* 2050394
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Plant Science at the Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Sona Pandey, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 292,773.00

This REU Site award to Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, located in St.
Louis, MO, will support the training of 10 students for 11 weeks during the
summers of 2021- 2022. It is anticipated that a total of 20 students, primarily
from schools with limited research opportunities or from an under-represented
group, will be trained in the program. Fostering the next generation of plant
scientists is critical to solving some of the planetâ€™s biggest challenges. The
Danforth Center is an independent, non-profit private research institute with
state-of-the art research facilities and is dedicated to fundamental as well as
applied research in plant biology. In addition to presenting research findings
at a final program symposium, many interns will present their work at scientific
conferences and will have their work included in scientific publications.
Assessment of the program will be done through on-site interviews and through
the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the program in order
to determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of the
Danforth Center is to improve human conditions through plant science, a field
that has become exceedingly important with growing human population and changing
environmental conditions. Interns will conduct 11-week research projects under
the guidance of Danforth Center scientists. Research covers many areas such as
abiotic stress, bioenergy, genomics, bioremediation, cellular signaling,
translational plant sciences and others. The research component will be
supplemented with additional educational activities, including workshops from
Danforth Center core facilities, including Advanced Bioimaging Laboratory,
Proteomics &amp; Mass Spectrometry, Bioinformatics, Phenotyping, Maker and
Tissue Culture and Transformation facilities. Interns will also participate in
workshops/training sessions in Equity Diversity and Inclusivity, implicit bias,
and sexual harassment. Other program components include weekly meetings, a
scientific retreat, educational field trips and a career panel which will expose
interns to current research topics in the plant sciences, ethics in research,
and career path alternatives. Interns will have ample networking opportunities
with Danforth Center scientists as well as those from other local institutions.
Applications are available online and are due each February. The program runs
each summer from May through August. More information about the program is
available by visiting http://www.danforthcenter.org/internship or by contacting
internship@danforthcenter.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.