* 2050256
* Enhancement of STEM Teacher Agency Through Authentic Experiences in Mathematics and Science
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2027
* William McComas, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 03/31/2027
* USD 1,444,960.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by recruiting and preparing
highly effective secondary mathematics and science teachers for service in high
need schools. The project will recruit 18 prospective mathematics and science
teachers, who will concurrently earn a Master of Arts in Teaching and teaching
licensure. These Master Teaching Fellows will supported financially and receive
professional development through their first four years of teaching in high-need
secondary schools. The project features a unique focus on the development of
teacher agency, which is the ability to actively plan and do things that enhance
their growth as teachers. The project intends to develop teacher agency by
focusing on the authentic practice of science and mathematics. A primary
approach the project will take to engage teachers and students in authentic STEM
practice will be ongoing involvement in school-based science, mathematics, and
engineering fairs. To help them further engage in authentic practice, the
prospective teachers will be mentored by university scientists and
mathematicians on individual research projects. Through the focus on agency and
authenticity, the project expects the prospective teachers will see themselves
as scientists, which in turn will increase their effectiveness and commitment as
STEM teachers. It also expects that these teachers will be able to mentor their
students to develop agency as STEM learners, supporting greater success of their
students in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This six-year project at the University
of Arkansas (UA) includes partnerships with Springdale Arkansas Public Schools,
UA Center for Mathematics and Science Education, and three non-profit
organizations (Springdale Education Foundation, Amazeum, and Arkansas STEM
Coalition). These partnerships will serve as a framework for recruiting and
preparing 18 STEM post-baccalaureates (in two cohorts of nine) for secondary
teacher licensure in the disciplines of biology, chemistry, mathematics, or
physics and completion of the 11-month UA Master of Arts in Teaching program. A
key aspect of the project is its focus on the development of personal agency
(empowerment and ability in a specific domain) and its potential to impact
attitudes and achievement in subjects such as science and mathematics. Agency is
an important element of personal fulfillment and success but has thus far not
featured strongly as a goal in teacher preparation, particularly with respect to
authentic practices. Project leaders will explore questions related to efficacy
of the strategies, implementation in field settings, and impacts on students.
The project will follow and support the 18 teachers over the six-year award
period and prepare them to be successful teachers and leaders who embrace the
richness of culture and diversity as they launch a teaching career in a high-
need school. The project leadership team will collect data to inform the
building and dissemination of this model of STEM teacher preparation that
combines engagement in authentic practice with the development of agency in the
preparation of highly effective STEM teachers. This Track 2 Teaching Fellowships
project is supported through the Robert Noyce Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.