* 2050429
* REU Site: Increasing Native American perspectives in field and experimental linguistics
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Spike Gildea, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 342,051.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. It has both scientific and societal
benefits, and integrates research and education. The aim of this project is to
make STEM and higher education more accessible to and inclusive of American
Indian/Alaska Native students through a research experience that relates
directly to a topic of particular interest to American Indian/Alaska Native
communities â€“ the revitalization and scientific study of Native languages.
American Indian/Alaska Native students are greatly underrepresented in academia
and this situation has remained virtually unchanged for decades. A growing body
of research points to the importance and need for higher education to increase
its cultural competency as a critical strategy for becoming accessible to
underrepresented groups, such as American Indian/Alaska Native students.
Conversely, academia cannot achieve excellence without perspectives from a
diversity of backgrounds to inform and improve it. Thus, the broader impact of
this REU site is manifold: It uses a culturally informed and competent approach
to introduce American Indian/Alaska Native students to linguistics and the
various research disciplines with which linguistics intersects; in doing so it
contributes towards an increase in participation of American Indian/Alaska
Native students in higher education and research; and as a result, this project
contributes towards strengthening academia broadly through a diversification of
perspectives.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Through the REU site, participants complete
research rotations in multiple areas of linguistics, specifically focusing on
experimental linguistics and language documentation and revitalization. The
program embraces a usage-based study of language within a community-centered
cross-disciplinary approach, which is relatively novel in undergraduate
linguistic training. REU participants are exposed to the full range of skills
necessary to conduct research in linguistics. These research rotations are
supplemented with coursework in topics on descriptive and experimental
linguistics and academic and professional development workshops. The workshops
focus on providing participants with skills to initiate careers in STEM, as well
as pursuing master's and Ph.D. degrees in linguistics or related fields. The
fundamental goal of this work is to help students become active agents of
innovation in STEM through linguistics, seeking to break down disciplinary silos
and reprioritize the societal value of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.