* 2050971
* REU Site: Applied Mathematics Research Program for Undergraduates
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Svetlana Roudenko, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 03/31/2024
* USD 324,000.00

The AMRPU @ FIU program focuses on introducing undergraduate students to
research in applied mathematics and provides opportunities for the students to
explore various topics and models outside of the standard curriculum. Students
will have instruction and mentoring that will help them pursue collaborative
research projects closely aligned with their own interests. With this applied
modeling approach, the students can quickly get a deeper understanding of the
mathematics than is possible in an ordinary classroom environment. In addition,
group research projects will familiarize students with communication skills
necessary for effective teamwork and will provide opportunities to write
scientific, potentially publishable, papers and practice public presentations of
their work. Moreover, the program is designed to facilitate access to research
in applied mathematics for a very diverse group of undergraduates, including
under-represented minority and female students in mathematics and science, and
to increase the number and proficiency of students entering the workforce.
Through this multifaceted and inclusive approach, the students will gain
valuable experiences that will enhance their success in graduate school and
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applied Mathematics provides a rich and
challenging field of study with practical applications. A wide variety of
subjects across science and technology are advanced through mathematical
modeling and analysis. Epidemiology, ecology, biomedicine, fluid dynamics,
reaction-diffusion processes, and aerodynamics are just a few of the many
examples. Each summer this REU program will have a different set of topics for
training and research but will keep the common theme of interconnections among
the various disciplines of mathematics as well as modeling and applications. The
areas of focus include Differential Equations and Dynamical Systems, Fourier
Analysis, Linear Algebra, and Probability and Statistics. Connections among
these areas (as well as others) will provide the participants a broad view of
the fields of mathematics and their utility in all areas of science and
technology, a perspective too often missed in traditional mathematics
instruction. Similarly, exposure to the common threads and variety of ideas and
approaches from a diverse group of undergraduates, graduate students, and
faculty mentors of all backgrounds, ethnicities, ancestry, and gender will help
promote the progress of the scientific enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.