* 2050461
* Cultivating University-School-Community Partnerships to Prepare STEM Undergraduates to Teach in Urban Environments
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Shari Weaver, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 03/31/2026
* USD 707,426.00

This project aims to address the national urban teacher shortage by preparing
and supporting STEM undergraduates to effectively teach in culturally diverse,
urban, high-need schools. The project will recruit 18 undergraduates majoring in
biology, chemistry, physics, mathematical science, actuarial mathematics,
computer science, or engineering. These students will receive scholarships
during the third and fourth year of their undergraduate STEM degree while
participating in the teacher preparation program. The teacher preparation
program will include training in culturally responsive pedagogy, combined with
teaching experiences in community-based settings. These experiences are expected
to enable the new teachers to apply their content and pedagogical knowledge
within the context of the local community. To support this goal, the new
teachers will be supported in their first two years of teaching through an
induction program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Worcester Polytechnic
Institute includes partnerships with community-based organizations, such as the
Worcester EcoTarium Museum and Worcester Parks &amp; Recreation Department, and
two local high-need schools (Worcester Public Schools and Leominster Public
Schools). The goal of the project is to recruit, prepare, and support STEM
undergraduates from a range of diverse backgrounds to successfully teach in
urban, high-need schools with diverse student populations. Program objectives
designed to meet this goal are to: 1) improve recruitment strategies to grow and
diversify teacher candidate cohorts; 2) engage STEM teacher candidates with
early teaching experiences; 3) build STEM teacher candidates' cultural
competency in a local community with rich cultural diversity; and 4) provide
professional development and networking opportunities to facilitate induction
support for the project's new teachers in the first and second years of
teaching. Evaluation of the efficacy of these trainings and community-based
teaching experiences will be gathered through teacher candidate and mentor
teacher interviews and surveys. The multiple touch points in the community will
be investigated to determine how their frequency and dosage affect teacher
candidate attitudes and preparation to teach in high-need school districts, as
evidenced by the construction of an e-portfolio of teaching activities and a
reflection journal to document and enable analysis of their teaching paths. This
project may provide insight into the strategies and best practices for
leveraging university-school-community partnerships in recruiting, training, and
retaining STEM educators for urban districts while highlighting practices to
increase teacher effectiveness with students from diverse populations. This
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipend project is supported through the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention,
and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.