* 2050294
* SBIR Phase I:  Semantic Annotation of Hypertext and its Application in Event Mapping
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2022
* Xuchen Yao, MAP OS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be to help applications of augmented reality, location-based
search, and real-time live mapping of the world, and to build a digital twin of
the earth. Event information is dynamic and hyperlocal. Thus it is important to
ground the location and time of events to real GPS coordinates and universal
time. This creates technical challenges of entity disambiguation and resolution,
and real-time processing event information to reflect last-minute changes. The
proposed natural language grounding work also helps create a mirrorworld with
information interlinked between the virtual internet and physical spaces and
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will be the first to investigate neural language model pre-
training over semi-structured hypertext on a web scale (55TB of compressed data
monthly). This will greatly accelerate understanding of noisy web text, while
the majority of research to date has been conducted on clean plain text only.
This project will also attack the challenge of machine reading with document-
level annotations in a semi-supervised fashion, while the predominance of study
has been carried out with more precise word-level annotation in a fully
supervised way. The technical goal of this project is to create a scalable
infrastructure that allows quick iterations of mining web scale data, and an
ensemble of algorithms that are adapted to learning structured information over
hypertext. It is an unsolved challenge for most small businesses that in the
past only the internet giants have attempted. The resulting machine learning
algorithms will be capable of interpreting semi-structured web data, in contrast
to typical structured annotation to understand
hypertext.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.