* 2050886
* REU Site: The Physics of Waves from the Nanoscale to the Cosmic Scale
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Gary Collins, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 02/29/2024
* USD 347,533.00

The Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program in Physics and
Astronomy at Washington State University (WSU) provides students advanced
10-week research internships that demonstrate how the concept of waves pervades
all aspects of our physical universe. These internships will take place in
world-class facilities under the direct supervision of faculty who are experts
in their respective disciplines and highly experienced undergraduate research
mentors. Recruitment and support for underrepresented and underserved groups in
STEM are a significant focus of the program. This includes a major partnership
with the NSF-funded Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP)
program at WSU. Peer and team mentoring and professional development are
integral parts of the holistic experience within both the research setting and
living experience. This is achieved in part through the WSU Community of
Scholars program that includes scholars in all REU programs on campus (involving
approximately 80 REU scholars each summer) and uniquely engenders relationships
and networking opportunities with student peers across the country. This REU
program will host 6-10 scholars each summer to foster their research skills and
post-graduate career opportunities in physics, astronomy, and related fields to
help create the next generation of STEM leaders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU
program will provide undergraduate students with internships in world-class
research groups spanning fields that include gravity waves, shock physics, low-
dimensional and complex materials, and quantum atomic phenomena. Each student
will select a project of interest from within the department and be paired with
a faculty mentor who has extensive experience mentoring WSU undergraduates.
State-of-the-art research facilities available include the Institute of Shock
Physics, the WSU Dodgen Research Nuclear Reactor, the Center for Materials
Research, the Franceschi Microscopy Center, and multiple Bose-Einstein
Condensate instruments, including one on the International Space Station.
Individual projects will be connected through the common concept of waves.
Seminars in each subfield will be presented to all trainees to highlight this
pervasive and connective physics and astronomy phenomenon. Professional
development field trips to the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory and the
Hanford Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory will give students a
broad experience of research settings, engage in meaningful discussions with
researchers, and get insights into career opportunities. A University-wide,
summer “Community of Scholars” program at WSU provides an interdisciplinary and
social living environment and professional development opportunities for
numerous REU and REU-like summer programs to engender social and professional
relationships among its typically 80 undergraduate participants. This is of
strategic importance to develop a network of peer support among students and is
particularly important for underrepresented STEM disciplines groups. A
partnership with the NSF-LSAMP program will synergize recruitment and support
for underrepresented and underserved scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.