* 2050045
* Collaborative Research:The ferric uptake regulator (Fur) regulates intracellular iron homeostasis via reversible binding of a [2Fe-2S] cluster in Escherichia coli
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Codrina Popescu, University of St. Thomas
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 03/31/2024
* USD 121,835.00

This NSF award will support a collaborative project of Dr. Huangen Ding
(Louisiana State University) and Dr. Codrina V. Ewbank-Popescu (University of
St. Thomas) for research conducted with graduate and undergraduate students.
Research activities ranging from molecular biology to spectroscopy seek to
understand the molecular mechanism by which the protein Fur regulates iron
content inside bacteria. Iron is an essential element for all living organisms.
However, iron overload can cause dangerous oxidative damage to cells under
aerobic conditions. Thus, tight regulation of the iron content is essential for
cells to grow. In bacteria, the Ferric Uptake Regulator (Fur) is a global iron
regulator. When iron content is too high, Fur becomes a transcription repressor
to block formation of the iron transporters and prevent accumulation of excess
iron in cells. However, the mechanism by which Fur senses the intracellular iron
content remains largely elusive. This project is based on preliminary studies
showing that in the bacterium E coli, Fur can bind a cluster of Iron bound to
Sulfur when the intracellular iron content is high. The goal of the project is
to determine how Fur may undergo the binding of this [2Fe-2S]-cluster in
response to changes of the intracellular iron concentration and in turn regulate
the expression of the genes related to iron metabolism in bacteria. This project
will provide greater understanding of how bacteria, including infective bacteria
in our tissues, can pull iron essential for growth from inside animal and plant
cells, to be used instead for bacterial growth. This will inform our knowledge
of the interactions of bacteria with larger creatures in the ecosystem,
agriculture, and health. The project will also provide opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students to participate in vigorous and exciting
interdisciplinary research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ferric iron
regulator (Fur) is a highly conserved global iron regulator in bacteria. The
current hypothesis states that when the intracellular “free” iron content is
elevated, Fur binds ferrous iron to form an “iron-bound” Fur and regulates the
intracellular iron homeostasis by controlling the expression of specific genes.
However, the “iron-bound” Fur has never been isolated from any bacteria.
Preliminary studies revealed that the Escherichia coli Fur can bind a [2Fe-2S]
cluster via the conserved cysteine residues in the E. coli mutant cells in which
the intracellular iron content is elevated. The goal of this project is to test
a hypothesis that Fur regulates the intracellular iron homeostasis via
reversible binding of a [2Fe-2S] cluster. Aim 1 is to determine the redox
properties and stability of the [2Fe-2S] cluster in Fur by combining biochemical
and spectroscopic (including UV-Visible absorption spectroscopy, electron
paramagnetic resonance (EPR) and Mössbauer spectroscopy) approaches. Aim 2 is to
investigate the physiological function of the [2Fe-2S] cluster-bound Fur by
analyzing its specific DNA binding activity in vitro and the gene expression
profile regulated by the [2Fe-2S] cluster-bound Fur in E. coli cells. Aim 3 is
to explore the conserved nature of the [2Fe-2S] cluster binding in Fur proteins
from other bacteria. Because Fur is highly conserved among bacteria, success of
the project is expected to illustrate a novel mechanism by which Fur regulates
the intracellular iron homeostasis in E. coli and other bacteria via an iron-
sulfur cluster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.