* 2050745
* Resolving the integrated sources of ecological opportunity and diversification across a pollinator specialization gradient
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Josef Uyeda, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 07/31/2024
* USD 983,127.00

Biodiversity sustains ecosystems and human-life through natural services (e.g.,
insect diversity for pest control, pollinator diversity for food production).
Despite its importance, our understanding of how biodiversity is generated and
lost is still simplistic. For instance, we know that species interactions,
changes in climate, and geologic events can change the rates at which new
species evolve or go extinct. We also know that these drivers of speciation and
extinction likely act in a combined manner, although that interaction has been
rarely quantified due to the technical difficulty of doing so. This project
combines genomic and ecological data with computational tool-development to
understand how drivers interact to affect biodiversity. The knowledge acquired
through this work is critical to managing biodiversity in a changing world. In
addition to training the next generation of scientists, this project
collaborates with 4-H summer camps (~2,500 campers/year) to teach principles of
biodiversity to the general public and increase public appreciation of science.
Importantly, the results of this project will assist with informed decision
making to mitigate biodiversity loss and sustain human and natural system well-
being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the major limitations in the study of drivers
of lineage diversification is the difficulty in quantifying the joint
contributions of different sources of ecological opportunity. Although many
studies have investigated how ecological opportunity can be created by changes
in biogeographic, abiotic, and biotic environments, ecological opportunity often
results from the interaction of various sources (e.g., dispersal to a new
environment resulting in novel biotic interactions, abiotic niches and
ecological release). Applying an integrated approach, this project develops
methods to quantify the contributions and interactions of different sources of
ecological opportunity and drivers of diversification. Specifically, the project
develops and applies fully-parameterized, graphical, and likelihood-free methods
to quantify the joint roles of potential drivers of diversification in the oil-
rewarding plant genus Calceolaria and its oil-bee pollinators of genera Centris
and Chalepogenus. This speciose group of plants and its specialized pollinators
are characterized by repeated transitions across biotic, abiotic, and
biogeographic gradients expected to interact to drive diversification. Their
work demonstrates how interactions of different drivers can be quantified in a
macroevolutionary framework, setting the foundations to advancing our ability to
answer these central, but complex, eco-evolutionary questions across the tree of
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.