* 2050175
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Big Data Analytics and Machine Learning
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Om Prakash Yadav, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2024
* USD 514,253.00

The continued growth and development of any nation depends on two important
factors: the evolution of sustainable technology and the availability of a
skilled workforce that can apply the technology for the betterment of society
and manage its growth through research and development. Further, to maintain the
strategic position of the United States of America in both technology
development and science and engineering education, it is critical to encourage
and motivate a new generation of American students to pursue advanced studies in
STEM disciplines. The best way to achieve this goal is to bring highly motivated
undergraduate students together within an active research group and introduce
them to intellectual excitement. This will allow these students to get actively
involved in research projects, help them think independently, foster creativity,
and develop confidence and skills necessary to work on research projects and
succeed in their chosen career paths. It will also provide them access to strong
mentors and the opportunity to begin developing their network with their
classmates and seniors in their research group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU
Site aims to achieve three distinct goals: 1) provide a deeper understanding of
big data analytics and machine learning concepts; 2) increase passion and
research skills in data analytics and machine learning, and inculcate
professional skills and ethical behavior among students during their
undergraduate education, especially those from underrepresented population
groups and/or with limited access to this research at their home institutions;
and 3) provide international research experience to prepare a global STEM/data-
savvy workforce. This project will support thirty undergraduate students (over a
three-year period) for a 10-week long high-impact research internship
experience. During this research internship period, the participants will gain
4-weeks long international research experience in real world big data and
machine learning projects at the University of Chile (UCHILE), a strong research
institution in South America. Students from any STEM discipline across the
nation will be recruited for this program. Specifically, efforts will be made to
recruit at least 50% participants form underrepresented population including
women, at least one third from outside North Dakota, and at least 60% from
outside NDSU. This project will introduce undergraduate students to unique
applications of big data and machine learning tools to manage digital
engineering systems. Students will develop deeper understanding of these new
concepts and advance new models/algorithms to solve engineering problems for
industries such as energy infrastructure, cyber manufacturing, precision
agriculture, and several other cyber physical systems. Lastly, students will
work on both theory and practice to develop better insight for solving real
engineering problems and demonstrating their applications in real life
scenarios. The international research experience will further enable these
students to join the global workforce by gaining global research and cultural
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Division
of Engineering Education and Centers (Directorate for Engineering), and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.