* 2050739
* REU Site:  TECH SCEnE - Technology, Science and Community Engagement in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Smitha Rao, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 02/29/2024
* USD 358,920.00

Capacity-building through developing culturally competent educators, scientists,
and professionals is a critical component of the 21st century workforce. While
collaborative partnerships are integral to manage and protect all the
inhabitants within a community, such opportunities remain a challenge for
remote, rural communities and underrepresented minorities (URMs) within these
communities. The REU site TECH SCEnE - “Technology, Science, and Community
Engagement in Engineering” reflects University research in a community-centric
environment for the advancement of diverse and inclusive interests in, and
equitable application of, STEM fields. The REU site TECH SCEnE will provide
engineering and STEM field research experiences for undergraduates that are
inclusive of, and responsive to, diverse cultural perspectives and local
community priorities. Through a shared teaching and learning approach, the
multi-disciplinary team, participants, and Tribal Nation community partners will
discover from each other’s knowledge, skill sets, and cultural practices. The
project aligns with NSF commitment to capacity-building by broadening
participation through preparing a diverse, globally engaged STEM workforce and
expanding efforts to broaden participation from underrepresented groups and
diverse institutions across geographical regions in all NSF activities. The
project facilitates shared knowledge exchange, collaborative priority-setting,
and supports tribal resource monitoring, management, and education. Furthermore,
the application of the projects defined within the scope of the program directly
impacts the community, providing relatable research and cultural experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the REU site TECH SCEnE are to: 1)
Increase interest in engineering and STEM-related careers (for both industry and
research), and particularly, for underrepresented minority students; 2) Improve
collaborative cooperation, communication, leadership, and interpersonal skills;
3) Develop and apply multidisciplinary engineering and STEM research skills; 4)
Enhance faculty learning, mentorship, and pedagogy; and 5) Demonstrate
transformational values of community engagement in engineering and STEM
research. Building on long-term university-community partnerships, The REU site
TECH SCEnE will provide engineering and STEM field research experiences for
undergraduates that are inclusive of, and responsive to, diverse cultural
perspectives and local community priorities. Through a shared teaching and
learning approach, the multi-disciplinary team, participants, and Tribal Nation
community partners will discover from each other’s knowledge, skill sets, and
cultural practices. The bio-inspired projects directly center on mutually
beneficial needs and equitable evaluation and outcomes. Specifically, the
project’s intellectual focus will (1) identify key components and directions of
REU influence on students, mentors, and community partners, and (2) examine REU
contributions to student career and graduate school choices, mentor pedagogy,
and communities. Emphasis will be on broadening participation of under-
represented minorities and Tribal Nations. The team expects to contribute to
scholarship in the advancement of a diverse workforce in STEM fields, and best
practices associated with university-community research, such as equitable
approaches in STEM research, shared teaching and learning among diverse
participants, and multi-directional, multi-cultural evaluation. The education
components are designed to foster knowledge exchange between Michigan
Technological University, the Keweenaw Bay Indian Community and to promote
career opportunities in engineering and STEM for underrepresented minority
students. Societal advances include 1) engineering approaches to monitoring and
managing community resources and landscapes, and 2) key approaches and
challenges of preparing a culturally aware workforce of
tomorrow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.