* 2050493
* REU Site: Puerto Rico-Chemical Learning Integrated in Materials and Biomolecular applications (PR-CLIMB)
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Arthur Tinoco, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 04/30/2024
* USD 355,452.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to the University
of Puerto Rico-Río Piedras, located in San Juan, PR, supports the training of 10
students for 9 weeks during the summers of 2021-2023. In this program, funded by
the Division of Chemistry, undergraduate participants will engage in high
caliber interdisciplinary research projects inspired by rebuilding efforts in PR
related to the pharmaceutical industry, electrical grid, and water
infrastructure. This program also fosters professional development through in-
laboratory training, hands-on workshops, and specialized seminars to inspire
interest in graduate school in the STEM fields. The broader goal of this site is
to train socially conscious scientists who can address community-based problems,
to help build the future STEM workforce for Puerto Rico, and to establish a
network of STEM professional collaborators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student
participants at this REU site will be matched with research groups conducting
fundamental science on the engineering of materials and biomolecules for real-
life applications including drug discovery, drug delivery, energy storage, and
water purification. The faculty mentors have extensive experience in
undergraduate training, and an advanced students or postdoctoral researchers
will serve as a co-mentors, providing additional training support to the
participants. Alongside research, students will take part in hands-on workshops
exposing them to state-of-the-art instrumentation; a seminar series on critical
thinking and technical skill development; and orientation on research, graduate
school, and career opportunities. A special seminar contextualizes the program’s
mission to professionally rehabilitate Puerto Rico, and participants will also
go on educational/cultural outings where they will visit a pharmaceutical
company and different parts of Puerto Rico. Students majoring in chemistry or
related fields are recruited from two-year and four-year institutions in Puerto
Rico and the rest of the U.S., particularly from minority serving institutions
and from institutions with few research opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.