* 2050597
* Increasing the Number and Diversity of Highly Effective STEM Teachers in High-need Urban School Districts
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Rajah Smart, Davenport University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 737,538.00

This project aims to serve the national need for highly effective, diverse STEM
teachers in high-need urban schools. Over the next decade, teacher preparation
efforts will be challenged by school administration turnover, social and policy
changes, and demographic shifts. Thus, preparing excellent teachers will become
even more important. This project is designed to increase interest in teaching
careers among high school students, community college students, undergraduate
STEM majors, and STEM career changers. The project features an innovative
pipeline development approach that includes recruiting potential teachers from
urban high-need high schools and by developing dual enrollment programs that
accelerate college degree attainment. By offering early teaching experiences to
high school and undergraduate students, the project has the potential to
increase student interest in teaching. Since many of these teaching experiences
will be conducted as service-learning projects, these efforts will benefit the
community as well. The project will leverage STEM teaching methods courses and
undergraduate urban education courses to help prospective teachers understand
the context of urban education, including challenges and data-driven educational
strategies that increase student achievement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
at Davenport University (DU) includes partnerships with Grand Rapids Community
College and four high-need local educational agencies (Detroit Public Schools
Community District, Muskegon Heights Public School Academy System, Hope Academy
of West Michigan, and Grand Rapids Public Schools). The project aims to
strengthen the recruitment pipeline and increase the size and diversity of the
pool of eligible STEM candidates in DUâ€™s Urban Education teacher preparation
program. The project aims to recruit, provide scholarships or stipends, educate,
and graduate 23 prospective STEM teachers. These students will include 15
eligible juniors and seniors pursuing a Bachelor of Science in Computer Science
or Biological Laboratory Science and 8 STEM professional career changers. These
prospective teachers will be prepared to gain Michigan K-12 teacher licensure
with a focus on biology, chemistry, physics, integrated science, and/or
mathematics. They will also gain experience in implementing culturally relevant
pedagogical models of instruction. Upon certification, the new teachers will
receive mentoring, academic resources, and induction support to successfully
transition into a teaching career in high-need, urban school districts. The
project will collect data and analyze how service-learning experiences,
mentoring, coaching, and an enhanced curriculum emphasizing culturally
responsive teaching practices prepares prospective STEM teachers to be
successful STEM teachers in urban STEM classrooms. This Track 1: Scholarships
and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.