* 2050746
* REU Site: Training and Experimentation in Computational Biology (TECBio)
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2025
* Srinivas Chennubhotla, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2025
* USD 601,418.00

This REU Site award to The University of Pittsburgh, located in Pittsburgh, PA,
will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2021-2024. It is anticipated that a total of 40 students, primarily from schools
with limited research opportunities or from an underrepresented group, will be
trained in the program called Training and Experimentation in Computational
Biology (TECBio). Rising Sophomores, Juniors and Seniors from the life,
physical, and computer sciences and engineering are encouraged to apply. The
TECBio REU is positioned to provide foundational training to students in the
emerging field of computational biology. Assessment of the program will be done
through the online SALG URSSA tool. Following completion of the program, TECBio
alumni will receive continued mentoring by program directors and mentors, who
will track and maintain contact with students in order to determine and support
their career paths. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TECBio REU @ Pitt is housed in the
Department of Computational and Systems Biology at the University of Pittsburgh
and has the scientific focus of “multiscale modeling, simulation, and systems-
level analyses for biological discovery”. TECBio students can expect a
challenging and fulfilling experience that will prepare them for graduate school
success. TECBio students pick from 35 diverse research mentors in 5 major
research areas at the cutting-edge of computational biology (computational
structural biology, computational drug discovery, genomics/bioinformatics,
bioimage informatics, and systems biology). Students will also receive training
in how to be a more effective mentee, participate in a journal club, attend
research and career seminars, learn the responsible conduct of research, present
at symposia, and participate in social, cohort-building, networking, and
leadership-enhancing events. Successful applicants will demonstrate a desire to
pursue interdisciplinary research and graduate training in computational biology
or related fields. More information about the program is available on our
website www.tecbioreu.pitt.edu or by contacting the PI (Dr. Joe Ayoob at
jayoob@pitt.edu) or the Program Coordinator (Mr. Adam Kohlhaas at
tecbio@pitt.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.