* 2050928
* REU Site: Physics Research at the University of Washington Bothell
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Eric Salathe, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 02/29/2024
* USD 331,353.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big
Idea&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
program in physics at the University of Washington Bothell (UWB) will be one of
the only physics REU programs in the Pacific Northwest. The goal is to give a
diverse group of physics students short-term research experience in
gravitational-wave astronomy, computational physics and astrophysics, physics
education research, and condensed matter physics. The program includes close
mentoring and guidance from faculty, fostering interaction, and active
participation by students through professional development workshops, seminars,
outreach opportunities, social activities, and presentation of research
projects. Establishing an REU in Physics at the University of Washington Bothell
will broaden the UWB Physics program's impact by attracting diverse physics
students from the Pacific Northwest and across the country. The REU program's
coordination with local UWB physics summer research students will bring a broad
national perspective and awareness to the participating UWB physics students,
encouraging them to continue their studies and research training to become part
of the diverse STEM workforce. Program activities will incorporate best
practices in recruiting, supporting, and training diverse physics students.
Overall, the UWB Physics REU program is designed to positively impact the
diversity of the national STEM pipeline and the training of future STEM
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will give eight undergraduate
students from outside UWB the opportunity to participate in a ten-week summer
research program at UWB during each of the next three years. Up to six UWB
students supported by faculty grants will join the REU cohort to benefit from
and contribute to the program activities. The program includes close mentoring
and guidance from faculty, fostering interaction, and active participation by
students through professional development workshops, seminars, outreach
opportunities, social activities, and presentation of research projects. The
proposed REU site will focus on research in frontier areas of phenomenological,
experimental, and applied physics. In gravitational wave astronomy, participants
will contribute to data analysis developments needed to maximize discoveries in
this new observational field. In computational physics and astrophysics,
students will improve developed software to analyze astrophysical phenomena and
contribute to open source scientific computing. In physics education research,
participants will understand how people learn and practice physics and
astronomy. Condensed matter research projects will investigate the
characteristics of thin films for optical and electrical applications. All
participating students will have the opportunity to gain programming skills
through REU training workshops and in application to their research projects.
REU student contributions to UWB Physics research groups will advance the work
led by each research mentor within the context of their research collaborations
and the broader field. Establishing an REU in Physics at the University of
Washington Bothell will broaden the UWB Physics program's impact by attracting
diverse physics students from the Pacific Northwest and across the country.
Overall, the UWB Physics REU program is designed to positively impact the
diversity of the national STEM pipeline and the training of future STEM
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.