* 2050922
* REU Site: Intersection of Linguistics, Language &amp; Culture
* SBE,SMA
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Isabelle Barriere, Molloy College
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 04/30/2024
* USD 350,745.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate and is supported by the Department of
Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program. It has both scientific and
societal benefits, and integrates research and education. While STEM-based
models in linguistics and speech-hearing-communication sciences aim to provide
explanations that apply across languages and socio-cultural and ethnic groups,
the bulk of research is still conducted on Mainstream American English and other
majority languages. Moreover, research in the language sciences is largely
conducted by professionals from majority language communities. This is
problematic for two reasons: findings are not representative of the increasingly
diverse US population and neither are researchers, clinicians and educators.
This 26-week Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program addresses
these two issues by equipping 18 undergraduate students per year from under-
represented communities with both transferable STEM-based skills and knowledge
specific to language sciences that will ensure student success in graduate
programs focused on speech, language and communication sciences and in working
with members of minoritized linguistic communities. The program will include six
modules: (A) Establishment of a community of scholars, (B) Research ethics
training, (C) Mentored scientific research, (D) Research dissemination, (E)
Participation in workshops to prepare a graduate school application portfolio
and promote well-being in graduate school, (F) Organization of a program
translational conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recruiting students who use
lesser-studied languages and non-mainstream varieties of English, and having
them conduct research with Mentoring Faculty who are experts in the various sub-
fields of linguistics and speech-language-communication sciences (Theoretical
Linguistics, Computational Linguistics, First and Second Language Acquisition
and Processing, Bilingualism, Speech, Language-Hearing and Communication
Sciences, Developmental and Acquired Disorders) and have a research track record
that reflects their commitments to excellence and diversity, constitutes an
important step toward redressing the current imbalance in the field and ensuring
that the student projects will benefit from the scholarly study of the
linguistic and cultural diversity found in New York City. The program will
benefit from the tremendous ethnic, linguistic, and cultural diversity of New
York, in both the recruitment of student participants as well as project
participants, and the mentors' state-of-the-art research facilities that include
Molloy Speech Perception, Speech Production, Language Intervention and
Processing and Brain Bases of Communication Laboratories, Brooklyn College
Linguistics and Sociolinguistics Laboratories, CUNY Graduate Center
Developmental Neurolinguistics Laboratory, LIU-Brooklyn Speech Language Hearing
Clinic and Speech-Audiology Laboratory and the YVY Multilingual/dialectal
Research Institute. This REU program thus serves two purposes: to involve
undergraduates in research projects that can be expected to contribute
publishable results and novel data sets that will be made available to the field
through open-access websites, while simultaneously encouraging and preparing
minoritized students to undertake graduate work on diverse languages and
cultures. This REU site will prepare students to become accomplished researchers
and practitioners in language sciences equipped with STEM-based knowledge and
skills to work with minoritized languages and
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.