* 2050619
* Citizen Science Teachers: Noyce Residency Scholars Program for Western New York
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Joseph Gardella, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 06/30/2026
* USD 671,211.00

This project aims to serve the national need of increasing the number and
retention of diverse and effective science teachers in high-need school
districts in Western New York. With a citizen science focus, this project will
explore innovative strategies for preparing science teachers through civic
engagement, study of local environments, and transformational approaches
sustained in partnership with schools and communities. This focus will be paired
with a context-specific, community-based teacher residency approach, a model
that research has demonstrated to produce teachers who reflect greater
demographic diversity and have notably longer retention as teachers. Taken
together, a citizen science focus and residency approach may yield project
outcomes that shed light on recruiting, preparing, and retaining high-quality
science teachers that reflect the demographic diversity of students in P-12
schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the University at Buffalo
includes partnerships with Buffalo Public Schools and Niagara Falls City
Schools. The project’s overall goal is to recruit, prepare, and retain 20
science teachers across five cohorts of science career changers and
undergraduate biology, chemistry, physics, and earth science majors. It is
expected that project will contribute to a deeper understanding of how a civic
engagement approach to local environments, when paired with a community-based
approach to field experiences, can yield high quality, culturally, and
linguistically-diverse teachers who have a positive impact on science engagement
and learning in P-12 schools. Using surveys, interviews, and data about
participation, retention, and academic performance, this project will examine
the effectiveness of the project's interventions in preparing and engaging
science teachers, and in placing and retaining these teachers in high-need
schools. Project outcomes will be analyzed by building a series of statistical
models, such as cross-sectional SEM models and longitudinal models. Quantitative
data will be triangulated with qualitative data to provide a more rigorous
assessment of project impact. Project findings will be disseminated in journals,
at conferences dedicated to STEM teacher preparation as well as venues open to
increasing the diversity of the ranks of STEM teachers, and through online
reports and monographs. Findings can inform teacher education programs across
the country regarding diversifying teachers in P-12 schools, with a particular
focus on science teachers. This project also supports research on P-12 students’
science learning experiences and the impact of civically engaged science
instruction facilitated by teachers from diverse backgrounds. This Track 1:
Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention,
and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.