* 2050272
* SBIR Phase II:  CoagCare-A POC Blood Coagulation Diagnostic Platform That Utilizes A Hand-held Meter and Mechanically Sensitive Test Strips for Broad Spectrum Hemostasis Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Ramkumar Abhishek, Abram Scientific, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 968,825.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be to develop and commercialize a new
technology for accurate, portable, and inexpensive measurement of multiple blood
clotting parameters. Common tests are routinely performed on patients who suffer
from conditions like atrial fibrillation, deep vein thrombosis, or have had
heart valve replacement. These conditions affect millions of patients in the US
alone and represent $2 B of spending annually. However, many current solutions
cannot accurately or conveniently perform multiple blood clotting tests on the
same system or sample, causing clinically significant problems for end-users and
raising the cost and inconvenience of performing these tests routinely. The
technology in this project will enable various blood clotting tests to be
performed in a single portable system. This will potentially lead to cheaper and
more convenient blood coagulation testing for medical professionals and improve
medical outcomes by bringing accurate and multiple tests to a single portable
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project will develop a technology that will enable the first-of-its-
kind implementation of a point of care (POC) direct, mechanical test in a meter
and single-use disposable card format, to more closely replicate the mechanical
methods that underpin blood clotting tests in the clinical laboratory. As a
mechanical measurement, the card will measure physical properties of a clotting
whole blood sample and account for confounding factors, such as hematocrit.
Specifically, the objective of the project will be to develop a POC, hand-held,
battery-operated system that can enable the generation of a viscoelastic curve
and associated thromboelastography parameters in less than 10 minutes, a
significant improvement over current bulky and labor-intensive solutions with
turnaround times of up to 30 minutes or more. Beyond addressing the
thromboelastography needs, the proposed broad-spectrum portable hemostasis
platform can be extended to other coagulation tests based on fluid mechanical
characterization of a blood sample, including prothrombin time, partial
thromboplastin time, and activated clotting time. This project will demonstrate
the implementation of a blood coagulation test in a portable POC
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.