* 2050412
* REU Site:Visiting and Early Research Scholars' Experiences in Mathematics (VERSEIM-REU)
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Eric Todd Quinto, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 05/31/2024
* USD 364,258.00

The Visiting and Early Scholars’ Experiences in Mathematics Research Experiences
for Undergraduates (VERSEIM-REU) is an intensive ten-week summer research
program in applied and pure mathematics at Tufts University. For each of the
next three years, nine VERSEIM scholars will be admitted and will be mentored by
a team of faculty and advanced graduate students. VERSEIM scholars will meet
weekly and informally discuss progress, questions, and articles, as well as
participate in ongoing professional and academic development. They will present
their work to the group in the middle of the program and in a closing ceremony.
Scholars will also meet regularly with other students for social and cohort-
building activities. The experience will provide participants knowledge and
skills to navigate graduate school and careers in the mathematical sciences. The
program will recruit students from groups underrepresented in mathematics in
partnership with the Tufts Visiting and Early Research Scholars' Experience
(VERSE) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will introduce the VERSEIM
scholars early in their mathematical education to engaging projects designed to
develop their talents in research. Though some of the underlying questions,
based on ongoing research of the faculty involved, are beyond the level of most
undergraduate students, the Tufts team has a great deal of experience in
isolating specific questions and research tasks that excite students'
imagination and allow them to explore the problems experimentally. Scholars’
experimental findings would lead to conjectures and further explorations, some
of which will yield generalizable conclusions and proofs for the original
problems. Scholars will choose among three research topics in fields including
number theory (patterns in the last digits of prime numbers), geometric group
theory (computational aspects of geometric group theory), pure, applied, and
numerical harmonic analysis (groups and integral geometry, frame theory),
machine learning (analysis of high-dimensional molecular dynamics simulations),
mathematical neuroscience (functional significance of brain rhythms), numerical
analysis (numerical methods for PDEs), mathematical ecology (predator-prey
dynamics in fluctuating environments), and tomography (algorithms and theory in
limited data tomography).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.