* 2050728
* REU Site: Biochemical, Environmental, and MOlecular Research in Engineering (BEMORE)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Mark Marten, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2024
* USD 389,826.00

The Biochemical, Environmental, and MOlecular Research in Engineering (BEMORE)
REU Site at the University of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC) will prepare
students to address knowledge gaps, develop new technologies, and bring unique
perspectives to complex problems at the interface of biochemical and
environmental systems. In particular, the BEMORE REU Site award will support 10
undergraduate students per year for 10 weeks of research training and
professional development in the summers of 2022-2024. The innovative REU Site
structure involves five interdisciplinary teams of two faculty mentors (from
different departments), two REU students, and two peer mentors (from different
majors). The interdisciplinary projects developed by BEMORE faculty will address
grand challenges in antibiotic resistance, sustainable plastic replacements,
smart polymers, urban air quality, and bio-based sensors. In addition to
promoting the progress of science, these projects advance national health,
prosperity, and welfare. To amplify the new voices and perspectives needed to
address these grand bio-environmental challenges, the team will recruit cohorts
consisting of (at least) 50% female or non-binary students and (at least) 50%
students from underrepresented minorities. The professional research training
that students receive through the BEMORE REU Site will enable them to pursue
advanced interdisciplinary topics in graduate school or the
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grand challenges in sustainable development and
public health require improved cooperation between scientists and engineers, but
undergraduate students are rarely trained to work with collaborators from other
disciplines. To remedy this situation, the BEMORE REU Site will (1) engage
students in interdisciplinary projects that address grand challenges at the
interface of biochemical and environmental engineering and science, (2) train
students in the foundational tools, cutting-edge techniques, and scientific
concepts needed to address the aforementioned challenges, (3) educate students
to effectively communicate with researchers in their own field, scientists in
other disciplines, and the general public, and (4) support students’
professional development through research outcomes, networking activities, and
regular feedback from faculty mentors, peer mentors, and other REU students.
Students will build interdisciplinary research competencies during the project
through multiple levels of student-student and student-faculty interaction. In
the three-year BEMORE REU Site, the team aims to facilitate (at least) 60
conference/meeting presentations from the 30 REU students and generate (at
least) 10 peer-reviewed publications with REU student co-authors in high-impact
journals. Formative and summative assessments will be used to evaluate student
outcomes and ensure that students will “be more” prepared to tackle the most
daunting challenges of the 21st century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.