* 2050858
* REU Site: Collaborative Marine Research Experience at the Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Andrew Peters, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2024
* USD 318,400.00

The Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS) will host a Research Experiences
for Undergraduates (REU) site. The REU Site will support nine students during a
twelve week, Fall-semester research program from 2021-2023. BIOS will offer a
hands-on experience for undergraduates focused on the "process of science"
rather than on specific topics within science. Students will conduct team-based
research projects and will participate in a weekly seminar series, join BIOS
scientists aboard the R/V Atlantic Explorer, and visit local sites of ecological
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BIOS will introduce nine undergraduate students
per year to the techniques, skills and intellectual processes required to
conduct collaborative research in the marine sciences over the course of a
research-intensive program. BIOS is uniquely situated in the middle of the
Atlantic Ocean, allowing students the opportunity to study the open ocean in
conjunction with established oceanographic timeseries programs, or the near-
shore environment of one of the most northerly coral reef systems in the world.
In addition to an immersive, experiential introduction to scientific research,
the BIOS REU program is designed to provide professional development of both
students and mentors. Participants receive training in the practice of research,
including extensive practice in scientific communication, as well as skills for
advanced graduate study and career development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.