* 2050872
* REU Site: Chemistry and Biochemistry REU Site to Prepare Students for Graduate School and an Industrial Career
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Daniel Ess, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2024
* USD 371,250.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award, with a Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) component, provides ten REU and two RET
participants with ten-weeks of research training and professional development.
In this program, supported by the Division of Chemistry, REU and RET
participants will conduct individual chemistry or biochemistry research projects
using state-of-the-art equipment and techniques. These chemistry and
biochemistry research projects focus on critical problems related to chemical
and biochemical industries. Planned professional development activities for REU
and RET participants include visits to chemical and biochemical companies;
workshops discussing current and grand challenges in industry and the most
important skills to success in industry; and the creation of presentations for a
national chemistry conference. Inspiring the next generation of scientists, both
REU and RET participants will work with the BYU summer chemistry and
biochemistry camps for children and youth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REU and RET
participants at this site will conduct independent research on projects spanning
chemistry and biochemistry, particularly on fundamental research projects with
an industrial connection. Slated projects include the development of
heterogeneous catalysts for CO2 removal, the design of miniaturized mass
spectrometers and of micrometer microfluidic devices, organic synthesis
endeavors toward targets with putative anticancer activity, and computational
chemistry directed at the modeling and design of new catalysts. Alongside the
professional development activities, these projects, facilitated by BYU
Chemistry and Biochemistry faculty, will provide participants with experiences
in problem solving and scientific discovery, preparing them to earn advanced
degrees and enter the industrial chemistry workforce. To increase the diversity
of the STEM workforce, REU recruitment at this site will emphasize participation
of students from two-year colleges and those from underrepresented minority
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.