* 2050638
* Supporting, Mentoring and Retaining New STEM Secondary Educators Through Major Transitions from Recruitment to Highly Effective Teacher
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2026
* Padmanabhan Seshaiyer, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 03/31/2026
* USD 739,258.00

The project aims to serve the nation by developing highly effective high-school
STEM teachers to meet the national shortage of teachers in STEM fields. Teacher
turnover remains a persistent problem and thirty percent of new teachers move or
leave the profession after their first year. This proposal aims to increase the
number of George Mason University and Virginia Community College System students
who choose STEM secondary teaching careers. It also aims to mentor them through
their first year of teaching and support them to be highly effective in-service
teachers to their 4th year and beyond. The project also responds to the changes
in K-12 education resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. Thus, the project also
intends to prepare future teachers to excel in virtual, in-person, and hybrid
instruction and to be highly effective teachers for students and at schools that
have been disproportionately impacted by the pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project at George Mason University includes partnerships with the Virginia
Community College System, Prince Williams County schools, and Fairfax County
schools. Project goals include supporting and mentoring 35 prospective teachers
through their major education and career transitions as future STEM secondary
teachers, including their induction into teaching and initial years of service.
Recruitment efforts will include working with Virginia Community College System
to develop innovative programming in career development workshops, as well as
leveraging a partnership with the University Career Services Industry
Specialists for STEM and education sectors. A novel element of this project is
that the College of Science Learning Assistant program will serve as a pool for
recruitment of undergraduate STEM students into K-12 teaching. The Learning
Assistant Seminar enables these students to build a basic skillset in effective
teaching by learning skills in the seminar and practicing them in the classroom.
Recruited potential secondary teachers in STEM, majoring in biology, chemistry,
and physics, will be financially supported with scholarships in their junior and
senior years. Finally, a network called, TeacherTeams, will be formed and led by
successful George Mason program alumni who are teaching in high-need schools and
want to support upcoming teachers. Subject areas of TeacherTeams will include
Earth Science and Math/Physics/IT, Biology and Chemistry. This Track 1:
Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention,
and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.