* 2050011
* Imaging deep mantle structure beneath Alaska using full waveform tomography
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Barbara Romanowicz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2023
* USD 240,242.00

The Earth’s surface plates are constantly moving and are being consumed into the
Earth at plate boundaries. In North America, the oceanic Pacific plate is
subducting beneath the south coast of Alaska, generating powerful earthquakes
and active volcanoes on Earth’s surface. But where inside the Earth does this
subducted plate then go? Tracking this plate into the Earth tells us about the
more recent history of plate movement on the surface over millions of years, as
well as how the Earth has evolved since it formed over billions of years. To
understand the present, we must investigate the past. Much like ultrasound waves
are used to look at organs inside a body, seismologists use seismic waves
generated by earthquakes to investigate the inner workings of the Earth. The
sharpness or blurriness of the images is controlled, among others, by the pitch
(or frequency) of the waves that are used. Higher frequencies improve the focus
but require heavy computations in the whole Earth. Assumptions can be used to
simplify the calculations, reducing the heavy computations to the part of the
Earth that we want to image. This simplification means that we can improve our
focus and better track the history of subduction under Alaska. The study will
support the training of a graduate student and provide support for an early-
career investigator. The PIs will share codes and models with the community, and
will be involved in local outreach in the Bay Area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
evolution of Alaska over the past 200 Ma features multiple episodes of
subduction, collision and accretion. The remnants of this long subduction
history should be present down to the lowermost mantle, but past regional and
global tomographic models resolve inconsistent structures, likely owing to
methodological limitations and limited sampling. Our understanding of the plate
tectonics history of the Northern Pacific is currently incomplete. Remaining
questions include: how deep do slabs penetrate beneath Alaska, what is the slab
geometry and thickness, and how does it interact with the transition zone? The
primary objective of this proposal is to improve the resolution of whole mantle
regional seismic images beneath Alaska using a Full Waveform Inversion method
applied within a restricted region, referred to as “box” tomography. Full
Waveform Inversion is required to account for the effects of multipathing and
wavefront healing that otherwise mask strong and local heterogeneity, such as
slabs and surrounding mantle wedges. Moreover, the spatially restricted “box”
approach couples a fast 1D and slower 3D wavefield solver thus reducing
computation time, which enables the team to use higher frequency regional and
teleseismic body waves. Using a combination of 3-component surface wave,
overtone and body waveforms, a shear velocity model will first be constructed.
Increasing the maximum frequency of the computations as iterations progress, and
with additional body waveforms sensitive to compressional velocity,
compressional velocity images will be obtained. This analysis will significantly
sharpen existing images of seismic wavespeeds and radial anisotropy,
particularly at transition zone depths and the mid and lower mantle. These
higher resolution tomographic images of the mantle beneath Alaska will help to
(1) constrain the history of subduction and mantle dynamics in this region, and
(2) compute more accurate mantle corrections for core phases observed on polar
paths from the south Sandwich Islands to stations in Alaska, which present a
particularly large spread of travel time anomalies, at least part of which is
likely due to Alaska slab structure. The results of the work will be of interest
to geodynamicists for modeling flow in the mantle beneath subduction zones, and
in plate motion reconstructions, by allowing better identification of subducted
slabs. It will also be of interest to geodynamicists and mineral physicists
investigating the pattern and origin of inner core anisotropy. Moreover, a
robust, high resolution tomographic model of Alaska and a method for providing
corrections for its effects will improve the utility of the USArray stations in
Alaska for other deep Earth studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.