* 2050893
* REU Site: Collaborative Research:  Research Opportunities in Rock Deformation
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Lars Hansen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 12/31/2024
* USD 32,208.00

Rock deformation, a sub-discipline of Earth science, uses geology and
engineering methods to measure the strength of rocks. Information about rock
strength can be applied to a wide range of problems in engineering, natural
hazards, and material science, as well as geology. However, very few scientists
specialize in the field of rock deformation; thus, many important research
questions remain unexplored or underexplored, slowing advances in science and
engineering. Geoscience departments at primarily undergraduate or primarily
minority-serving institutions often do not have active rock deformation research
programs and labs that deal with rock deformation are relatively rare. This REU
site aims to increase access and exposure of a diverse population of students to
career opportunities in this area. The project offers undergraduate students the
unique opportunity to conduct summer research at one of eleven state-of-the-art,
experimental rock deformation labs across the country. Experts in rock
deformation will serve as mentors to a cohort of 10 students each summer. This
REU site provides access and training, professional and career development
activities, and robust workforce development for students from all
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU site will provide research and
mentorship opportunities for undergraduate students in the field of experimental
rock deformation. The long-term objective is to increase the number and
diversity of students pursuing research or industry careers in rock deformation.
Student participants will receive training in research methods and professional
development topics that will provide a stable foundation for graduate school or
related career paths. A large team of PIs and senior participants ensures that
students who participate in the program will have a deep professional network to
support their future endeavors. Students will be drawn from the full spectrum of
higher education institutions. Strong emphases will be placed on recruiting
students from diverse and under-represented backgrounds, and smaller colleges
and universities that do not have research programs in rock deformation. The REU
site will include three integrated sessions: a field session to introduce
students to the geological study of deformed rocks, a laboratory session where
students conduct experiments on specimens collected during the field session,
and a conference session where students can present the results of their
research projects. The REU site will adopt a distributed model, leveraging the
combined lab capacity of the PIs and other senior participants to support 10
students per year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.