* 2050892
* REU Site: Mote Marine Laboratory Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Estuarine and Coastal Sciences
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Catherine Walsh, Mote Marine Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2024
* USD 433,268.00

The Mote Marine Laboratory (MML)in Sarasota, FL will host a Research Experience
for Undergraduates (REU) program. The program will bring ten undergraduates to
MML each summer for three years. Interns will conduct semi-independent research
projects during the 10-week program that are centered on initiatives for
restoring ocean health for future generations. In addition to improved research
skills, students gain valuable experience in scientific communication by
developing research proposals and reporting their findings in scientific poster
presentations. Career guidance on grantsmanship, scientific writing, poster and
oral research presentation, and pursuing graduate study in Ocean Sciences is
provided in student- centered discussion groups. Students will be exposed to a
broader range of topics in coastal and estuarine sciences by attending research
seminars presented by Mote scientific staff, visiting scientists, and Mote NSF
REU Program alumni. Participants are encouraged to present research findings in
peer-reviewed literature and/or at professional conferences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program is designed to advance discovery in estuarine
and coastal sciences while simultaneously promoting education and career
development of future ocean science professionals. This is accomplished by 1)
providing students with direct, ‘hands-on’ research experiences in diverse ocean
science topics; 2) developing meaningful relationships between students and
ocean science professionals; and 3) exposing undergraduates to various skills
necessary to pursue a successful career in science. Students are paired with MML
researchers from twenty-three Programs and conduct mentored research projects on
one of the several major threats to coastal habitats: aquatic pollution, ocean
acidification, natural toxins, habitat alteration, coral reef decline, new and
emerging marine diseases, deteriorating water quality, and impacts of
overfishing on fisheries ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.