* 2050950
* REU Site: Physics and Astronomy Research at Rutgers University
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Ronald Gilman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 05/31/2024
* USD 336,613.00

This REU site will bring ten students per summer to the Department of Physics
and Astronomy at Rutgers, where they will spend ten weeks doing forefront
research in astronomy, particle (nuclear and high energy) physics, condensed
matter physics, and physics education. The students will also engage in a
program of field trips and professional development activities that educate them
about the conduct of research and the prospects for careers in (and beyond)
physics and astronomy. Most participants will be rising juniors and seniors,
recruited from a diverse set of undergraduate institutions. REU participants
will include significant numbers of students from groups underrepresented in
physics and/or institutions with limited research opportunities. By improving
their capabilities and confidence in doing research and arming them with the
information and tools they need to define and achieve their educational and
professional goals, the REU site will broaden participation in the physics and
astronomy communities. The program also deliberately incorporates elements
intended to stimulate a ripple effect, as students return to their home
institutions and bring their experiences to bear on the engagement of their
peers in science and research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a mixture of formal and
informal settings, students will benefit from interacting with each other, with
their faculty mentors and assigned graduate student "near-peer" mentors, with
Rutgers undergraduate physics and astronomy majors, and with a diverse co-
residential peer group from outside Rutgers working in completely different
scientific fields. The central objective is to provide the same high-quality
mentorship and guidance to REU students from outside Rutgers that the
departmentâ€™s own students have been receiving for many years. REU participants
will engage in cutting-edge research in multiple areas, presenting the results
of their work in two formats at the end of the summer program as a prelude to
presenting it at a professional conference (and in many cases, working towards a
refereed paper) during the ensuing academic year. The faculty mentors involved
in this proposal, are a vibrant, collegial, intellectually diverse, well-funded,
and award-winning set of scientist-educators with exciting research programs and
excellent records of working with undergraduates. Their extensive mentorship
experience stems from strong commitments to undergraduate research by the
department and university, including the Research in Science and Engineering
(RiSE) program, which will be a key partner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.