* 2050869
* REU Site: Software Safety and Reliability: Research, Practice, and Innovation
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Gopal Gupta, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 02/29/2024
* USD 404,772.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site at the University of
Texas at Dallas focuses on software safety and reliability, which are critical
for safe and dependable operation of many systems and the reduction of
devastating accidents. It offers innovative research opportunities on these
important topics, especially to students from underrepresented groups or
universities with limited resources. By enhancing skills through workshops and
lectures in critical thinking, oral and written communication, problem solving,
and research methods, students will be encouraged and well equipped for graduate
education and research careers in science and technology. Interactions with
mentors and fellow participants will provide avenues to exchange ideas and
stimulate discussions. Research connections will be established with students'
home institutions to continue collaboration among multiple institutions in
different geographical regions. An REU website will publicize research articles,
videos and slides of lectures and project presentations, as well as
announcements for effective community outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus
of this research is on evaluating the strengths and weaknesses of existing
methodologies and current practices for safety assurance and reliability
modeling and prediction. Issues to be explored include: how the introduction of
software safety and reliability requirements may affect the software lifecycle;
how software processes, techniques, and tool support should be adjusted
accordingly; how safe software systems can be unreliable; how reliable software
systems can be unsafe; and how to make software systems both safe and reliable.
Software for blockchain-based smart contracts and autonomous systems like self-
driving vehicles will be emphasized. The findings will be compiled to provide a
comprehensive guideline of how software safety and reliability can be achieved
effectively and efficiently. A key aspect of this site is the close
collaboration with industry. REU students will take trips to industry sponsors,
allowing them to speak directly with practitioners to better understand how
software safety and reliability is applied to real-life applications. Workshops
on technical writing and oral presentation will be held to improve proficiency
in preparing and delivering technical reports. Seminars on ethics and
professional responsibility will also be given to ensure REU students behave
properly and respectfully.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.