* 2050469
* Building Capacity to Prepare Secondary Computer Science Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Dan Lo, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 02/29/2024
* USD 74,997.00

This project aims to serve the national need for highly effective computer
science teachers for grades 6–12. There is national momentum to expand K-12
student access to computer science education, including for historically
underrepresented and otherwise marginalized youth. As of 2019, 34 states had
moved toward this goal by developing K–12 computer science standards. However,
two-thirds of currently certified K–12 computer science teachers in the United
States do not have a degree in computer science. The limited formal preparation
of these teachers raises concerns about the quality of K-12 computer science
education across the Nation. This project will lay the foundation for enhancing
Kennesaw State University’s capacity to prepare secondary computer science
teachers who have strong computer science knowledge and skills. Specifically,
the project will: (1) examine needs in local school districts and the interests
of computer science and mathematics majors in teaching as a career; (2) develop
new undergraduate and graduate degree programs leading to computer science
teacher licensure; (3) produce curricula, teacher professional development
opportunities, and outreach programs to strengthen computer science education in
Georgia, specifically in high-need districts; and (4) create a metro-Atlanta hub
for computer science teacher education at the University. As a result, Kennesaw
State University will develop capacity in four areas: student interest and
expertise; curricular relevance; certification programs; and recruitment,
retention, and advising. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Kennesaw State
University includes partnerships with the Cobb County School District and the
Georgia Department of Education to create multiple programs for computer science
teacher education. Moreover, the project will design and implement activities
targeting students, pre-service teachers, and in-service teachers with a goal to
promote, recruit, and retain computer science teachers. Programs to be developed
include a Master of Arts in Teaching in Computer Science and a Secondary
Computer Science teacher concentration in an existing Master’s of Education
degree program. The project will also develop and refine self-learning modules
as supports for students preparing for the Georgia Assessment for the
Certification of Educators Computer Science Assessment, which can be used to
demonstrate content mastery for licensure in the state. This Capacity Building
project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
(Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K–12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary
K–12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It
also supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K–12
STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.