* 2050793
* REU Site: Chemistry Research for Medicine and Energy at the University of Rochester
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* David McCamant, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 02/29/2024
* USD 390,000.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site award to the University
of Rochester, located in Rochester, NY, supports 10 undergraduate students for a
10-week residential research program during the summers of 2022-2024. The
program, supported by the Division of Chemistry, immerses students in
interdisciplinary chemical research and equips them with the professional skills
to succeed in STEM careers. The program is enriched by an array of activities
related to research ethics, project development, professional networking,
scientific communication, and outreach. Participants are recruited nationally,
with an emphasis on students who are traditionally underrepresented in STEM and
may have limited access to research opportunities at their home institutions.
The goal of this program is to increase retention in STEM by providing students
with scientific and professional skills, along with a strong support network of
mentors and peers, that will endure beyond the summer research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REU students will contribute to research that
addresses fundamental challenges related to the synthesis and discovery of new
drugs, energy, and sustainable chemistry. Research will be undertaken with
faculty mentors whose research extends from catalysis development, nanoparticle
synthesis, peptide self-assembly, natural product synthesis, ultrafast
spectroscopy and quantum dynamics simulations. The major broader impact of this
project stems from equipping a cohort of 30 undergraduate students with both the
hard and soft skills necessary for a successful career in science. Additionally,
the site helps students establish a professional network to support their career
by facilitating long-term mentoring between REU students and faculty
mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.