* 2050692
* Central Convergence Research Experience for Undergraduates
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Brandy Wiegers, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 03/31/2024
* USD 473,353.00

The Central Convergence Research Experiences for Undergraduates site will
provide a transformative research experience for student participants. Hosted by
the Department of Mathematics at Central Washington University, the REU will
provide early training in mathematics research for future leaders in the
mathematical sciences. Each research project, designed by research mentors who
have training and expertise to produce high-quality research with undergraduate
students, will be accessible to students with a calculus background. Through
these well-designed research projects, problem-solving training, and other
professional development support, students' tools and knowledge of the
profession will be expanded to create a stronger sense of personal mathematical
identity, including an individual understanding of diversity of the broader
mathematical community. The program organizers will use long term relationships
with national Math Alliance mentors and others to recruit and retain a diverse
set of student participants, including students who identify from racial and
cultural groups underrepresented in the field of
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a multi-year basis, the Central Convergence
Research Experiences for Undergraduates will cover a broad range of applied
mathematical topics including mathematical biology, probability, economics, and
financial mathematics. Three projects will be offered every year, with at least
four students recruited to each project to work with a Central Washington
University mathematics faculty mentor, for a total of 13 students per year.
Interlaced with the mathematical research projects are professional development
training, seminars by guest mathematicians, and field trips to local sites.
Toward the end of the program, students will give a final presentation at a
symposium and produce a written report suitable for publication. Students will
also be supported in presenting their results at regional or national
mathematics conferences after the summer program. The project will be evaluated
with formative and summative assessments, and the program organizers will stay
in contact and mentor students after each summer ends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.