* 2050440
* Collaborative Research: Examining the Role of Compensation and Other Factors for Retention of Teachers in High-need Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Matthew Berman, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 06/30/2025
* USD 689,939.00

This project aims to serve the national need of retaining effective STEM
teachers in high-need schools. The research team seeks to understand what
induces STEM teachers to continue to serve in high-need schools, particularly
how compensation affects their decision to stay. School districts often use
compensation packages (including salary and benefits like health insurance,
retirement plans, and leave days) to attract teachers into different jobs.
However, when teachers make decisions about whether to stay in a job, they take
other considerations into account, including working conditions. Using statewide
Alaska employment information, this project will mathematically determine what
compensation measures, working conditions, and other factors most strongly
influence teacher decisions to stay or go. The project will then do case studies
to highlight examples of high-need schools that have improved compensation and
working conditions to retain STEM teachers longer than predicted. This
information may help to inform policy at the state and school district levels by
helping school leaders and lawmakers design compensation systems that are more
effective in promoting teacher retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at
the University of Alaska Anchorage and the University of Alaska Fairbanks
applies Bandura’s theory of reciprocal determinism to a mixed-methods research
design exploring two overarching research questions: (1) How does compensation
encourage STEM teachers to stay in high-need schools, and (2) What other factors
influence STEM teacher retention? The project will use statistical models of
teacher job changes to describe the extent to which measurable characteristics
of teachers, school assignments, students, districts, and communities affect
retention, and how trade-offs between salary and working conditions influence
teacher choices. Individual and comparative qualitative case studies of high-
need schools with better-than-predicted STEM teacher retention will identify key
determinants of teacher decisions to stay in high-retention schools. The
research directly addresses known gaps in the literature around (1) the relative
contribution of working conditions and compensation as factors in STEM teacher
retention, (2) the degree to which options for STEM educators to move between
classroom teaching and non-teaching jobs, including in the private sector,
affect retention, and (3) how high-need schools that retain STEM educators are
able to do so. The wide variation in Alaska’s compensation systems and community
characteristics will facilitate broadly generalizable analyses, which will have
potential to provide practical recommendations to schools and districts, as well
as to influence policy in structuring teacher compensation. This Track 4: Noyce
Research project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.