* 2050943
* REU Site: Online Interdisciplinary Big Data Analytics in Science and Engineering
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Matthias Gobbert, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 03/31/2024
* USD 293,710.00

This REU Site program will provide 8-week summer online research experiences to
undergraduates on how to utilize modern data science and high-performance
computing (HPC) techniques to process and analyze big data in many science and
engineering disciplines such as Atmospheric Science, Mechanical Engineering, and
Medicine. The REU Site program will be conducted purely online to allow students
to conduct research without traveling and to work with experts nationwide. In
recent years, the astronomical growth of available datasets in many science and
engineering disciplines often requires big data analytics techniques to
efficiently and effectively process the large datasets and obtain knowledge and
insight from them. The program will help students identify frontier research
challenges encountered when facing big data in science and engineering, and
guide students to conduct research to tackle those challenges using advanced
cyberinfrastructure software technologies (big data, distributed machine/deep
learning, HPC, etc.) and hardware resources (including big data clusters, CPU
clusters and GPU clusters). The program will develop the national workforce in
areas of critical need on “Data + Computing + X”. The project thus serves the
national interest, as stated by NSF's mission, to promote the progress of
science and advance the national prosperity and welfare.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By having three phases of training, namely formal
instruction, team-based research and dissemination, this REU Site program will
i) ignite students' interest in how data science and high-performance computing
techniques can aid in the scientific discovery process via interdisciplinary
research projects; ii) provide interdisciplinary team-based research experiences
via guidance from research mentors, graduate assistants, and interdisciplinary
collaborators in the application domain area of each project; and iii) provide
integrated training on crucial professional skills (including skills in
collaboration, communication, presentation and writing, and experience in
scientific paper preparation and presentation). This REU Site will provide a
unique and comprehensive program integrating the following elements under the
guidance of the faculty team, who have extensive experience in interdisciplinary
research and online education: 1) frontier research connecting advanced
cyberinfrastructure techniques with big data challenges in science and
engineering, 2) online research experience that leverages modern communication
tools, 3) team-based interdisciplinary research and communication experience, 4)
complementary professional development activities (such as graduate school
preparation, invited talks from established researchers, and interaction with
university administers including college deans and department chairs), 5)
educational research on online undergraduate training
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.