* 2050606
* Empowering STEM Teachers with Earned Doctorates: A Noyce Program for Elementary and  Middle School Mathematics Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Malcolm Butler, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 03/31/2026
* USD 1,459,394.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by providing novel and
important information regarding the impact of K-12 STEM teachers with a
doctorate degree and their roles as instructional leaders in their schools and
district. By applying research-informed and equitable policies, practices, and
structures, the project intends to increase the capacity and expertise of K-8
mathematics teachers to serve as leaders in their schools and districts. The
project has the potential to incentivize, build precedence for, and
professionalize the value of mathematics teachers with doctoral degrees in K-12
school settings, where research and practice can be readily linked. The 15
participating teachers will earn a specialized doctorate of education in K-8
Mathematics Education. They will also attend the University of Central Florida-
Orange County Public Schools Teacher Leader Academy. This project aims to
advance the impact of participating teachers by increasing their: 1) ability,
knowledge, and social justice mindset; 2) mathematical content knowledge; 3)
pedagogical content knowledge; and 4) leadership capacity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the University of Central Florida (UCF)
includes partnerships with Orange County Public Schools (OCPS), and City Year
Orlando, a nonprofit whose members are young adults from diverse backgrounds
serving one year of community service in OCPS as student success coaches. The
project has the potential to be a transformative endeavor that will, through the
15 project teachers' dissertation studies, produce a broad collection of needed
studies to inform the practical implementation of the four key recommendations
outlined in the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics Catalyzing Change
framework. Organized by three interconnected and synergistic components (e.g.,
Multilayered Coaching Cycles, Repositioning Mathematics as a Gateway, and
Mentoring Underrepresented STEM Education Professionals), the UCF-OCPS Teacher
Leader Academy will provide a structure and support for teachers to apply in
their urban classroom settings. These structures and supports include the
uprooting of inequitable policies, practices, and structures described in
Catalyzing Change. The project will serve as an innovative model for empowering
STEM teachers with earned doctorates and increasing diversity of teachers in
STEM fields. The UCF-OCPS Noyce Teacher Leader Academy aims to directly impact
more than 200 additional K-8 mathematics teachers, more than 30 administrators,
the estimated 9000 students in the schools where the project's teachers teach,
more than 200 City Year Orlando young adults, and 2000 students served by City
Year Orlando. Both quantitative and qualitative methods will be used to
determine evidence-based outcomes of the project. The project's leadership team
will disseminate results of the project through national and regional
presentations, refereed journal articles, and a publicly-available website of
resources. This Track 3: Master Teaching Fellowships project is supported
through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K- 12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become
STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on
the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.