* 2050999
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Smart Computing and Communications
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Anupam Joshi, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/29/2024
* USD 402,234.00

The goal of this Research Experiences for Undergraduate (REU) site in Smart
Computing and Communications is to increase technical awareness, intellectual
curiosity, creativity, and critical thinking of undergraduate students in smart
computing and communications. This project will contribute to the preparation of
a diverse workforce of scientist trained in the multi-disciplinary area, which
promises to impact most every sector of society such as healthcare, natural
disasters, energy, transportation, agriculture, finance, manufacturing, and
national defense. Students from predominantly undergraduate and community
college institutions will have the opportunity to be engaged in cutting edge
research. The program will bring together a cohort of ten undergraduate student
researchers per year to participate in a 10-week full-time research program.
Each student will select a research project and will be immersed in an active
research group, led by a faculty mentor and a senior-level graduate student,
committed to actively guiding undergraduate researchers and providing a high-
impact educational experience. The students will participate in weekly
professional development seminars and short courses on topics including, but not
limited to, technical writing, public speaking, and ethics in science and
engineering. At the end of the 10-week program, students will conduct a poster
presentation as part of the campus-wide Summer Undergraduate Research Fest
(SURF). Students will also have the opportunity to continue their research
throughout the academic year and submit papers to peer-reviewed venues with
faculty advisors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU research projects will be
conducted in three interrelated thrust areas of smart computing and
communications: (i) security and privacy protection, (ii) novel applications and
(iii) sensing and adaptive networking. Proposed projects will include a mix of
theory and hands-on work and will leverage enabling paradigms (e.g., cloud
computing, Internet-of-Things, high-speed wireless) to design, model, and
implement novel techniques and solutions for smart computing and communication
applications, encompassing algorithms for artificial intelligence, data mining,
machine learning, edge analytics, signal processing and big data. Some projects
will also include building functional prototypes for demonstration. The program
will expand the minds and capabilities of each participant, including faculty
mentors and graduate students to help them become better teachers and
communicators. The research results will be disseminated through data releases,
conference publications and presentations in scholarly
venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.