* 2050697
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research Pathways That Broaden and Strengthen the Geosciences
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Karl Wirth, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 06/30/2025
* USD 642,244.00

The Keck Geology Consortium REU will offer undergraduate research experiences
for 14 undergraduate students per year to help students: (1) improve their
understanding of the earth through authentic research; (2) develop disciplinary
and personal skills needed by professional earth scientists; (3) develop their
confidence and identity as scientists through greater understanding of the
intellectual and practical work of science; and (4) refine their career plans
and prepare them for graduate study using intentionally designed research
experiences and mentoring. Gateway projects, designed for rising sophomores,
will engage students in a mix of field and laboratory work to investigate
societally relevant questions, expose them to the breadth of the discipline, and
to career opportunities in the earth sciences. Students in the Advanced Research
Program (rising juniors) will participate in a four-week summer project
involving a mix of field and laboratory investigations, followed by an academic
year-long project at their home campuses, that focuses on important problems in
the discipline. Both programs include analytical, professional development
components, and conference presentations designed to help students learn
cutting-edge approaches, as well as to develop their professional knowledge and
skills. Mentor workshops, curricular materials, and technology are used to
support the work of student participants and project
mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal goal of Keck Geology Consortium
programs is to broaden the diversity of the geoscience workforce and to prepare
students for careers in the geosciences. Undergraduate participants, especially
those from underrepresented minorities, will be recruited from both Consortium
and non-Consortium institutions. The Gateway Program is designed to further
existing efforts at the Consortium institutions to broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups within the geosciences and STEM. With an emphasis on
year-long research experiences, structured research curricula, and mentor
training, the Consortium programs provide a distinctive model for undergraduate
research. This project also endeavors to advance the evaluation of undergraduate
research experiences with further development of a research knowledge and skill
survey and to facilitate community-wide engagement with “science identity”
formation with a goal of simultaneously strengthening REU’s and geoscience
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.