* 2050105
* Acoustically activated release of organic liquids in porous media: a multiscale experimental investigation using laser-based optical diagnostics
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Jaime Juarez, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 03/31/2024
* USD 321,056.00

A porous medium is a material that contains open voids where liquid can become
trapped. Trapping of liquid in a porous medium is important in a variety of
technological and naturally-occurring processes, including extraction of natural
resources such as petroleum. Shale and sandstone are two types of sedimentary
rock that serve as a common source of petroleum due the porosity of these types
of rock. Extracting oil from rock is an energy intensive process that only
yields about 40% of the total available oil. The remainder remains trapped
inside void spaces within the rock. Improving the extraction yield requires
techniques that are prohibitively expensive and can cause greater environmental
harm than the initial extraction process. This project will investigate the
hypothesis that acoustic sound waves can be used to improve the yield of
petroleum from oil-bearing rock. Sound waves are advantageous because they can
travel long distances through rock and do not introduce potential sources of
contamination to the petroleum reservoir. A combination of analytical and
experimental approaches will be used to describe transport phenomena related to
multiphase flow through porous media. The resulting information will yield
insight into the growth, break up and phase separation of multiphase flows in
porous systems that can have applications beyond the extraction of oil, such as
the production and performance of paints, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, and
processed foods.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this project is
to experimentally investigate acoustic separation of an oil phase from a porous
oil rock analog. The results of these experiments will be used to develop a
scaling model based on fundamental principles to describe oil phase separation
from porous media across multiple scales. To achieve this objective, the
specific tasks of the project are: (1) develop a two-dimensional experimental
micromodel of oil-trapping porous media to serve as a control; (2) acoustically
actuate the two-dimensional micromodel and use flow visualization and
microscopic particle image velocimetry to study the resulting two-phase flow
fields, and develop a three-dimensional scaling model to characterize the
observed behavior as a function of injection rate, frequency, and input voltage
(which is directly related to acoustic pressure and energy density); and (3)
investigate and refine acoustic actuation in a three-dimensional porous oil rock
analog using laser-based visualization of flows in an experimental model to
validate scaling models. The research team will collaborate with the Society of
Hispanic Engineers to deliver lectures on acoustics to a Hispanic high school
population of about 700 students. These lectures will utilize research products
to enhance the learning experience of the students and provide them with insight
into the STEM field. The team will also interact with the Academic Program for
Excellence to inspire freshman students, especially those from underrepresented
groups, and to introduce them to the field of acoustics. This project is jointly
funded by Particulate and Multiphase Processes and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.