* 2050895
* REU Site: Program for Access to Training in Health Informatics (PATHI)
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Kim Unertl, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 03/31/2024
* USD 405,000.00

The REU Program for Access to Training in Health Informatics (REU-PATHI) will
provide 10 undergraduate students with the opportunity to conduct meaningful
health informatics research for a period of 10 weeks in the summer. Health
informatics connects science, engineering, social sciences, and multiple other
fields to identify, design, develop, deploy, and study innovative technology-
based solutions for important health-related problems. The REU-PATHI site seeks
to broaden participation in health informatics and open new opportunities in
this rapidly expanding field. Health Informatics is one of the fastest growing
fields today. At least 50% of REU-PATHI students will come from groups that are
underrepresented in STEM-C fields, including women, members of minority groups,
first generation college students, and students attending institutions with
limited access to research experiences. Students will be matched with faculty
mentors in the Vanderbilt University Medical Center Department of Biomedical
Informatics, who will work with students to develop knowledge, skills, and
experience in health informatics research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of the REU-PATHI Site are to engage undergraduate students from
diverse backgrounds in meaningful scientific research projects. The
undergraduate students will have the opportunity to work in one of three health
informatics focus areas: 1) Computing, focusing on computationally-intensive
topics such as biomedical data science, predictive analytics, natural language
processing, and data privacy; 2) Precision Health, focusing on topics such as
genome-phenome studies, multi-omics analysis, phenotype risk scoring, and
clinical decision support and 3) Human-Technology Interaction, applying concepts
from human-computer interaction, human factors engineering, and sociotechnical
systems to topics such as studying workflow and patient safety. Regardless of
specific research area, all REU-PATHI students will participate in twice-weekly
seminars presented by faculty, professional development workshops, a team-based
design challenge, and other professional development activities. However, there
are significant challenges in orienting and training diverse undergraduate
students to the many career pathways available in this high-impact scientific
research field. REU-PATHI addresses this urgent problem by 1) training
undergraduate students to conduct cutting-edge health informatics research; 2)
introducing students to pathways in health informatics graduate education and
research and giving them the skills, knowledge, and confidence to pursue those
pathways; 3) involving graduate students, postdoctoral scholars, and faculty in
mentoring undergraduate students; 4) providing opportunities for REU students to
disseminate their research to peers, graduate students, faculty, and the field;
and 5) linking high school students in our larger internship program to
undergraduate peers to help high school students understand next educational
steps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.