* 2050271
* Distinguishing Sediment, Serpentinite, and Altered Oceanic Crust in the Source  of Aleutian Volcanic Rocks Using Boron &amp; Molybdenum Isotopes
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Gene Yogodzinski, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2024
* USD 370,790.00

Subduction is the fundamental geologic process where one tectonic plate sinks
beneath another into the hot interior of the Earth. Subduction has many
important human impacts, especially hazards from seismic and volcanic activity
that are a constant threat to population centers and commerce worldwide.
Subduction also plays a key role in shaping the earth's surface and is important
in the formation of continents and the mineral resources they contain. As a
result, subduction-related processes are the subject of broad public and
scientific interest. The key goal of this work is to understand how fluids
(superheated water at high pressures) drive subduction magmatism, which is
manifest in volcanoes at the earth’s surface. Under this project, chemical data
will be collected on volcanic rocks of the Aleutian Island Arc. Data collection
will focus on the elements boron (B) and molybdenum (Mo), which are relatively
water-soluble in earth-surface systems, and as a result, are abundant in
seawater and are easily transferred to rocks that underlie the ocean basins.
When subduction pushes the hydrated oceanic crust back into the Earth’s
interior, the water is driven out of the rocks by chemical reactions that
produce fluids rich in B and Mo. Under the extreme pressures and temperatures of
the Earth’s interior, fluids lower the melting point of the rocks that they
encounter and trigger the melting processes that lead to volcanic eruptions at
the Earth’s surface. In turn, the concentrations of B and Mo in these volcanic
rocks reveal key information about the paths that the fluids follow and the
rocks that are melted along the way. Immediate societal benefit of this work
will be research training of the graduate students who will be supported under
the project. The project also initiates an after-school intern program for
students from Dreher High School, in Columbia, South Carolina. The student
interns will assist with sample preparation, data reduction, and data
management. The interns will also produce a small data set of their own as a
final project. The goals of the program are to expose high-school students to
areas of applied chemistry and to NSF-funded research in the earth
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key technical goal of the project is to take
advantage of the fluid-mobile behavior of boron and molybdenum in order to
distinguish the competing roles of subduction inputs (sediments, serpentinite
and altered basaltic crust) in the generation of the Aleutian Arc magmas. We
will collect B and Mo isotope data for subduction inputs (sediment, altered
oceanic crust, abyssal peridotite) and outputs (volcanic rocks) along the
Aleutian arc and link the chemical results to physical parameters such as
subduction rate, sediment flux, and thermal parameter, which change
systematically along the arc. Boron isotopes are used as tracers of fluid
pathways, which also respond to changes in the thermal state of the subducting
plate. The importance of Mo isotopes stems from their value as a tracer of both
fluids and sediment type. The combined B and Mo isotope tracers and Aleutian
natural laboratory create opportunities to distinguish sources in subducted
sediment, serpentinite, and altered oceanic crust, especially at the point along
the arc where the Amlia Fracture Zone enters the trench, and in the western-most
Aleutians, where hot-slab effects are uniquely well
expressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.