* 2050910
* REU Site: Frontier Technologies for Biometrics and Authentication
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Zhanpeng Jin, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 02/29/2024
* USD 393,599.00

This project establishes a new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Site hosted by the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at the
University at Buffalo. Undergraduate students across the nation will work with a
group of experienced faculty members and industrial mentors and conduct cutting-
edge research in biometrics and authentication during each summer. Biometrics is
replacing traditional passwords and becoming the most preferred authentication
approach in daily-life scenarios, including mobile applications, banking, and
border security. The trend leads to an impressive upsurge in the industry's need
to hire scientists and engineers with biometric computing skills. To hardness
the biometric technology and meet the increasing industry demand, biometrics and
authentication have become a core part of the cybersecurity course curriculum.
This REU site will provide a short-term intensive research training experience
to a group of undergraduate researchers to prepare them for a career in the
field of cybersecurity and benefit their graduate applications and job hunting.
Through various activities such as hands-on projects, seminars, demos,
presentations, field trips, and other professional development opportunities,
undergraduate students will also enhance their professional skills. This REU
site aims to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite substantial previous efforts, there
remain unresolved challenges about the effectiveness and management of systems
for biometric recognition, as well as the appropriateness and societal impacts
of their use. Moreover, the general public has been exposed to biometrics
largely as high-technology gadgets in spy thrillers or as fear instilling
instruments of state or corporate surveillance in speculative fiction. The
following research problems in biometrics are challenging and unexplored, but of
great importance to trustworthy biometrics: new biometric modality, anti-
spoofing, cancelability, continuous authentication, and societal acceptance. The
problem formulation and solutions will help the community strengthen the
understanding of biometrics in individual identification and authentication.
Specifically, under the long-term vision of biometrics and authentication, this
REU site will focus on the two fundamental research directions on (A) biometric
modality and (B) biometric security. Specifically, the research projects for
undergraduate students will be built on top of six (6) research areas under the
theme of Biometrics and Authentication, including 1) Biometric Sensors &amp;
Hardware, 2) Biometric Data Processing, 3) Authentication Algorithms, 4)
Biometrics System Security, 5) User Interface Optimization, and 6) Attacks &amp;
Countermeasures. Research outcomes include a set of cutting-edge biometric
technologies, including emerging physiological and behavioral biometrics,
continuous and revocable authentication, vulnerabilities, and mitigation
approaches to new attacks to biometric authentication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.