* 2050785
* Collaborative Research:  Laboratory and theoretical study of geyser dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Robert Sohn, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2024
* USD 181,914.00

With over 4 million annual visitors to Yellowstone's Old Faithful geyser, public
fascination with geysers is undeniable. Yet, the scientific understanding of
geysers is incomplete. While it has been understood for over a century that
geyser eruptions are caused by the sudden boiling of water in underground
conduits, scientists do not understand what triggers these boiling events, and
how the size and shape of the underground conduits affect a geyser’s behavior.
Recent studies at geyser fields in Yellowstone National Park, El Tatio on the
Chilean altiplano, and the Geyser Valley in Kamchatka, have shown that the
underground plumbing systems at these sites include a reservoir that is offset
to the side relative to the main eruption conduit. In such systems, steam gets
captured in the side reservoir, earning it the name ‘bubble trap’. The discovery
of this geometry is the most significant advance in several decades, but
researchers are only beginning to understand how it affects a geyser's behavior.
This team will create a small geyser setup in the laboratory that will include a
bubble trap. They will run a series of experiments to study how fluids behave in
this type of system. The proposed work will use mathematical models to relate
behaviors observed in the lab to the much larger systems that we encounter in
nature. The project will provide research experiences for undergraduate students
and will contribute instructional materials to educators through an established
teacher training program. The laboratory geyser will be exhibited at the Lamont
Doherty Earth Observatory open house, visited by thousands of people each
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geysers represent a unique class of hydrothermal
systems where the thermodynamics of two-phase (vapor and liquid) flow and
favorable conduit geometries combine to produce episodic eruptions. With over 4
million annual visitors to Yellowstone's Old Faithful geyser, public fascination
with geysers is undeniable, but our scientific understanding of geysers is
incomplete. Recently, however, data from geyser fields in Yellowstone National
Park, El Tatio on the Chilean altiplano, and the Geyser Valley in Kamchatka,
have provided compelling evidence for conduit geometries that include a
reservoir that is laterally offset from the eruption conduit. This so-called
'bubble trap' geometry allows compressed steam to accumulate under an
impermeable roof, and its discovery has revitalized geyser research as this team
seeks to understand its implications for a geyser's dynamic behavior. None of
the laboratory geyser experiments developed to-date accurately simulates the
full range of behaviors observed in natural systems, and the effects of bubble
trap conduit geometries have not been explored thoroughly. Similarly,
mathematical models have informed geyser research for more than a century, but
none of the extant models considered the full range of thermodynamic and fluid
mechanics processes associated with a bubble trap conduit geometry. This project
will address both of these shortcomings by combining novel laboratory
experiments that include the missing pieces for geysers with a bubble trap. The
laboratory analog geyser will provide an idealized representation of the
thermodynamic processes and subsurface geometries of natural geysers, enabling a
series of experiments aimed at elucidating the fluid mechanical and
thermodynamic behaviors of the geyser system. In parallel, mathematical models
will be developed to describe the system behavior, and these relationships will
be used to improve our understanding of natural systems. The laboratory geyser
will enable the evaluation of competing hypotheses for eruption triggering, and
comprehensive monitoring instrumentation will enable the observation of geyser
processes in unprecedented detail.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.