* 2050129
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Microscale interactions of foundation species with their fluid environment: biological feedbacks alter ecological interactions of mussels
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Michael Nishizaki, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 01/31/2024
* USD 97,891.00

The project investigates how the metabolic activity of dense aggregations of
marine organisms alter the water chemistry of their interstitial spaces, and how
these microscale alterations feedback to affect the organisms’ interactions in
coastal ecosystems. The research team focuses on bivalve mussels, foundation
species that form dense ‘beds’ typically known for facilitating other species by
ameliorating harsh flow conditions. This ability can become a liability,
however, if flow is not sufficient to flush the interstitial spaces and steep,
metabolically-driven concentration gradients develop. The research evaluates
whether corrosive chemical microclimates (such as low oxygen or low pH) are most
extreme in low flow, high temperature conditions, especially for dense
aggregations of mussels with large biomass and/or high respiration rates, and if
they negatively impact mussel beds and the diverse biological communities they
support. The research addresses a global societal concern, the impact of
anthropogenic climate change on coastal marine ecosystems, and has potential
applications to aquaculture and biofouling industries by informing adaptation
strategies to “future-proof” mussel farms in the face of climate change and
improved antifouling practices for ships, moorings, and industrial cooling
systems. The project forges new collaborations with investigators from three
campuses and integrates research and education through interdisciplinary
training of a diverse group of graduate, undergraduate and high school students.
STEM education and environmental stewardship is promoted by the development of a
K-12 level science curriculum module and a hand’s-on public exhibit of bivalve
biology at a local shellfish farm. Research findings are disseminated in a
variety of forums, including peer-reviewed scientific publications and research
presentations at regional, national and international
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team develops a framework that links
environmental conditions measured at a coarse scale (100m-100km; e.g., most
environmental observatories) and ecological processes at the organismal scale (1
cm – 10 m). Specifically, the project investigates how aggregations of
foundation species impact flow through interstitial spaces, and how this
ultimately impacts water chemistry immediately adjacent to the organisms. The
research focuses on mytilid mussels, with the expectation that the aggregation
alters the flow and chemical transport in two ways, one by creating a physical
resistance, which reduces the exchange, and the other by enhancing the exchange
due to their incurrent/excurrent pumping. These metabolically-driven feedbacks
are expected to be strongest in densely packed, high biomass aggregations and
under certain ambient environmental conditions, namely low flow and elevated
temperature, and can lead to a range of negative ecological impacts that could
not be predicted directly from coarse scale measures of ambient seawater
chemistry or temperature. The team develops computational fluid dynamic (CFD)
models to predict interstitial flows and concentration gradients of dissolved
oxygen and pH within mussel beds. The CFD model incorporates mussel behavior and
physiological activity (filtration, gaping, respiration) based on published
values as well as new empirical work. Model predictions are compared to flow and
concentration gradients measured in mussel aggregations in the laboratory and
field. Finally, the team conducts several short-term experiments to quantify
some of the potential negative ecological impacts of corrosive interstitial
water chemistry on mussel aggregations, such as reduced growth, increased
dislodgement, increased predation risk, and reduced biodiversity. Because the
model is based on fluid dynamic principles and functional traits, the framework
is readily adaptable to other species that form dense assemblages, thereby
providing a useful tool for predicting the ability of foundation species to
persist and provide desirable ecosystem services under current and future
multidimensional climate scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.