* 2051652
* STTR Phase I:  On-chip integration of sample preparation and monitoring with dielectrophoretic cell isolation
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2022
* Alexandra Hyler, CYTORECOVERY, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 02/28/2022
* USD 255,986.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is a platform to isolate cells based on their
biophysical properties. The platform will help isolate cells that are not
abundant and enable study of their role in biological function and diseases such
as cancer. Specifically, a single chip platform will carry out sample
preparation, manipulation, and monitoring, greatly reducing the sample handling
steps and thereby ensuring the maintenance of cell viability and improvement in
sample consistency. This recovered sample is essential for the development of
cell-based therapies in regenerative medicine and cancer
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project will develop an electrically functional microfluidic sample
manipulation platform for phenotype-selective recovery of cells, based on their
biophysical attributes that allow discrimination between distinct
electrophysiological properties for the cells of interest within the sample
media. Specifically, microfluidic designs will be developed to swap cells from
complex biological matrices into an optimized buffer for enabling cell
manipulation, and the instrumentation will be developed for on-chip monitoring
of the sample during various stages of the phenotype-selective cell recovery
process. The designs will be optimized for enhanced levels of selection purity,
while maintaining high cell collection efficiencies, so that the recovered
sample is enriched for cell phenotypes of interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.