* 2051642
* Collaborative Research: Taking the Pulse of the Arctic Ocean - A US Contribution to the International Synoptic Arctic Survey
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Cynthia Pilskaln, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Continuing Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 06/30/2024
* USD 583,506.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Arctic Ocean is being affected
by major environmental changes, such as sea ice loss, driven by ongoing climate
warming. However, since we have limited information on oceanic, biological, and
chemical conditions there, it is challenging to predict future changes, to
evaluate how much ecosystem change may already have occurred, or to know if
these changes are occurring over the entire Arctic Ocean. International
scientists are working together to develop the Synoptic Arctic Survey (SAS)
program to address this challenge. SAS collaborators are sampling the physical,
biological, and chemical status of the Arctic Ocean on multiple scientific
expeditions. They are synthesizing these new measurements with existing data,
and projecting future changes via modeling. This project is the core of a US
contribution to the international SAS program, continuing US prominence in
Arctic research, and focuses on the US Arctic near Alaska and in the Canadian
Basin to the north. Multiple educational, training, and outreach activities are
focusing on early career scientists, K-12 students, Indigenous peoples,
undergraduate and graduate students, and local Alaskan coastal communities.
Findings from the international effort will guide predictions and management of
ecosystem resources that are essential to human communities, including local and
Indigenous Arctic residents, and large-scale commercial fisheries and other
economic activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will quantify the current
state of the physical, biological, and biogeochemical marine systems of the
Canadian Basin during a multidisciplinary cruise in late summer to detect
changes through comparisons with historical data, to quantify linkages between
the adjacent shelves, slopes, and deep basins, and to provide a contemporary
baseline against which future changes can be compared to detect responses to
climate drivers. The SAS has organized around three major research areas: (1)
physical drivers of importance to the ecosystem and carbon cycle, (2) the
ecosystem response, and (3) the carbon cycle itself, linked with the overarching
question: What is the present state and what are the major ongoing
transformations of the Arctic marine system? This proposal poses specific,
focused research questions under this overarching umbrella that will directly
advance our basic understanding of this poorly understood region, while also
providing observational and experimental data that will contribute to the
broader SAS objectives. A Project Coordination Office will facilitate
coordination of US project components with international research activities and
will encourage and recruit additional US complementary proposals to join the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.