* 2051759
* Towards the Understanding of Deep Crustal Faulting and Fluid Movement through the Analysis of Long Period Earthquakes at Clearlake, CA
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Takaaki Taira, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 04/30/2024
* USD 139,000.00

Volcanos pose serious threats to human societies yet can be sources of
geothermal energy. Clear Lake Volcanic Field is a volcanic steam field located
in California. It hosts numerous geothermal power plants. Although it has not
erupted for 11,000 years, it exhibits volcanic-type seismic activity such as
tremors and long-period (LP) events. LP events are produced by fluids surging
through cracks and faults in the Earth’s crust. Studying these events allows
better understanding fluid movement and fault dynamics. This is important
economically and to better assess seismic and volcanic hazards. However, seismic
signals from LP events are small and challenging to detect and analyze. Here the
researchers investigate these events at Clear Lake Volcanic Field. They use
seismology which is the study of seismic waves generated by earthquakes and
travelling through the Earth. The waves are detected at the surface and
analyzed. The researchers leverage on existing data. They combine state-of-the-
art analytical techniques to better identify and locate the LP events. They
examine the dynamic properties of the events (stress drops), their scaling with
magnitude, and when possible the focal mechanisms of the earthquakes that
produced them. The improved catalog of LP events, high-resolution locations, and
focal mechanisms is used to investigate the fluid transport system in the
region. The project outcomes – which include refined methods and development of
hybrid approaches to improve LP event analysis – could be applied at other
volcanic systems. The one-year project also supports a collaboration between
academia and the industry, and educational outreach to the public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study is based on existing catalog of seismic waveform
data that have shown to include LP events. These events are compared to non-
volcanic tremor and low-frequency earthquakes at other places along the San
Andreas fault system. The researchers search the continuous waveform data set
using adaptive waveform template matching to identify LP events related to
events already in the catalog. They develop new templates - based on waveform
similarity - to further interrogate the data and detect and catalog new LP
events. They use the double-difference location method to develop a high-
resolution catalog. The detected events are analyzed using spectral modeling
methods to estimate the scalar seismic moment and corner frequency; the goal is
to assess possible scaling properties of the LP earthquakes. The team also
utilizes three-component waveform data to determine focal parameters from moment
tensor inversion. LP events are small and challenging to model and therefore
require efforts toward the refinement of methods and the development of hybrid
approaches to extract more reliable results. Because of their small magnitude,
the researchers need to explore combined inversion scheme that utilizes a
source-type inversion of both waveforms and first-motion polarities, possibly
expanding the method to utilize body wave amplitude ratios. The results of the
multipronged analysis will be used to investigate potential fault structure and
the fluid transport system of the Clear Lake Volcanic Field. It will also allow
evaluating whether continued study is warranted with a possible portable array
deployment to improve coverage to better investigate LP earthquake
seismicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.