* 2051491
* IIBR Informatics: Accurate assessment of protein-DNA complex models and applications
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Jun-tao Guo, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 04/30/2024
* USD 673,715.00

Protein-DNA interactions play crucial roles in many biological processes, such
as structure-based drug design and structure-based transcription factor binding
site prediction. Transcription factors, a type of proteins, are considered as
one of the prime drug targets since mutations on transcription factors and
aberrant protein-DNA interactions have been implicated in many diseases
including cancer. The major challenges in modeling protein-DNA complexes are
accurate assessment of the quality of complex models and a small number of known
protein-DNA complex structures. This project aims to better understand protein-
DNA interactions from a structural perspective by developing methods for
assessment of the quality of protein-DNA complex models. A comprehensive
database of protein-DNA complex structure will be constructed for analysis,
modeling, and assessment, which will be a valuable resource for the scientific
community. The project will actively promote and recruit postdoc and students
from underrepresented groups through summer programs. Techniques and results of
this project will be integrated into curriculum design to foster creative
learning and understanding of relationships among structure modeling,
macromolecular interaction, biological function, and biomedical applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational modeling of protein-DNA
complexes, including homology modeling and protein-DNA docking, is a cost-
efficient alternative to fill the void in the protein-DNA complex structure
landscape. The major challenges are accurate assessment of the quality of
complex models and the assessment of the similarity between protein-DNA
complexes. While standard protocols have been developed for comparing protein-
ligand complexes, they are not suitable for assessing the similarity of protein-
DNA complexes due to their unique structural and chemical features. DNA has a
double-helical structure and the hydrogen bonds between protein and DNA bases
are crucial for protein-DNA binding specificity. New methods are clearly needed
for accurate comparison of protein-DNA complexes, which in turn can help develop
methods for accurate quality assessment of protein-DNA complex models. In this
project, a novel method will be developed for accurately capturing the essence
of similarity between protein-DNA complex structures and new algorithms will be
developed for assessing the quality of protein-DNA models. In addition, these
newly developed methods will be applied to assess the quality of homology
protein-DNA complex models and structure-based transcription factor-binding site
prediction with these models. The datasets and algorithms developed from this
project will be made freely available to the research community. The results of
the project can be found at https://guolab.uncc.edu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.