* 2051681
* The Mechanics of Piezo Ion Channels
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Christoph Haselwandter, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2024
* USD 237,427.00

Nontechnical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Going back to antiquity, it has been
recognized that touch, the ability to sense mechanical stimuli, is fundamental
to life. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying mechanosensation in humans
and other vertebrates have long remained elusive. Piezo ion channels have
recently been found to provide the molecular basis for a wide range of seemingly
unrelated forms of mechanosensation. This presents a unique opportunity to
discover and describe general physical mechanisms and principles underlying
vertebrate mechanosensation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research objective
of this project is to conceive a physical theory describing the mechanics, and
mechanical activation, of Piezo ion channels. The research team supported by
this project works closely with experimental groups to test and refine this
theory of Piezo mechanics, with the aim of elucidating the physical basis for
mechanosensation in vertebrates. The research component of this project is
motivated by the prospect that a quantitative understanding of the physical
principles underlying mechanosensation will yield new fundamental insights into
life, and that a physical understanding of mechanosensation will also suggest
novel approaches for the quantitative analysis and control of mechanosensation
under normal physiological conditions and under disease conditions, such as in
the case of chronic pain. The interdisciplinary research supported by this
project will be closely integrated with interdisciplinary teaching activities at
the interface of physics and biology, at the level of high school,
undergraduate, and graduate education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In common with other organisms, vertebrates possess
a variety of senses that respond to mechanical stimuli. Despite intense efforts,
the molecules and physical mechanisms responsible for vertebrate
mechanosensation have long remained elusive. In 2010, Piezo proteins, a
previously unknown class of mechanosensitive ion channels, were discovered,
which has led to stunning progress in the elucidation of the molecular basis for
vertebrate mechanosensation. Piezo has been found to underlie mechanosensation
in many important physiological functions in vertebrates, such as cardiovascular
mechanotransduction, mechanosensing in epithelial homeostasis, proprioception,
sensing of touch, and mechanotransduction in the respiratory
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several molecular structures of Piezo are now
available, which presents a unique opportunity to arrive at a quantitative,
physical understanding of how Piezo interacts with the surrounding membrane to
sense mechanical stimuli. Based on approaches from condensed-matter theory and
materials science, this project aims to develop a physical theory describing the
mechanics of Piezo ion channels, and thus to elucidate the physical basis for
Piezo gating in cell membranes: the project (1) develops physical models
describing the dependence of Piezo gating and Piezo localization on local
membrane composition, membrane shape, and force exertion on the membrane; (2)
explores how Piezo interacts through the membrane with other proteins, and how
this might give rise to cooperative gating responses of Piezo; and (3) develops
physical models describing the shape and energetics of the observed Piezo
vesicles and, on this basis, explores the protein mechanics of Piezo. The
physical theory of Piezo mechanics developed through this project is directly
motivated by experiments, and the research team supported by this project works
closely with experimental groups to test and refine new models of membrane-Piezo
interactions. Given the ubiquity of Piezo in vertebrate mechanosensation, this
project raises the exciting prospect that simple physical mechanisms and
principles underlie a diverse array of complex physiological functions, which
may reveal new and unexpected links between seemingly unrelated biological
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.