* 2051129
* REU/RET Site: Physics Research at Brigham Young University
* MPS,PHY
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Jean-Francois Van Huele, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 02/29/2024
* USD 370,586.00

This project aims to provide students from a diverse pool of undergraduate
institutions with a memorable and formative experience in physics and astronomy
research to solidify their commitment to further study and careers in scientific
fields. The leaders will guide participants in short but intense research
projects in one of the many active research areas in physics and astronomy at
Brigham Young University. The whole cohort is mentored from initial research
prospectus to final report and intermediate presentations in addition to the
one-on-one faculty mentoring. Professional preparation and skill development are
complemented with informal activities for social cohesion and networking. The
individual participants' projects explore a broad spectrum of currently unsolved
problems through hands-on activities under a faculty mentor's direct supervision
to provide significant and lasting educational and intellectual benefits to the
participants. As the participants' projects are integrated into the current
research program of active research groups, they are likely to contribute to the
advance of knowledge and produce results that can be published and/or presented
at professional meetings. When it matters most, participants are immersed in an
intense collaborative experiment centered around collegiality and scientific
practice at a significant time in their educational development. By assembling a
vast group of diverse participants from different walks of life but with a
common purpose and interest in physics, the program intends to create lifelong
connections and a resource network that will benefit all participants, their
scientific productivity, and professional trajectory. The project provides
cohort diversity by striving towards a 50-50 gender balance and seeking out
participation from underrepresented groups. It contributes to the long-term goal
of increasing the participation of under-served groups in the STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Department of Physics and Astronomy at Brigham
Young University (BYU) proposes to offer a Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) Site in Physics. The objective is to guide participants in
short but intense research projects in one of the university's many active
research areas through one-on-one mentoring by faculty. The program also
emphasizes the whole cohort's progress from research question to final products
through close academic mentoring by the PI and co-PI, as well as weekly meetings
to discuss the cohort's progress and provide professional development. These
complement informal activities for social cohesion and networking. The site will
have twelve REU participants and two RET participants each summer for the next
three years. The REU site at BYU has run successfully for the past twenty years.
It benefits from a departmental and institutional commitment that allowed it to
complete a successful program during the Covid-19 period of 2020 despite nearly
all projects being done remotely and a department and institutional commitment
to undergraduate research excellence. The leaders strive to bring together a
diverse cohort of participants from different institutions and backgrounds, with
special efforts to recruit students from underrepresented groups in physics and
those from two-year and four-year colleges in the nearby geographical region.
The leaders undertake particularly concerted efforts to recruit women and ethnic
minorities. Because of the geographical location and past experiences with
minority students, the team expects to be particularly effective recruiting
students from Hispanic and Native American groups. A particular aspect of the
program is the inclusion of two RET participants, typically one local. There are
identical research expectations for REU and RET participants, but both groups
benefit from the association. The small RET component of the program is a
significant asset. The breadth of the projects offered is a valuable asset. Many
participants have not yet decided on the particular sub-field of physics they
want to pursue as graduate students or professionals. The program offers
experimental, computational, and theoretical projects in a wide variety of sub
fields of physics. Although each student's project is unique, participants
indicate that they the broader exposure to physics through the REU cohort. The
areas covered include: Quantum Information and Dynamics, Semiconductor
Nanomaterials, Brown Dwarfs and Transiting Planets, Coherent Lenses Imaging and
Optics, Local Structure of Quantum Materials, Materials Structure and
Properties, Modeling Complex Systems, Nano magnetism, Nonlinear Acoustics,
Numerical Relativity, Pulsating Star Astronomy, and
Underwater.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.