* 2051699
* EAGER:Novel approaches to study green leaf volatile perception
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Johannes Stratmann, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 05/31/2024
* USD 299,795.00

Plants that are injured by herbivores emit volatile organic compounds (VOC) into
the airspace which can be perceived by neighboring plants. These plants
interpret the volatile compounds as alarm signals and start to upregulate
defense responses against their enemies to be prepared for an impending attack.
Effects of volatile compounds as inducers of defenses are well characterized,
but it is unknown how plants perceive them. In general, alarm signals are
perceived by dedicated receptor proteins. Most herbivore-induced volatile
compounds are very small and difficult to track, which impedes the
identification of their receptors. This project will develop a novel approach
for labeling volatile compounds with very small tags that can be used to track
the compounds and thus identify their receptors. The tagging strategy can be
adapted for other small infochemicals and thus transform our knowledge of
communication in plants. Identification of receptor proteins for volatile alarm
signals may help to devise novel strategies for sustainable crop production by
relying on innate plant defenses rather than agrochemicals. Aspects of this
project will also be incorporated into an Ecology and Evolution laboratory
class. In addition, undergraduates from groups underrepresented in STEM
disciplines will be actively recruited to provide extra-curricular experiential
learning opportunities. These students will work on VOC signaling related to
this project. This will develop their practical, analytical, and communication
skills, which prepares them for professional careers. In addition, two graduate
students will be trained in biology and chemistry to provide a cutting-edge
interdisciplinary education in chemical ecology and molecular
biochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many aspects of plant communication are
mediated by volatile organic compounds such as green leaf volatiles (GLVs). When
plants are injured by herbivores, they emit GLVs, which can be perceived not
only by distant parts of the wounded plants (within-plant communication) but
also by neighboring plants (interplant communication). Perception of these GLVs
is interpreted by receiver tissues as a sign of imminent danger and results in
priming or upregulation of defense responses. The objective of this EAGER
proposal is to advance novel approaches to identify GLV receptor proteins that
initiate defense signaling. Very small non-proteinaceous ligands like GLVs
(containing only six or eight carbons) are difficult to tag and to track. This
proposal takes a novel approach by using ‘click chemistry’ to couple bioactive
minitagged GLVs to reporter tags in order to identify receptor proteins for
GLVs. Reporters that emit fluorescent light will be used to localize the
receptor-GLV-reporter complex, and biotin-based reporter tags will be used to
purify this complex and to isolate a GLV receptor. Additionally, GLV-induced
rapid phosphorylation-based signaling events will be determined by a
phosphoproteomics approach to identify early GLV-responsive signaling proteins
such as GLV receptors. Although the role of GLVs in plant communication is well
documented, it is completely unknown how they are perceived by plants. This is a
significant knowledge gap that hampers our understanding of GLV signaling and
function. Identification and characterization of GLV receptors would transform
our understanding of plant communication at the molecular and ecological
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.