* 2051101
* REU Site: SURF-I: Safe, Usable, Resilient and Fair Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Jelena Mirkovic, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/29/2024
* USD 405,000.00

This project hosts an REU Site at University of Southern California Information
Sciences Institute, with the theme of ``SURF-I: Safe, Usable, Resilient and Fair
Internet''. REU participants will work in a diverse, stimulating academic
environment that gave birth to the Internet and the domain-name system, with
researchers that are leaders in AI, social data mining, scientific workflows and
networking. The REU site focuses on research to support emerging trends in
cybersecurity, usability, safety and fairness as they pertain to the Internet
communication. As the world has all learned from the current Covid-19 pandemic
experiences, Internet communication permeates the daily lives. Even before the
pandemic, people relied on the Internet for business and entertainment. During
the pandemic, this reliance grew to meet education, telemedicine, exercise,
governance and many other human needs. It is critical to keep Internet safe and
secure for all participants, offering access to reliable and unbiased
information. The research at the REU site will also investigate complex and
timely issues of fairness in society, leveraging information shared on the
Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site intentionally offers a wide
spectrum of research themes under the umbrella of ``Safe, Usable, Resilient and
Fair Internet,'' to attract diverse student population. The research topics are
grouped into three areas: communication infrastructure and cybersecurity,
scientific experimentation and knowledge capture, and social data science. The
communication and cybersecurity theme tackles several open problems: resilience
in the face of natural disasters or targeted cyberattacks, secure communication
with cloud servers, detecting emotionally manipulative language in online
content and password reuse. These problems have naive solutions. As our reliance
on the Internet grows, we need more systematic solutions to increase resilience
and security of our communication and protect users from manipulation. The
scientific experimentation and knowledge capture theme addresses important
problems on data integration, knowledge representation and reusability, entity
linking and knowledge discovery that span over multiple domains and are critical
to improve scientific products and broaden participation in science. The social
data science theme deals with important problems that require AI, data mining,
data management and statistics to understand human behavioral patterns and
preferences. Its novel focus on cognitive factors and their impact on
communication has already uncovered phenomena that can change the way social
networks present information to users, and the way people leverage
crowdsourcing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.