* 2051771
* SBIR Phase I:  A novel label-free imaging device for real-time detection of lymph nodes during laparoscopic cancer surgeries
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Zhongming Li, CISION VISION, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 06/30/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to enable surgeons to see lymph nodes directly during cancer
surgeries to (1) improve the quality-of-care for lung cancer, rectal cancer, and
some gynecological cancers; and (2) save costs for hospitals by accelerating a
time-consuming and potentially inaccurate step in cancer surgeries; (3) improve
hospital accreditation performance, since lymph node number is a quality metric
and many hospitals fail to meet the requirements stipulated by medical
authorities. Decades of clinical evidence have shown evaluating lymph nodes is
linked to higher survival rates for cancer patients. This project will develop a
device to be seamlessly integrated into the existing surgical protocols and used
as an accessory to existing laparoscopic towers and surgical robots. Any cancer
hospital will be able to purchase this device, attach it to their existing
towers or surgical robots, and improve their quality of care, surgery
efficiency, and accreditation performance immediately at an affordable
price.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project addresses a difficult and
common problem in surgical oncology â€“ finding lymph nodes in cancer surgeries.
Lymph nodes are critically important in the context of cancer because they are
the channels for cancers to spread. However, lymph nodes are translucent in
color and surrounded by fat, also translucent, making it difficult to find them
with current optical systems. This project aims to develop a label-free optical
imaging device to visualize lymph nodes with high contrast in real time without
any injection. The goals of this project are to (1) build an accessory device
attachable to a commercially available laparoscopic tower, (2) obtain optical
performance testing results from animal carcasses, and (3) obtain optical
performance testing results from cadaver specimens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.