* 2051213
* Reconstructing paleoecology for critical transitions in hominin evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Kaye Reed, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/29/2024
* USD 323,026.00

Understanding the paleoecology associated with hominin fossils can advance
knowledge about the factors that determined the evolution of the human lineage.
In this multidisciplinary project, the researchers reconstruct paleoecology for
regions where human ancestor fossils have been recovered from sediments between
3.5 and 3.3 million years ago. They conduct high-resolution, regional-level
analyses based on the faunal assemblages from three sites that have a combined
area of 3000 square kilometers and reconstruct the paleoecological context
immediately preceding the origin of the genus Homo. The project advances
undergraduate and graduate training and international research collaborations.
Science communication and K-12 science education activities related to the
project are designed to increase interest in science and human origins studies
and highlight interdisciplinary science and the diversity of people behind the
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests hypotheses related to the
emergence of Homo, the apparent extinction of Australopithecus afarensis, and
the paleoecological context of co-existing hominin species. Fieldwork is
conducted to refine the stratigraphy and age of relevant sections and conduct
high-resolution faunal comparisons between sites. Project faunal experts refine
the taxonomy of mammalian fossils, collect and analyze taphonomic and
paleoecological data, conduct high-resolution, broad-scale reconstruction of
paleoenvironment, and assess ecosystem changes prior to the appearance of Homo
and disappearance of A. afarensis. For each fossil species in the sample,
functional traits of body mass, diet and substrate use are estimated. Diet is
estimated through enamel isotopic (δ13C and δ18O) signatures, mesowear and
hypsodonty indices. Using correspondence analysis to compare faunal assemblages
from the successive time bins and across sites with modern communities, the team
estimates biotic and abiotic factors that differed among the three sites and
explores how these patterns align with the disappearance of A. afarensis and the
appearance of Homo. In addition, species cluster analyses are used to examine
biogeographic patterns that emerge, consider taxonomic origins, hypothesize
patterns of dispersal, and estimate regional paleoecological
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.