* 2051007
* REU Site: Life in the Universe - Astronomy, Astrobiology, and Planetary Science at the SETI Institute
* MPS,AST
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Alexander Rudolph, SETI Institute
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 02/29/2024
* USD 491,809.00

This project is a renewal of a REU Site at the SETI Institute (SI) with a focus
on astronomy and planetary science, with a connecting theme of astrobiology. Ten
student participants per year will be paired with SI scientists to conduct
research at both SI and at the nearby NASA Ames Research Center. The
undergraduate students will perform detailed research into a variety of topics,
including exoplanets, asteroids, comet and meteors, Mars surface science,
Saturnâ€™s rings, the outer Solar system, and astrobiology. In addition, all
participants will spend a week learning about radio astronomy at the Allen
Telescope Array, studying an extremophile research site at nearby Lassen
Volcanic National Park, and studying habitability and life detection at coastal
field sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By offering high-quality research experiences
to students at a critical stage of undergraduate education, the REU Site will
contribute to increasing the nationwide pool of scientists and engineers.
Participants will develop the research methods and analytical skills
(mathematical, computational, and logical) necessary to process data, understand
primary research, and to remain current with new developments in the field. The
REU Site also has an active and highly developed plan to recruit
underrepresented minorities into its program, which will expand STEM training
opportunities to these groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.