* 2051519
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Aging, activity patterns and function in modern foragers
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2022
* David Raichlen, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2022
* USD 32,819.00

Aspects of lifestyle play an important role in shaping how individuals age, but
most of what we know about human senescence stems from work with industrialized
populations, who do not represent the full range of lifestyles modern humans
engage in. This doctoral dissertation project will examine human aging in a non-
industrialized population, and evaluate how aspects of lifestyle contribute to
age-related patterns of physical and cognitive function. This project will help
create a broader picture of how humans experience growing older across a range
of biosocial contexts, and so advance our fundamental knowledge about human
senescence. The project will inform public health research by examining whether
certain aspects of aging can be mitigated through elements of lifestyle.
Furthermore, by employing an interdisciplinary approach to the study of aging,
this project will strengthen research infrastructure ties among several
institutions and departments, and also contribute to the professional
development of women in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In industrialized
populations, growing older is associated with declines in physical and cognitive
function that limit independence and increase risk of disability. Large-scale
epidemiological studies indicate that engaging in high levels of physical
activity (PA) may attenuate age-related declines in function. It is not clear,
then, whether the age-related functional declines seen in industrialized
populations are inevitable aspects of human senescence or by-products of
sedentary industrialized lifestyles. This project will examine variation in
lifestyle and aging in hunter-gatherer populations that currently include
members who continue to engage in full-time foraging, and others who engage in
more market-integrated lifestyles with less reliance on foraging. The project
tests the overarching hypothesis that variation in engagement in traditional
foraging practices is associated with distinctive PA profiles that benefit age-
related patterns of physical and cognitive function. Researchers will recruit
participants (ages 18+) from communities who engage in different amounts of
foraging, and participants will complete tests of physical and cognitive
function. Participants will also wear an accelerometer for several days,
allowing researchers to characterize patterns of PA. The researchers will
compare age-related patterns of function for non-industrialized and
industrialized populations, as well as assess whether amount of foraging is
related to variation in age-related patterns of function. They will also use
formal mediation analyses to assess how patterns of PA influence the
relationship between age, function, and amount of
foraging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.