* 2051066
* REU Site: Multidisciplinary Research Experience in Advance Manufacturing for Undergraduates
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Farhad Ameri, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2024
* USD 392,737.00

This REU site at Texas State University will focus on providing research
experience for undergraduate students in the strategic area of advanced
manufacturing, which plays a crucial role in positioning the U.S. manufacturing
sector as a world leader. The project will attract, engage, and educate ten
undergraduate students each summer from across the nation with an emphasis on
recruiting women and underrepresented minority groups. The REU site offers
hands-on multidisciplinary research experience in state-of-the-art research
facilities in conjunction with a series of professional development activities
and field trips. The unique REU experience provided will play a transformational
role in preparing future leaders in the emerging areas of manufacturing.
Additionally, the project will provide an entry point for a wide range of
students from institutions with limited access to research infrastructure and a
strong impetus to pursue graduate school and careers in STEM areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site will expose students to transformative
interdisciplinary research related to advanced manufacturing systems, materials,
and processes. The specific intellectual merits of this REU site are to:(1)
Develop novel techniques based on Machine Learning, simulation, and sensor
technologies to improve the robustness, efficiency, and accuracy of robotic
systems; (2) Develop innovative data-driven methods for supervisory control and
monitoring of manufacturing assets and processes supported by industrial
Internet Of Things (IOT) standards and technologies; (3) Apply novel analytical
and simulation techniques for Additive Manufacturing process optimization and
characterization of mechanical, thermal, and electrical properties of 3D printed
nanocomposites; (4) Develop advanced techniques based on micro and
nanotechnology for prototyping microdevices. The site will create an innovative
model for training the next generation of researchers in the area of advanced
manufacturing. Participants will be equipped with the necessary knowledge and
skills to address a broad theme of advanced manufacturing issues with local
significance and global implications. A unique combination of rigorous data-
driven, physics-based, and experimental research techniques will provide
students with a solid basis for undertaking research challenges in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.