* 2051951
* SBIR Phase I:  Resilience for Waterfront Infrastructure (“REWIRE”)
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Matthew Campbell, NATRX, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/ commercial potential of this SBIR Phase I project is to
support sustainable coastal communities and infrastructure facing risks due to
erosion, sea level rise, and coastal storms. Approximately 50% of the world’s
population lives within 50 miles of the coast and migration toward coastal areas
is increasing. The risks to these areas are reflected in the substantial
increase in insurance and FEMA claims. This project will research and develop
software systems that streamline the analysis, permitting, and implementation of
nature-based coastal protection solutions that have been proven to adapt to
these risks and provide environmental benefits. This project will develop cross-
cutting technologies that will enhance our knowledge of coastal sciences and
engineering and leverage nature-based approaches to coastal integrity issues,
leading to increasing ecological, cost, and performance advantages compared to
traditional manual methods of data collection, analysis and engineering. The
empowerment of more resilient coastal communities, enhanced fisheries, and
adaptive infrastructure solutions will incentivize private sector investment in
these regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to
develop an integrated software system to prescribe intelligent coastal
maintenance solutions through the automated characterization of the relationship
of near-shore vegetative indicator species with shoreline protective actions. It
is generally understood that shoreline stability is related to nearshore
vegetative health, but the difficulty of analyzing and interpreting the complex
data sets with certainty levels sufficient to prescribe specific maintenance
actions necessitates the investigation and development of a new analytical
framework. The principal technical objective is the development of a machine
learning and bayesian inference decision support tool incorporating data from
existing imagery databases, multispectral UAV imagery, RTK bathymetry, and
shoreline maintenance actions for experimental validation. This approach would
be applicable to a wide variety of vegetated erosional shoreline systems (i.e.
wetlands, coastal dunes, and mangroves). The anticipated result is the technical
foundation of a commercial system to more efficiently manage coastal
infrastructure risk at lower costs and with enhanced ecological benefits for
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.