* 2051956
* SBIR Phase I:  Large nanostructured changes in refractive index in any 3D geometry
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,03/31/2022
* Daniel Oran, Irradiant Technologies Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 03/31/2022
* USD 255,687.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to enable an alternative to traditional
nanofabrication which relies on structuring material in two-dimensional layers.
These processes often limit the current design-space and
prototyping/manufacturing methods with not only what can be made, but also the
time and resources required for development, relegating viable commercial
applications to only high-volume markets. These shortcomings will be addressed
by developing a new form of nanofabrication 3D-printing capable of rapid-
prototyping and mass-manufacturing photonic components with cheaper systems
enabling the mass-customization of components that can more rapidly address
market needs in both low- and high-volume markets. Products developed using this
nanofabrication process for photonics components may address inefficiencies in
datacenters with low-loss optical interconnects, as well as enabling complex
optical filters, near-eye displays, and ultracompact
lenses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project develops a nanofabrication process for optical and photonic
components to be fabricated with large changes in refractive index at nanoscale
resolutions into any 3D geometry with graded control. The process uses
volumetric deposition of nanomaterials consisting of high refractive index
dielectrics into a patterned polyelectrolyte gel scaffold which, once shrunken,
improves both resolution and density of the patterned materials. By utilizing
two-photon lithography and linear shrink factors the process can achieve feature
sizes below 25nm while allowing for the creation of gradient patterns in any 3D
geometry. Combining this patterning and shrink strategy with a method to
volumetrically deposit high refractive index dielectric nanomaterials will allow
for a degree of control over refractive index never before possible; allowing
light to be sculpted in 3D with unprecedented control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.