* 2051060
* REU Site: Collaborative: Making Augmented and Virtual Reality Accessible
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Shiri Azenkot, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 04/30/2024
* USD 241,557.00

Augmented and virtual reality (XR) technologies are becoming popular consumer
products. However, at present XR devices, development tools, and content pose
major accessibility challenges for people with disabilities. How can you
describe a 3D virtual environment to a person with a visual impairment? How
should you present captions in 3D to a person who is hard-of-hearing? How can a
person with a motor control disability navigate a 3D world?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site brings together Profs. Shiri Azenkot and
Brian Smith, experts in accessibility, along with Prof. Steven Feiner, an
augmented reality and 3D interaction pioneer. The site will train students to be
future leaders in XR accessibility. Students will receive training in
accessibility and XR, engage in the research process from ideation to
presentations, and join a community of scholars and practitioners who will
provide career advice and mentorship. In addition, the projects undertaken by
REU students will form the basis for new collaborations among the investigators
and other collaborators at Columbia and Cornell. The site will recruit students
from underrepresented backgrounds, especially students with disabilities. The
target is to have a mixed-ability cohort where half the students have a
disability and half do not. Students will participate in a range of formal and
informal learning, including an XR development "bootcamp," conversations with XR
experts across academia and industry, and presentations on their work progress.
Students will work on projects at the intersection of accessibility and XR.
Examples of possible projects include designing descriptions that provide
overviews of virtual environments for people who are blind and designing
effective navigation techniques in a virtual environment, also for people who
are blind. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this proposal are two-
fold. First, it supports the NSFâ€™s mission of broadening participation by
focusing recruitment efforts on students from underrepresented groups,
especially students with disabilities. Second, the focus of the research will
benefit people with disabilities around the world. As XR becomes an increasingly
popular consumer platform, the REU research will help ensure that it provides an
equal user experience to people regardless of their disability
status.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.