* 2051292
* REU Site: Communities, Crime, and Criminal Justice in Detroit (C3JD)
* SBE,SMA
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Bradley Smith, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 02/29/2024
* USD 291,385.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. It has both scientific and societal
benefits, and integrates research and education. The Communities, Crime, &amp;
Criminal Justice in Detroit (C3JD) REU provides selected undergraduate students
with a rigorous and highly supportive experience in which they will learn about
and actively engage with the various components of the research process. The
focus of C3JD REU projects is to advance research on issues at the intersection
of communities, crime, and criminal justice. This includes three distinct
research projects that examine: 1) the factors that influence Detroit residents’
willingness to call upon formal and informal forms of social control in
responding to crime; 2) the degree to which perceived legitimacy and procedural
justice affect Detroit residents’ cooperation with police; and 3) the ways in
which Detroit’s demolitions program, by far the largest in the U.S., has
impacted Detroit residents’ views of their communities, of crime, and of the
criminal justice system. Supporting students from under-represented backgrounds
will generally contribute to the future equality and health of higher education.
Involvement of under-represented students in important, high-impact research
projects also stands to enrich the overall value and impact of research in
Criminology and Criminal Justice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The C3JD REU Program
provides students from traditionally under-represented backgrounds with a unique
opportunity to develop their conceptual understanding of research and their
practical understanding of how to conduct research through a variety of
methodologies. Students receive access to meaningful forms of mentorship that
help them understand the social world of academia and consequently establish a
greater understanding of the professional and/or academic pathways that they
will embark on. The C3JD REU Program: 1) recruits a diverse pool of
underrepresented undergraduate students; 2) provides students significant
mentorship from faculty; 3) develops students’ understanding of the research
process; 4) provides students with guidance on the various mechanisms and
pathways involved in the dissemination of research findings; and 5) prepares
students for entrance into competitive graduate programs. Students who complete
the C3JD REU Program and strengthen their understanding of research and
evidence-based practices have developed a skillset that makes them well prepared
to embark on the next stage of their careers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.