* 2051852
* SBIR Phase I:  Creating high-quality, lower-cost soil maps using machine learning algorithms
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Yones Khaledian, SOILSERDEM LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/ commercial potential of this SBIR Phase I project will be to
produce high-quality, accurate, high-resolution soil maps for agronomists and
farmers. Accurate soil information is a fundamental driver of better, more
efficient crop/soil management. The new technology would significantly increase
farm profitability, lower food costs, and improve environmental protection and
sustainability. Making higher quality soil fertility mapping readily available
and usable is the goal of this project. This technology is expected to result in
increased crop yield while allowing for decreased input costs, leading to higher
profits in an industry that chronically suffers from low profit margins. The
expected benefits include more environmentally responsible farm management and
better manure-management planning, nutrient-management planning, precision
farming, land use planning, planting decisions, evaluating stressors on plants,
field conditioning, crop rotation, and prediction/interpretation of yields.
These will result in increased farm profitability, more efficient application of
nitrogen fertilizers, and increased soil health and fertility for plants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances an innovative technology has three
key components to produce maps of essential soil nutrients in training fields
and beyond — maps that currently require extensive sampling while producing
inadequate data. The first is a digital hill-slope position to select optimal
sampling locations to represent the soil variability across the landscape,
eliminating the need to take unnecessary soil samples. The second element
leverages advanced machine-learning algorithms insensitive to the quantity of
sample size. The third element is its ability to select suitable remotely sensed
information (terrain derivatives and satellite imagery). The technology will
select appropriate analysis scales of terrain derivatives to capture all
potential soil variability. It will then select and use proper bands of
satellite imagery, based on spatial, temporal, and spectral resolution, to
decrease the risks of overfitting and computation time. Unlike currently
available methods, this technology can predict the soil nutrients inside the
training fields and beyond — i.e., this technology has the potential to predict
soil properties in neighboring fields — using the soil information obtained from
training fields—without the need for additional
samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.