* 2051145
* REU Site: Environmental and Earth Systems Research at Biosphere 2
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Katerina Dontsova, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2026
* USD 514,341.00

Research Experiences for Undergraduates: Environmental and Earth Systems
Research at Biosphere 2 (B2 REU) is a 10-week summer research site that gives
undergraduate students the opportunity to experience authentic geoscience
research. Each summer, ten students will work with mentors and peers to perform
state-of-the-art research in environmental and Earth sciences and learn about
careers in STEM. B2 REU students will be selected from applicants throughout the
United States from institutions with little access to research experiences
and/or come from groups underrepresented in science, including minority,
particularly Hispanic and Native American, and 1st generation students. The
Biosphere 2 facility provides a unique setting to excite students about
environmental research and a strong group of mentors and science staff ensures
that students build knowledge and connections that will help them in their
future careers. In addition to research, students participate in a variety of
professional development activities curated to facilitate their growth as
scientists. At the end of the summer, students will present their work at the
University of Arizona undergraduate research symposium, where hundreds of
students convene and share their work with fellow students, research mentors,
and other faculty and staff. We also support students to attend a professional
meeting of their choice to network with and present their work to the larger
scientific community. The B2 REU program helps train the next generation of
motivated, diverse, and interdisciplinary scientists for environmental and Earth
system sciences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Student research projects in the B2 REU
emphasize interdisciplinary science in the context of environmental challenges
and ecosystem resilience. Biosphere 2 infrastructure allows for unprecedented
control at large scales and features a rainforest, an ocean, and the Landscape
Evolution Observatory (LEO) â€“ a research instrument under glass for studying
interactions among hydrologic, geologic, and biologic processes during formation
of soil and landscapes. Research in the iconic, 3-acre Biosphere 2 facility is
complemented by studies in nearby natural settings, including the NSF Critical
Zone Observatory (CZO) that examines Earth systems processes along the elevation
gradient of the Santa Catalina Mountains and at other field sites close to
Tucson. REU student projects 1) address important Earth systems questions that
cut across traditional disciplines and include multiple approaches and ways of
knowing, 2) provide a unique combination of scale, control, and measurement for
scientific inquiry, and 3) help students link their research to environmental
challenges. We support the diverse cohorts of students by creating a welcoming
and supportive environment that is focused on diversity, equity, and inclusion;
and we provide training to mentors to ensure that students feel they are valued
members of research teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.