* 2051819
* The Impact of SES on Working Memory in Naturalistic Versus Structured Settings
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2020,03/31/2023
* Dima Amso, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 03/31/2023
* USD 442,903.00

Working memory (WM) is relevant to planning, decision-making, and regulating
behavior and emotions. This process undergoes important development during early
childhood, and is shaped by family socioeconomic status (SES). WM, in turn,
shapes children's progress in school, and has been shown to mediate the
association between SES and academic achievement. Traditional laboratory
assessments may fail to capture the complexity of WM behavior and conditions
under which WM operates most optimally; thereby, limiting opportunity for
evidence-based recommendations for education. In order to address this gap in
the literature, the research team will measure the impact of SES on WM
development in children 3.5 to 6 years old using parallel computerized and
naturalistic play-based settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will use
a rule-based WM task, where children are instructed to match a door to a house
(or a beak to a bird) based on either one (e.g, color) or two (e.g. shape and
color) visual feature dimensions. In daily life, WM does not function in
isolation, but is paired with motivation to succeed. Thus, in order to increase
the ecological and construct validity of WM assessment in both computerized and
play-based testing settings, researchers included three conditions designed to
assess how engaging motivational mechanisms impacts WM performance. The Choice
condition is identical to the Standard condition, but children choose the houses
that they want to play with; the Reward condition is identical to the Standard
except the children earn a sticker after correct trials. The Reward+Choice
condition combines the Reward and Choice manipulations. A central component of
the study involves determining whether the impact of SES on WM is constant
across computerized and play-based settings, or whether the impact diminishes as
WM tasks increase in ecological and construct validity. To address this issue,
the researchers will collect data on experiences in children's lives that may
mirror the computerized and play-based testing environments. SES impact on WM
performance in computerized and standard assessments may be mediated by formal
instruction opportunities in and outside the home (art or music classes) as well
as digital device use and skill. The researchers will also collect data on
experiences in children's lives that may support WM development but be
independent of SES. For example, individual differences in pretend play
engagement may be related to WM performance in play-based settings, independent
of SES. These predictions will be tested using structural equation modeling.
Findings will provide novel insights regarding optimal WM performance in young
children across various levels of SES. Findings will also have implications for
shaping early childhood curricula in ways that will benefit children across
various levels of SES.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.