* 2051212
* Collaborative Research: IMAGiNE: Quantifying Diatom Resilience in an Acidified Ocean
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* E. Virginia Armbrust, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 05/31/2024
* USD 392,981.00

This research seeks to investigate how long-term environmental changes like
ocean acidification will affect diatoms, a key microscopic phytoplankton forming
the basis of many marine food webs. Diatoms account for ~40 percent of the
primary production in our oceans, and a shift in their composition and abundance
may result in dramatic changes in coastal ecosystems. A stress test will be
developed to quantify the “resilience” of diatoms, i.e., the degree to which
they can withstand environmental stress such as saturating light, ultraviolet
radiation, or increased temperature. By applying this stress test to three model
diatoms that inhabit different oceanic environments, Thalassiosira oceanica,
Phaeodactylum tricornutum, and Thalassiosira pseudonana, this study will uncover
whether ocean acidification will have similar or distinct consequences on the
future fate of these important organisms. Furthermore, this study will also
characterize molecular mechanisms responsible for the observed shifts in the
resilience of diatoms. Mechanistic understanding of how ocean acidification
might alter the resilience of diatoms will enable predictive and actionable
strategies for better environmental stewardship. Additionally, this project will
generate new high school curriculum on the concepts of resilience and collapse
of complex systems encountered in our everyday life. The curricula will be
disseminated widely through teacher training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diatoms have
evolved phenotypic plasticity to survive in fluctuating environments, and the
capability to tolerate diverse types of stress. The proposed research addresses
the challenge of quantifying how diatoms manage trade-offs between maintaining
phenotypic plasticity and devoting resources to mitigating stress, which is
central to predicting their resilience in complex environments. The stress test
framework will enable the quantification of ecological resilience of a diatom,
i.e., the degree to which a diatom population can tolerate a disturbance and
persist without changing physiological state. By performing the stress test on
three model diatoms representing different ecological niches, and in relevant
conditions of current and future oceans (i.e., temperature, CO2, NO3, Fe, and
light conditions), this study will allow the prediction of when interactions
among specific factors will have synergistic or antagonistic effects on the
resilience of diatoms. Systems level analysis of transcriptional (RNA-seq) and
physiological changes coupled to hypothesis testing using CRISPR-cas9-based
genome editing will provide predictive and mechanistic understanding of changes
in diatom resilience in dynamic environments. The resulting knowledge,
framework, and tools will serve as predictive indicators to forecast species
partitioning and shifts in ecosystem function in changing oceans. Furthermore,
the stress test framework and systems approaches will be generalizable to
investigate resilience and other complex traits across microbial communities of
environmental importance. This award is cofunded by the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems and the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.