* 2051900
* SBIR Phase I:  CANCER DIAGNOSTIC TOOL USING CANCER GENOMIC SIGNATURES TO DETERMINE CANCER TYPE
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,04/30/2022
* Zurab Kakushadze, VYNANCE TECHNOLOGIES, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 04/30/2022
* USD 275,987.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a data analytic tool to predict
and identify the organ of origin from early cancer screening blood tests. This
will allow noninvasive detection of cancer at early stages, when it can be
treated with potentially improved outcomes and in a less costly manner. Second,
a complementary application of the proposed technology is to address an unmet
need in identifying cancer organ of origin in metastatic cancers of unknown
primary, where not knowing the organ of origin hampers designing an effective
treatment plan in 30,000+ cases/yr in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will accomplish internal
development, and external validation of the proposed data analytic technology so
it is ready to be validated on circulating tumor DNA data from blood, and can be
used for metastatic tumors of unknown primary origin. The proposed technology
addresses the problem of the unknown primary by analyzing whole genome or large
subsets using predictive tools. Different cancer (sub)types have different
patterns or signatures of somatic single nucleotide variations in the cancer
genome. A library of these signatures is built using a large number of whole
genome data samples with a broad cross-section of known cancer (sub)types. The
unknown cancer organ of origin of a new data sample is identified by comparing
its somatic mutational patterns to the signatures in the library. A key research
objective is to identify the minimum subset of whole genome required to
determine the cancer organ of origin to facilitate its application in blood
tests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.