* 2051019
* REU/RET Site: Computational Mathematics for Data Science
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Lars Ruthotto, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 04/30/2024
* USD 397,179.00

The Emory Research Experience for Undergraduates and Teachers site focuses on
computational mathematics and its applications in data science. Data science is
of fundamental and strategic importance to the US and impacts nearly every field
of science. However, the number of academic training opportunities and skilled
workers has not kept pace with the rapid growth in demand from private and
public entities. The site emphasizes developing research and professional skills
that will increase the participants' ability to understand, conduct, and
effectively communicate research in data science and computational mathematics.
The three-year program will train twelve undergraduates and four teachers
annually for six weeks. Faculty members from Emory's Departments of Mathematics
and Computer Science will supervise and mentor the participants. The site's
activities will equip undergraduate students with the mathematical and
computational skills required to launch careers in this area and will motivate
them to pursue a graduate degree. Student recruitment will be nationwide, with a
strong focus on underrepresented groups and students enrolled in colleges with
limited research opportunities in this area. By involving in-service K-12
teachers in the research experience, the site will extend its impact to high-
school students and help innovate curricula design and improve career
counseling. The teachers will be recruited from the diverse Atlanta metro area
and other districts nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU/RET site will
introduce undergraduate students and teachers to the mathematical theory and
computational tools used in applications ranging from data assimilation to
machine learning and enable them to advance these fields by solving research
problems in teams. The site's activities will be centered around a common theme
that differs each year. The site's annual research themes will be Learning from
Images, Combining Models with Data, and Data Science for Social Justice,
respectively. Within each theme, faculty mentors will pose at least four
research problems and advise student-teacher teams to work on innovative
solutions. New insights of relevance to the broader scientific community will be
created and disseminated in student/teacher-authored publications, open-source
software, and online blogs. The teachers will also create and make freely
available materials for classroom-use. The research projects will take
participants beyond standard coursework. The site's educational component will
introduce the participants to a range of mathematical techniques, including
machine learning, deep neural networks, numerical linear algebra, optimization,
partial differential equations, and statistics. The faculty mentors will also
provide their mentees with professional and computational skills, including
scientific writing, oral and poster presentations, and cloud computing. The
weekly seminar will feature group activities and faculty-led presentations on
data and ethics, algorithmic bias, public scholarship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.