* 2051895
* STTR Phase I:  Ultrasonic Measurement Instrument for Pharmaceutical Tablet Design, Development, and Continuous Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,10/31/2022
* Xiaochi Xu, PHARMACOUSTICS TECHNOLOGIES LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 10/31/2022
* USD 255,962.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to improve quality control in pharmaceutical
manufacturing. The compressed tablet is the most popular pharmaceutical dosage
form in use worldwide. Despite its well-established manufacturing processes,
issues with tablet quality are frequent. Issues in its design and manufacturing
have the potential to make significant medical and financial impacts as failures
in quality may result in harm to patients, product recalls, and medicine
shortages. The proposed Ultrasonic Measurement Instrument (UMI) unit will
substantially shorten drug tablet design/development cycles and detect/identify
manufacturing and quality problems before release. Its utilization in modern
continuous manufacturing lines will minimize the risk of defective tablet
production/disposition and costly product recalls/disposals. The UMI unit will
lead to two distinct solutions: (i) a real-time preventive quality monitoring
device for continuous manufacturing production line and (ii) a stand-alone
laboratory equipment for characterizing tablet physical properties. The target
users for our UMI-based products include pharmaceutical manufacturers; equipment
providers; generic drug manufacturers; R&amp;D groups and drug development teams
in corporations and universities; and compounding
pharmacies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project and its ultrasonic approach have several critical advantages
over the competing quality assessment and monitoring technologies for
pharmaceutical manufacturing. Unlike other detection techniques, ultrasound
directly interacts with the mass density, material elasticity/viscoelasticity,
defects/cracks, and inhomogeneities of a medium and piezoelectric transducers
are the most sensitive devices for transient strain sensing. Operating in MHz
frequency, ultrasonic techniques make rapid (micro-seconds scale) measurements
at relevant wavelengths for tablet and defect sizes (micrometer to millimeter
scales). Challenges to be addressed include: (i) existing wave propagation
models for viscoelastic tablet materials with microstructures are inadequate for
accurate materials characterization/valuation with ultrasound, and (ii) a
precise handling and positioning apparatus for tablets is needed, as for machine
learning and data analytics/mining, the repeatable acquisition and processing of
large data sets are required. The main outcome of the project is a proof-of-
concept testing/measurement unit (UMI) with a precise tablet handling sub-system
and its accompanying mathematical algorithms for the formation of large data
sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.