* 2051820
* Multi-Scale Investigation of SARS-CoV-2 Infection
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* M. Stanca Ciupe, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2024
* USD 351,670.00

By the beginning of May 2021, novel coronavirus-2 severe acute respiratory
syndrome (SARS-CoV-2) has infected more than 152 million people and resulted in
more than 3.1 million deaths worldwide. This has caused an urgent need for the
development of novel antivirals and vaccines capable of detecting, preventing,
and treating the infection, and to date, more than a billion people have
received at least one vaccine dose. While the pandemic is unfolding, guidance
regarding testing and quarantining strategies in vaccinated and unvaccinated
populations is needed in order to control its effects. This project uses a
multi-disciplinary approach, merging virological and immunological data with
mathematical and computational models to uncover causes for variability in
individual infections, their contributions to transmission in the population,
markers of severe infections, and best testing and quarantining strategies in
the presence and absence of vaccination. These approaches will provide testable
hypotheses for targeting specific proteins and types of treatments for severe
infections with SARS-CoV-2.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Suggesting SARS-CoV-2
mitigation strategies is complicated by limited knowledge regarding SARS-CoV-2
dynamics inside an individual, the immune responses it elicits, and the
uncertainty of whether infections result in no, partial, or life-long
sterilizing immunity. The focus of this project is to use novel multi-scale
mathematical models at the molecular, cellular and population levels with the
aim of predicting the kinetics of SARS-CoV-2 inside an individual, the
mechanisms of immune protection and those that lead to pathogenesis, and the
connection between individual infections, testing strategies, and the
transmission of the virus into the population. The research will focus on three
major mathematical challenges: (1) Developing within-host between-host multi-
scale systems; (2) Developing data analytics methods for model parameter and
uncertainty estimation; and (3) Establishing an optimal control problem for
testing practices. The overarching goal of the project is to integrate
mathematical models with single-cell neutrophil data, SARS-CoV-2 virus titers,
and knowledge of testing abilities to better control the spread of SARS-Cov-2
and reduce disease severity. By bridging the scales, the PI aims to provide a
unified picture of SAS-CoV-2 infection that can benefit both the medical and the
public health community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.