* 2051270
* SBIR Phase I:  Bamboo-based Composite Filaments for Structural Purposes
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2022
* Austin Trefes, PANDA INDUSTRIES INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this SBIR Phase I project is to
promote environmentally sustainable construction. By promoting the use of bamboo
in construction industry via offering a sustainable alternative to 3D printed
concrete, this project intends to reduce industry's contribution towards future
carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions. Current trends show that 3D printing could
replace a large share of construction industry due to high efficiency, low
labor, and reduced material requirements. This project would speed that
transition with its sustainable alternative to concrete. Since bamboo can absorb
as much as 12 tons of carbon dioxide per hectare per year, compared to 6.4 tons
for a mature forest, broader use of bamboo in the construction industry benefits
the environment. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project is focused on
creating a structural bamboo filament that could replace 3D printer filaments
made of concrete. This project will use bamboo for a rival filament to concrete
to be used in structural applications. Non-structural wood filaments already
exist and are mixed with Polylactic-Acid (PLA). This project plans to
incorporate some of those techniques in its design by breaking the bamboo into
rectangular, dust-like particles for combination with a soy-based adhesive and
PLA. The most challenging problems anticipated in this project are optimizing
that glue ratio to maximize spread properties and ultimate strength, and
orienting the anisotropic bamboo particles during the deposition. The project
aims to produce a bamboo filament that maintains similar properties to concrete
filaments in terms of strength and durability by the end of Phase
I.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been
deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual
merit and broader impacts review criteria.