* 2051186
* Exploratory and Confirmatory Neurocognitive Modeling with Latent Variables
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Ramesh Srinivasan, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 05/31/2024
* USD 349,551.00

This research project will improve methods for analyzing brain and behavior
measurements. Existing methods for combining multiple sources of brain data are
limited. They cannot take advantage of the joint measurement of different kinds
of brain activity to predict behavior. This project will combine multiple recent
developments in mathematical psychology and cognitive neuroscience to arrive at
a powerful new data analysis method that can process many sources of data at
once. The methods to be developed will identify the shared and unique
contributions of brain regions to behavior and can be used to discover new
functions of brain regions. Broader use of these methods also will facilitate
theory-building in cognitive (neuro)science. The project will involve early-
career scientists who will receive training in neuroscience or cognitive
science. The investigators will document their modeling techniques as part of a
series of publicly available video lectures. The project also will develop a
large code base and user-friendly software, thus contributing to the global
research and education infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
combine recent developments in mathematical psychology (Bayesian latent variable
modeling with cognitive models) and cognitive neuroscience (modeling of
neurocognitive relationships) to develop new methods for analyzing brain data.
Current approaches to brain-data analysis emphasize looking for separate
relationships between individual physiological measures and behavior. Direct
analysis of the relationship between different types of physiological measures
usually does not involve behavioral data. Identification of the processes that
give rise to patterns in different measures is carried out without direct links
to behavior. However, multiple neuroimaging techniques can provide common
underlying information that informs cognitive models of human behavior as well
as the physical location of the ongoing processes. For instance, both fMRI and
EEG are driven, at least in part, by the same underlying neural processes. At
the same time, each technique also contains unique information, so that some
cognitive processes underlying human behavior can potentially only be informed
by specific techniques or combinations thereof. This project will make it
possible to translate such theories about these complex relationships into
principled statistical models whose predictions and assumptions can be put to
the empirical test. The new methods will be applied to archival data sets, thus
contributing to generalizable knowledge in a way that is cost-effective and
ethical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.