* 2051440
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Genomics and Biochemistry
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Fern Tsien, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 328,827.00

This REU Site award to the Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center,
located in New Orleans, LA, will support the training of 10 students interested
in genomics and/or biochemistry research for 10 weeks during the summers of
2021-2023. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools
with limited research opportunities or from groups underrepresented in the
sciences, will be trained in the program. All projects are hypothesis-driven,
focusing on solving scientific problems and utilizing computational state-of-
the-art scientific methods. Students will analyze and interpret data and
communicate their findings. They will develop a competitive resume, receive
training in potential careers in STEM, and contribute new knowledge in genomics
and biochemistry. Student projects will be flexible for remote and/or on-campus
work. By the end of the program, students of diverse backgrounds will become
more competitive in their graduate school applications and research careers.
Students will learn how research is conducted, and many of them will present the
results of their work at scientific conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
program will focus on one-on-one training in genomics and biochemistry,
emphasizing hard scientific skills (hypothesis and experimental design,
methodology, scientific communication), soft skills (time management), and
professional development (responsible conduct in research, resume/CV writing,
career guidance). REU students will have networking opportunities with current
graduate students, post-doctoral fellows, and faculty members. They will have
the opportunity to enhance their scientific communication thru interaction with
inner-city K-12 schools. The goals of this program are to facilitate training in
data analytics and scientific visual literacy, to provide learning platforms for
current datasets and research problems, and enable trainees to use these
materials in a variety of situations (e.g., a pandemic). Computational and wet
lab projects adaptable to remote applications will be available based on student
research interests. Assessments of the program will be performed through the
online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the program in order to
follow their career paths. More information about the program is available by
visiting http://www.medschool.lsuhsc.edu/genetics/reu.aspx , or by contacting
the PI (Dr. Fern Tsien) at SummerResearch@lsuhsc.edu or
fmille@lsuhsc.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.