* 2051198
* Bayesian Inference for Attribute Hierarchy in Cognitive Diagnosis Models
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Shiyu Wang, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 229,951.00

This research project will advance statistical methods for estimation and
inference on attribute hierarchy within the framework of cognitive diagnosis
models (CDM). CDMs have been widely applied to the field of educational
assessment, psychiatric diagnosis, and other social sciences. In conjunction
with diagnostic assessments, this type of model uses subjects' observed
responses to specifically designed diagnostic items to determine the fine-
grained classification of the underlying latent attribute patterns. Attribute
hierarchy, or the relationship among attributes, plays an important role in
designing an effective diagnostic assessment. However, there is a lack of
efficient statistical tools for estimating attribute hierarchy from observed
data. This project will develop a series of Bayesian approaches for estimating
attribute hierarchy. The project will contribute to the newly developed
interdisciplinary field that integrates artificial intelligence with
psychometrics. The new methods will be useful for applied research in education
and psychology, as well as other social science disciplines. The investigators
will apply the new methods to educational data sets. Graduate students will
participate in the conduct of this research, and publicly available software
will be developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will develop
Bayesian inference on attribute hierarchy for both static and dynamic CDM models
and promote the use of CDMs in conjunction with attribute hierarchy to
facilitate learning. The project will address major research questions on 1) the
formulation of Bayesian framework for static and dynamic CDMs and 2) the
development of methods to directly learn attribute hierarchy from the observed
data in these two setups. For static CDMs, a series of new Bayesian estimation
methods will be employed to directly estimate the attribute hierarchy and
explicitly enforce the permissibility of attribute patterns. Stochastic
processes and irreducible transitions will be created to ensure the convergence
of the proposed algorithms. The project also will consider stochastic search
variable selection methods to estimate the attribute hierarchy when the CDM
satisfies conjunctive assumptions. The new methods for static CDMs will be
extended to model and draw inferences on the process of learning in practice
with the framework of dynamic CDMs. A set of simulation studies will be used to
evaluate the new methods, and the methods will be applied to two spatial
rotation learning datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.