* 2051997
* IUCRC Planning Grant University of Michigan – Ann Arbor (UM): Center for Secured Computation for Drug Discovery and Repurposing (SCDDR)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2022
* H Jagadish, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 04/30/2022
* USD 20,000.00

Pharmaceutical development has a large impact on the nation’s economy and public
health. Despite substantial annual outlays for pharmaceutical development, many
drugs fail in clinical trial, while the majority of those making it to market
fail to yield a profit. These costs and low returns hinder additional
development. The Center for Secured Computation for Drug Discovery and
Repurposing (SCDDR), through the pursuit of its research thrusts, has the
potential to greatly enhance the national research infrastructure by increasing
the capacity of the engineering/scientific workforce. In particular, SCDDR will
produce new methodologies and infrastructure for industry-wide collaborative
drug discovery, yielding new medicines at reduced cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Center will focus on three main areas of unmet/underserved research needs within
the (bio)pharmaceutical sector, with the goal of significantly accelerating the
pace of drug discovery while reducing research costs: 1) the development,
testing, and validation of machine learning methods for drug discovery and
repurposing; 2) providing an industry-wide and vendor-agnostic Secure Data Hub
for pharmaceutical and patient data with third-party private search
capabilities; and 3) enable federated machine learning for drug repositioning
over encrypted databases. Enabling these research thrusts are new developments
in efficient fully homomorphic encryption and applications of coupled tensor-
matrix and tensor-tensor completion methods to drug discovery and
repurposing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together data scientists,
mathematicians, biomedical researchers, and healthcare providers to produce
reproducible methodologies that will make a broad impact on drug discovery and
biomedical applications of data science. SCCDR will build a world-class data
science community that is inclusive and promotes diversity at all stages of the
academic pipeline. The Center will support programs to educate the next
generation of data science workforce members, research leaders, and citizens. By
forming collaborations with industry, government, and community partners, the
project will enable the dissemination and translation of research into impactful
products and services for the betterment of society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
single Center-wide project repository, including published results,
presentations, developed code, and educational materials, will be maintained and
disseminated through the Center website –
https://midas.umich.edu/scddr/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.