* 2051555
* Role of postsynaptic transmitter receptors in influencing presynaptic neurotransmitter identity
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Nicholas Spitzer, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 06/30/2025
* USD 790,344.00

Retrograde signaling to ensure the security of message transmission over long
distances was pioneered by the Greeks and the Chinese in the 3rd century B.C.
Signal fires at night and smoke signals by day generated on one tower could be
seen by observers on a distant tower, who then lit signal fires or generated
smoke signals to acknowledge receipt of the signal. Chains of signal towers
reliably transmitted signals over long distances. Inclusion of a mechanism for
sending a retrograde acknowledgement signal has been important for the security
of modern telecommunication. Most studies of the function of synapses in the
brain have focused on the mechanisms involved in the flow of information from
the presynaptic cell to the postsynaptic cell. This project tests the hypothesis
that retrograde signaling from postsynaptic neurotransmitter receptors
stabilizes the expression of the anterograde presynaptic neurotransmitter system
in African Clawed Frogs (Xenopus laevis). This project will reveal the role of
retrograde information signals in regulating the stability of the signaling
system and potentially explain neurological or psychiatric disorders
specifically associated with defects in the stability of synaptic signaling.
This project will also provide advanced research training for undergraduate
students and high school students from groups that are currently
underrepresented in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests the role of
postsynaptic transmitters in regulating presynaptic transmitter stability. We
will determine whether loss-of-function via focal blockade of endogenous
acetylcholine receptors by pancuronium or curare results in gradual loss of
choline acetyl-transferase (ChAT) in presynaptic motor neurons (MNs) at the
larval Xenopus neuromuscular junction (NMJ). Preliminary results show that this
is the case, consistent with destabilization of the endogenous transmitter,
acetylcholine. Because these MNs normally express the neurotransmitter gamma-
aminobutyric acid (GABA) transiently at earlier stages of development, we will
also investigate whether ectopic expression of GABA receptors (GABA A receptors
alpha, beta and gamma) in myocytes in a gain-of-function experiment during
development leads to stabilization of expression of GABA in presynaptic
cholinergic MNs at later stages. Preliminary data show that GABA appears in
innervating axon terminals and in cell bodies in the spinal cord and co-
expression of the MN markers Hb9, ChAT and Lim3 confirms their primary MN
identity. In line with the appearance of glutamic acid decarboxylase 67 (GAD67)
and the vesicular GABA transporter (VGAT) in these MNs, GABAergic miniature
endplate potentials (mEPPs) are recorded from the myocytes. These results are
consistent with stabilization of the previously expressed transmitter, GABA.
Investigating the mechanism by which postsynaptic transmitter receptors may
regulate presynaptic transmitter stability, we will test the role of molecules
thought to be involved in forming transsynaptic bridges (Lrp4 and Lfhpl4), that
link postsynaptic receptors to presynaptic stabilizing proteins. Preliminary
results knocking down the expression of these molecules recapitulates the loss-
of-function experiments and blocks the results of the gain-of-function
experiments. Receptor-mediated retrograde signaling at the synapse may be an
acknowledgment signal for maintaining transmitter
expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.