* 2051397
* Investigating the genetic history of the Central and Southern Plains
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Mary Adair, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2024
* USD 460,000.00

The study of genomes from ancient individuals has transformed archaeological
studies in the Americas. But current understanding of this early history is far
from complete, owing to limited genomic data available from Indigenous
populations throughout the regions that comprise the present-day United States.
This research, jointly developed by representatives of a descendent tribe and
investigators, advances knowledge through characterization of genomes and stable
isotopes from ancient individuals. Findings provide critically important
insights into the initial peopling of the Americas, the population history of
central US regions prior to and shortly after European contact, and the way
burial treatment may have reflected biological kinship. The project contributes
to the education of a graduate student and provides research experiences for
numerous undergraduate students. Results from this project will be integrated
with tribal historic knowledge to produce educational materials for the
participating tribe and the general public. Finally, the collaborative approach
taken in this project between scientists and tribal representatives aids in the
development of best practice recommendations for genetics research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years genomes sequenced from ancient individuals
throughout the Americas have started to reveal the contours of an extremely
complex population history. But sampling gaps, including a nearly complete lack
of data from the central portions of the present-day United States, limit the
understanding of this history. An intense research focus on questions regarding
the initial peopling of the Americas through ancient DNA means that of the few
ancient genomes that exist from the United States, most are from single
individuals from the very oldest sites in the Americas. Few complete genomes
exist from more recent contexts that are informative about the profound
demographic changes that nearly all Native American populations experienced.
This lack of data means that existing models of population history—and
particularly estimates of dates for population splits and effective population
sizes—are likely inaccurate. This project, a research collaboration between
tribal representatives and investigators, collects the first genomic-scale data
from ancient peoples of the Great Plains. Three major objectives are being
addressed with these data: (1) Test models for the initial peopling of the
Americas using genomes from pre-contact Indigenous individuals of the region,
(2) Investigate population histories of the region, (3) Investigate the
relationship between mortuary treatment, kinship, and mobility at multiple
sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Biological Anthropology Program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.