* 2051128
* REU Site: The Stressed Life of Cells
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Lisa Timmons, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2025
* USD 254,168.00

This REU Site award to the University of Kansas, located in Lawrence, KS, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2022-2024. Students will formulate their research plans with their mentors,
spend the majority of their time on a research project, and will present their
findings in a university-wide Research Symposium at the end of summer. The
underlying aim is to provide students with a strong basis and incentive for
pursuing careers in research, with a specific goal of increasing diversity and
participation in the sciences. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students,
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, or from
underrepresented groups, will be trained in the program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mentor-directed scientific activities will be performed in
the Department of Molecular Biosciences in faculty labs in the fields of
biochemistry, cell, molecular and developmental biology, virology and
microbiology, and computational biology. In the context of the common research
theme of “Stress,” students will learn how environmental and biological
conditions may affect development, function, and survival of cells and
organisms, as well as the nature of stress response mechanisms. Examples of
student projects may involve use of genetically tractable organisms (Drosophila,
C. elegans) to model evolution of stress responses or neurological responses to
stress, use of modified infectious agents (bacteria, coronavirus) in studies of
host/pathogen interactions and mechanisms, and biochemical analysis of
infection-associated strategies in microorganisms (T3SS, quorum sensing). Weekly
programs and social activities will develop student career progression, foster
independence as a scientist, hone presentation skills, and foster community.
Students will attend interactive workshops on responsible conduct of research,
scientific writing, and applying to graduate school. Assessments of the program
will be performed using the SALG URSSA tool. Program members and faculty will
maintain continued communications with participants as they plan for conference
presentations and prepare for graduate school, allowing their career
trajectories to be assessed. Participants should have completed freshman biology
and chemistry, and must be U.S. citizens or permanent residents. More
information about the program is available at mbreu.ku.edu, or by contacting the
PI, Dr. Lisa Timmons, at mb-reu@ku.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.