* 2051026
* REU Site: New York City Discrete Mathematics REU
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Adam Sheffer, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 04/30/2024
* USD 259,200.00

Each summer, this REU program in mathematics at Baruch College, CUNY will
provide the opportunity for a diverse group of students from across the country
to gain hands-on exposure to mathematical research and mentorship. One main goal
of the REU is to contribute to the development of a diverse and inclusive future
workforce. Each summer, at least half of participants will be women. The program
will also prioritize students who might otherwise have no opportunity to explore
their mathematical potential. Under the guidance of faculty mentors, according
to their individual backgrounds, participants work on a wide range of complex
mathematical research projects, investigate open mathematical problems, and hone
their writing and presentation skills. The mentors aim to foster long-term
relationships with their mentees, supporting them as they continue with their
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research projects of the program study open
questions in combinatorics, discrete probability, and mathematical aspects of
computer science. These include projects in discrete geometry, combinatorial
topology, probabilistic approaches to particle systems, combinatorial aspects of
theoretical computer science, additive combinatorics, and graph theory. Many of
the projects focus on less-explored aspects of active research
topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.