* 2051166
* CRII: SaTC: Measuring and Improving the Management of Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Taejoong Chung, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2022
* USD 149,351.00

The Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) is responsible for managing how packets are
routed across the Internet by exchanging routing related messages (path
announcements) between routers. While the Border Gateway Protocol plays a
critical role in the Internet communications, it remains highly vulnerable to
many attacks. This is because the protocol was originally designed for each BGP
router to trust all protocol related messages, especially path announcements,
sent by its neighboring routers. As a result, incorrect and malicious path
information would be accepted by routers at face value, potentially leading to
destination unreachable problems in the Internet. To address this issue,
Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI) was introduced in 2012 to allow
routers to verify path announcements in the Border Gateway Protocol. However,
today there is a dearth of information available about the vulnerability of the
RPKI, and how routers in the Internet have actually deployed and managed it.
This project will develop techniques to better understand and improve the
management of RPKI, helping to better secure the Internet. Given the early stage
of the RPKI protocol, the findings in this project stand a good chance of being
integrated to improve the state of the system. The project would train students
in related research. The findings of the project would identify what the current
security problems of RPKI are and help spur a greater adoption of RPKI by
releasing the codes, datasets and analysis tools developed in the project and
presenting the research outcomes to other researchers, administrators, and
Internet operations related working groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
has two research foci, each examining the management and improving security
challenges of the Resource Public Key Infrastructure. First, the project will
analyze existing RPKI repositories from multiple vantage points in an effort to
understand how much of actual Border Gateway Protocol feeds in the Internet are
verifiable. It will also determine what fraction of routers are actually using
RPKI to validate paths. For this focus, the investigators will collaborate with
one of the biggest network operators that have the most-peered global networks
in existence. Second, the project will develop new techniques to detect
misconfigurations of routers and potential security vulnerabilities. For this
purpose, the project will host a custom RPKI repository that have multiple
invalid routes, which will be used to test RPKI validators or
routers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.