* 2051501
* Collaborative Research: Seismic imaging of volcano construction, underplating and flexure along the Hawaiian-Emperor Seamount Chain
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Donna Shillington, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 03/31/2024
* USD 274,880.00

The Hawaii-Emperor Seamount Chain is the most well-known example on Earth of
hotspot magmatism, where volcanoes form far from plate boundaries above hot
regions in the underlying mantle. Many questions remain about the fundamental
earth processes that create the volcanoes of the Hawaii-Emperor chain and
elsewhere, and how the enormous mass of these volcanos is supported by the rock
material below them. This study will involve two seagoing expeditions to
seismically image the magmatic crust created by the hotspot and obtain critical
information about the crust's volume, its composition, how it varies along the
island chain, and how the tectonic plate deforms in response to the weight of
the volcanoes. In addition to gaining fundamental insight into the formation of
the Hawaiian-Emperor chain, the study will also be beneficial to a more
comprehensive assessment of geohazards for the Hawaiian island region. Seismic
data will image faults within the volcanic edifice and in the surrounding
oceanic crust that can be used to evaluate seismic, tsunami and submarine
landslide hazards. The project involves strong national and international
collaborations. The research cruises will provide excellent opportunities to
involve students in data acquisition and analysis, and the results will be the
basis for a large public outreach and education effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific objectives of the planned data acquisition and analysis of this
project are to examine controls on magmatic addition along the Hawaiian-Emperor
seamount chain, provide fundamental constraints on rheological properties of
oceanic lithosphere, address the origin of the hotspot swell, and assess
implications for earthquakes and tsunamis from plate deformation in response to
flexure. The plan is to acquire coincident 2D, deep-penetration seismic
reflection data as well as wide-angle reflection/refraction data using ocean
bottom seismometers spaced at 15 km along four 500-km-long transects across the
Hawaiian-Emperor seamount chain. The locations of these transects will encompass
wide variations in the timing of magma emplacement and volume flux, the age of
the lithosphere at the time of loading and the presence/absence of a topographic
swell. The transects are sufficiently long to capture the flexural response of
the lithosphere to volcano loading out to the flexural bulge. The processed
seismic reflection profiles and velocity models created from wide-angle seismic
data will constrain the volume and distribution of magmatic addition to the
crust as well as faulting within the volcanic edifice and within the loaded
oceanic plate. New seismic constraints will be combined with gravity, magnetic,
bathymetric and geochemical data and used as the basis for flexural analysis and
numerical modeling to gain fundamental new insights into crust and lithosphere
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.