* 2051231
* Understanding Advanced Heat and Mass Transport Control and Non-Noble Metal Catalyst Designs for Low Temperature Polyolefin Up-Cycling
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Siris Laursen, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2024
* USD 301,562.00

The project will investigate inexpensive catalytic materials and new energy
delivery mechanisms to efficiently transform waste plastics into valuable
building-block chemicals and fuels. Fundamental insights will be obtained to
develop continuous and modular chemical transformation processes that will
enable local municipalities to utilize waste plastics (as well as other types of
municipal waste) for economic gain. The project focuses on technologies
compatible with the scale of municipal waste treatment plants, thus avoiding
long-distance transport of waste material for processing in large centralized
chemical processing plants. Beyond promoting U.S. competitiveness in cyclic and
environmentally friendly chemical processes, the project will include education
and outreach efforts to train next-generation scientists and engineers, while
also increasing societal awareness of the plastics pollution problem and efforts
to solve the issue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary efforts in the
investigator's laboratory have determined that uncatalyzed thermal radical
reaction mechanisms dramatically limit the efficiency and role of catalytic
materials in the catalytic conversion of polyolefins to higher-value medium and
long-chain alkanes and alkenes. Additionally, the prior work has revealed
linkages between the catalysis and heat and mass transport effects, thus
inhibiting the development of fundamental mechanistic insights needed for
catalyst and reaction environment design. The project will investigate the
design and use of advanced reactor geometries specific for highly viscous
polymer melt mixing to understand and limit the effect of mass transport in the
catalytic cleavage of polyolefins. A new microwave energy delivery mechanism
that delivers heat energy directly to the catalyst particles will be employed to
avoid or dramatically reduce the role of uncatalyzed thermal radical reaction
mechanisms. The fundamental surface reaction energetics of a bifunctional
catalyst that presents both acid and metallic reaction sites will be
investigated such that constituent reaction kinetics for polyolefin
dehydrogenation, C-C cleavage, and hydrogenation may be balanced and optimized.
A mechanically and chemically-robust microwave susceptor, silicon carbide (SiC),
will be used to simultaneously provide tunable solid acid reaction sites, quench
thermal radicals, and convert microwave energy to localized heat energy. The SiC
acid catalyst will be combined with well-defined non-noble metal intermetallic
compound nanoparticle catalysts that will provide metal-like surface chemistry
to achieve efficient hydrogenation. Additionally, the role of hot phonons,
produced through microwave absorption by SiC, will be investigated for
accelerating kinetically-difficult reaction steps. To derive clear connections
between bulk and surface catalysis, the catalysts will be investigated using ex-
and in-situ x-ray diffraction and high-resolution energy-dispersive x-ray, x-ray
photoelectron, and high-sensitivity low-energy ion scattering spectroscopies.
Utilizing a suite of reaction conditions that provide a range of heat and mass
transport environments, clear insights into the role of uncatalyzed reaction
mechanisms, intermediate chemical potential, and composition polarization near
the catalyst surface will be developed. The role of chain dynamics and branch
points in the catalytic cleavage mechanism will also be determined such that a
more robust and general catalytic process may be developed to operate on
practical mixed polyolefin waste. The role of water content in motivating
optimal catalyst formulations will also be determined to ensure the application
of the science developed to real-world polyolefin up-cycling efforts. Beyond
polyolefin up-cycling, this project will produce transferable understanding
associated with heat and mass transport and reactor design that may greatly
improve efforts to catalytically up-cycle recalcitrant, solid, or highly viscous
materials. The educational component will enhance the chemical engineering and
materials science programs of the University of Tennessee, Knoxville, and raise
awareness of the plastics pollution problem in the local
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.