* 2051084
* REU Site: A Convergent Approach on Traineeship Towards Realizing H2 Economy
* ENG,EEC
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Ioulia Valla, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 09/30/2024
* USD 380,790.00

This new Research Experience for Undergraduate Students (REU) Site will initiate
a cohesive program at the Center for Clean Energy Engineering (C2E2) and the
School of Engineering at the University of Connecticut (UCONN) to engage
talented minority and underrepresented undergraduate participants in research on
hydrogen (H2) technologies. The program will offer a diverse cohort of
undergraduate students the opportunity to engage in research to advance
multidisciplinary approaches needed to address national emerging challenges in
H2 production, storage and utilization for the development of a sustainable
energy future. C2E2 in collaboration with a diverse group of academic and
industrial partners will build and invest into the training of young engineers
and provide them with the necessary tools to achieve societyâ€™s transition to the
H2 economy. More than ten faculty members from various departments at the School
of Engineering and the School of Law at UCONN will provide integrated education,
training, and hands-on interdisciplinary research opportunities that spark the
imagination of students towards an exceptional STEM workforce of future
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year interdisciplinary REU Site at
UCONN will mentor and train a total of 30 undergraduate students in H2 related
technologies. The students will participate directly in research with clear
contributions to addressing challenges in development of H2 technologies. Two
unique elements of this REU Site are the active engagement of industrial
partners and the integration of environmental policy and law. The core
objectives of this REU site are: (i) Increase the quantity and quality of
scientists and engineers prepared to address challenges on H2 technologies; (ii)
Increase the number of students from underrepresented populations including
minorities, to pursue graduate education and careers in academic or industrial
research in H2 related fields; and (iii) Build alliances with minority-serving
institutions and programs to enable a sustainable network of underrepresented
students who will become leaders in H2 related fields. In addition to active
research projects, students will participate in career development seminars,
which will involve fundamentals and technical aspects of H2 technologies,
environmental policies and law and real-world industrial
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.