* 2051891
* SBIR Phase I:  Reducing Numerical Weather Forecasting Computational Expense Using Machine Learning
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,04/30/2022
* Thomas Sherman, CRCL SOLUTIONS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 04/30/2022
* USD 254,060.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the development of artificial intelligence (AI)
weather forecasting tools to improve forecast accuracy and strengthen power grid
resiliency. The United States is currently transitioning to an increasingly
renewable energy-based economy. The availability of the leading renewable
sources, solar and wind, vary with weather, making forecasts critical to plan
for daily plant and energy grid operations. When weather forecasts are wrong,
the grid suffers inefficiencies, causing power prices to spike and hurt
consumers. Worldwide, national weather agencies continually release weather data
to the public. This project demonstrates the feasibility of improving weather
forecasting by collecting, organizing, and leveraging large public weather
datasets in real-time. AI will sort through these data to deliver advanced
weather insights to the energy industry as well as other commercial consumers
requiring high fidelity forecasts. These insights will allow energy market
participants to anticipate market movements, correct inefficiencies, and lead to
a more resilient energy grid and power distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
SBIR Phase I project proposes to advance the state of weather forecasting by
augmenting physics-based atmospheric models with artificial intelligence. The
intellectual merit of this project is the development of a toolkit of algorithms
that in real-time applies AI to detect errors in weather forecasts and uses
machine learning accessing historical forecasts to provide error correction. The
projectâ€™s objectives are 1) development of a database of historical wind
forecast data corresponding to major Texas wind farm sites; 2) training and
validation of an ensemble of AI algorithms, e.g. artificial neural networks,
random forests, and probabilistic analogs, that detect errors in historical
forecast data; and 3) development of software that ingests publicly available
weather forecasts from physics-based models, applies AI algorithms, and delivers
advanced weather forecast insights in real-time. This research will provide
feasibility that AI algorithms can easily integrate with high-fidelity models to
complement the existing weather forecasting infrastructure. The technology
developed in this project is a general environmental forecasting framework that
demonstrates the use of AI/ML applications to a broad set of weather-dependent
scientific and engineering challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.