* 2051989
* SBIR Phase I:  Distributed Secure Enclave For Modern Enterprise Networks And Critical Information Systems
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,02/28/2023
* James Charles, CURUVAR LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/28/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to protect critical infrastructure and enterprise
information systems against malicious digital adversaries at all levels.
Critical information systems, such as those which facilitate essential services
or maintain highly sensitive/valuable digital assets, represent significant
potential targets for highly sophisticated adversaries. Consequently,
vulnerabilities in these systems present grave security threats. The proposed
project will develop a new method for securing critical information systems that
offers both higher protection and accessibility for less sophisticated users.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to construct and
evaluate a prototype implementing core functionality for a Distributed Secure
Enclave capable of acting as a decentralized, intrusion-tolerant root of trust
for zero-trust security infrastructure. By combining advancements from
distributed cryptography and intrusion tolerant distributed systems within a
closed/permissioned Distributed Ledger (DL) network, such a platform will have
the ability to operate both as a decentralized system of record and
cryptographic key escrow service. These capabilities, once proven, could then be
extended to provide critical enterprise security services such as secret
storage/management, data/document encryption, certificate/key management,
identity and access management (IdAM), secure communication services, and many
others in a manner that is provably secureâ€”including in the presence of
sophisticated adversaries. By constructing and formally evaluating a functional
prototype of this technology, this proposed project aims not only to prove the
technical efficacy of this particular security solution, but also to demonstrate
a novel paradigm for applying DL technologies for practical applications within
the enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.