* 2051065
* REU Site: Microbiology of Low Oxygen Ecosystems (MLOxE) at Montana State
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Frank Stewart, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2024
* USD 436,510.00

This REU Site award to Montana State University, located in Bozeman, Montana,
will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2021-2023. The program will recruit primarily Underrepresented Minority (URM)
students, particularly American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) students from
Tribal and community colleges, as well as students from schools with limited
research opportunities. It is anticipated that 30 students will be trained in
total. These students will learn how research is conducted, and many will
present the results of their work at scientific conferences. Participation will
prepare students to help solve contemporary scientific and societal problems
through understanding the role of microorganisms in ecosystems. Program
assessment will be done through the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be
tracked after the program to determine their career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU program immerses students in research on
the Microbiology of Low Oxygen Ecosystems (MLOxE). Microorganisms living in the
absence of oxygen influence some of Earth's most important environmental
processes (e.g., nutrient, toxin, or greenhouse gas cycling), play essential
roles in human health, and can provide insight into how life first arose and
diversified on this planet. Students will explore questions in three thematic
areas: Microbial Interactions, Metabolism and Physiology, and Community and
Ecosystem Function. Student projects may involve diverse low-oxygen systems,
such as the microbial habitats of the human body, terrestrial hot springs, or
marine oxygen minimum zones. Participating faculty advisors represent the
Departments of Microbiology and Immunology, Land Resources and Environmental
Sciences, Chemistry and Biochemistry, and Chemical and Biological Engineering.
During the 10-week program, students will conduct lab, field, or computational
research in the lab of an advisor and participate in a range of other
activities. These activities include include team-building field trips,
educational and career development workshops, and networking designed to empower
students to pursue science as a career and to build supportive professional and
community relationships. Application instructions and additional information
about the program can be found at http://www.montana.edu/mbi/reu, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Frank Stewart at frank.stewart@montana.edu) or the co-PI
(Dr. Eric Boyd at eric.boyd@montana.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.