* 2051131
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Next-generation Cell Biology of Plants and Plant Pathogens
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Thomas Eulgem, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 381,493.00

This REU Site award to University of California, Riverside Center for Plant Cell
Biology (CEPCEB), located in Riverside, CA, will support the training of 10
students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2021 - 2023. It is anticipated that
a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited research
opportunities and/or from an under-represented group, will be trained in the
program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will present
the results of their work at scientific conferences. The scientific focus
addresses an urgent national need for training in the cell biology of plants and
plant pathogens. Major emphasis will be given to the use of innovative
experimental approaches driven by recent advances in genomics/chemistry-related
analytical technology. Assessment of the program will be done using the online
SALG URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the program in order to
determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The demand for plant
biologists is exponentially growing. The ever-increasing challenges of global
food security and changing ecosystems, as well as future needs for innovative
pharmaceuticals, sustainable raw materials and renewable energy require science-
based solutions developed by experienced and well-trained plant biologists. Like
nearly all other life-science disciplines, plant biology is experiencing a major
shift towards innovative high-throughput technologies, such as Next-Generation
DNA sequencing, transcriptomics, epigenomics, proteomics and metabolomics. In
particular, the fields of plant epigenetics, metabolomics/metabolic engineering,
cell biology, and translational biology have gained enormous significance. Key
assets of this program include extensive experience in successful undergraduate
research due to the 18-year history of this REU site, well-integrated
infrastructure, and successful plant researchers with access to state-of-the-art
genomics, bioinformatics, microscopy, metabolomics and proteomics core
facilities. This REU provides authentic research experiences that also include
opportunities for oral and written presentations, workshops on professional
development, scientific reading, and other group activities. Application
materials and more information about the program are available by visiting
https://cepceb.ucr.edu/reu/, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Rasmussen at
carolyn.rasmussen@ucr.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Eulgem at
thomas.eulgem@ucr.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.