* 2051539
* Collaborative Research: Beyond lithologic control of bedrock valley width: Investigating the role of persistent valley cover in bedrock valley width development, Buffalo River, AR
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Jill Marshall, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2024
* USD 180,701.00

Rivers shape landscapes by incising deep canyons and carving both wide and
narrow valleys, determining where people live and where floodwaters go. Little
is known about how, when, and why rivers carve wide vs. narrow valleys as they
flow through landscapes where they can ‘touch’ the adjoining valley walls. For
this project, the scientists will investigate controls on the development
bedrock valleys on America’s first National River, the Buffalo in northwest
Arkansas. This research represents an important step in advancing understanding
of how rivers and their valleys respond and evolve. Understanding the how and
why bedrock valleys widen will allow researchers, land use planners, and
environmental scientists to interpret how river systems in the past, present,
and future have and will respond to changes in river sediment or discharge.
Additionally, the project scientists will engage with a diverse population of
teachers and K-12 students in Kansas and Arkansas and develop an interactive
mapping tool that highlights the intersection of places (the Buffalo River) and
faces (the diverse peoples living in the Buffalo watershed over the past several
millennia).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the intuitive conceptual model that
soft bedrock makes for wide valleys and hard bedrock narrower valleys, new
research suggests that two end members of bedrock valley width development are
as important as bedrock lithology in determining bedrock valley width and
widening rates. In the project, the PIs will study how bedrock valley width,
widening rates, and associated valley bottom morphology are controlled by the
persistence vs. mobility of collapsed valley wall material. The Buffalo River in
northwest Arkansas is an ideal field site given the distinct lithologies that
create both wide and narrow bedrock valleys. The project goals are 1)
investigate the persistence of valley bottom cover as a function of the block
sizes of collapsed bedrock wall material and 2) determine controls on the block
size of collapsed material by characterizing fracture spacing in bedrock valley
walls, using data from field measurements of valley and channel morphology and
bedrock properties. The final goal of this project is 3) conduct a series of
flume experiments to quantify how valley widening end members control valley
widening rate, total valley width, and valley response to changes in key
drivers. The data collected during this project will allow for re-evaluation of
existing theories of bedrock valley widening and the advancement of processed-
based understanding of bedrock valley evolution in response to external climate
drivers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.