* 2051803
* SBIR Phase I:  Rapid and Sensitive Quantification of Phenylalanine within Test Strip
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Louay Fakhro, FAKHRO, LOUAY K
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses an urgent need for a rapid and
convenient method to monitor blood phenylalanine levels for patients with
phenylketonuria, or PKU for short. Patients with PKU are unable to catabolize
phenylalanine and therefore have elevated, toxic levels. These patients are
treated with a severely protein-restricted diet and other potential medications.
Since excess phenylalanine results in neurologic injury, and inadequate
phenylalanine results in protein malnutrition, the diet of patients must be
carefully balanced. This balance can only be accomplished by tracking blood
phenylalanine levels, which fluctuate throughout the day. Currently the
turnaround time of laboratory tests is 5 to 7 days, and sometimes longer, during
which patients may experience prolonged episodes of behavioral and
neurocognitive morbidities. PKU is a lifelong genetic disorder and requires
constant tuning of diet therapy. The annual societal cost for taking care of
patients with PKU can range from $15,000 to $200,000; this disease causes
irreversible damage and high costs of care when improperly managed. The proposed
project will develop a new monitor for these patients to prevent long-term
effects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will develop a new rapid, phenylalanine monitor for patients
with phenylketonuria. Rapid quantification of blood phenylalanine levels to
improve patient outcomes. The device will also be a cost effective alternative
to the standard of care as it is today. This device consists of a test strip and
a test device. The test strip accepts a blood drop from a finger prick. The test
strip contains various chemistries that condition the blood sample prior to
optically analysis by the test device. The test device implements spectroscopy
to interrogate the test strip as it determines phenylalanine quantity. The focus
of this project is to optimize the product design and system algorithm. The
proposed work enables cost-effective manufacturing and deployment of the device
to the end user; the end goal of this project is to develop a simple
prototype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.