* 2051541
* A Network Approach For Interpreting Social Landscapes
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2025
* Jing Deng, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2025
* USD 257,286.00

Humans are in many ways defined by their social interactions with others.
Indeed, the heart of human adaptive systems lies in peoples’ use of social
networks to facilitate solutions to collective problems like resource
shortfalls, information acquisition and dissemination, political turmoil, and
conflict resolution. Material culture—clothing, artwork, jewelry—is often used
to advertise important information about one’s personal and group identity
within a social network. One way in which people do this is to adopt or
manipulate the style of an object to distinguish themselves from others or more
closely identify themselves with others. Archaeology is uniquely equipped,
through the study of artifact style, to track the development of social networks
across vast expanses of space and time. Within this broader context, Dr. Charles
Egeland of the University of North Carolina at Greensboro, along with several
colleagues, will develop a methodology based on artificial intelligence to
identify stylistic similarities among digital images of artifacts. The level of
stylistic similarity among artifacts will be input into custom-coded program
plugins that can produce visual, graph-based representations of the pattern and
strength of social ties between archaeological sites. Two graduate students will
be trained to apply artificial intelligence and software integration in a social
science setting. The data, artificial intelligence methodology, and plugins
generated by this project will be freely accessible online by other users, and
the technique can eventually be applied to any object represented by a 2D
digital image. Ultimately, this project will help clarify how humans construct
and use social networks to meet challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Egeland
and his research team will examine how Paleolithic people used material culture
to construct social networks and navigate the rapidly changing environments. The
researcher will lead a team of archaeologists, paleoclimatologists, and computer
scientists to (1) assemble a database of ~200 digital images of engraved
artifacts; (2) construct an open-access, web-based application that uses
artificial intelligence to identify stylistic patterns among the digital
representations of the artifacts; and (3) develop custom plugins for an open-
source graph analysis platform to produce visual representations of, and
quantitative descriptors at multiple scales. With these data, the research team
will explore how geography, environmental uncertainty, and population density
influenced how people constructed and used their social networks to regulate
social boundaries and offset resource shortages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.