* 2051326
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Tooth biomechanics in Hominins and Extant Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Sarah Baumgarten, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2024
* USD 31,275.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation
project advances knowledge about the relationship between tooth root shape
variation and feeding adaptations in living primates and fossil hominins, to
advance knowledge about feeding and diet during human evolution. The project
uses methods and works with collaborators from a variety of fields including
paleontology, anthropology, anatomy, and primatology, providing integration and
cross-disciplinary perspectives for understanding human evolution. The project
supports graduate and undergraduate training, including individuals from groups
underrepresented in STEM research, and the investigator has developed student
and public science outreach activities plans well as contributing to primate
conservation efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous work in primatology and
paleoanthropology has considered how tooth crown shape affects the efficiency of
processing foods during feeding. However, teeth are subject to an equally
important, competing functional constraint; while teeth must function to
fracture food items, they must also avoid being fractured themselves. This
proposal seeks to answer whether: 1) variation in premolar form is mechanically
related to resisting tooth fracture during feeding on mechanically resistant
foods; and 2) variation in premolar tooth form explains mechanically significant
feeding behavior in fossil hominins. The project integrates morphometric and
engineering analyses coupled with observational behavioral data to test
hypotheses concerning the functional relationships of premolar root form, a
character featured in many hypotheses about early hominin phylogeny and
adaptation. The project also integrates multiple types of data analysis
including biomechanical analyses, three-dimensional shape analyses and primate
behavior videographic analyses, ensuring a robust and comprehensive approach.
Additionally, methodologies from several fields are incorporated, including
biomedical science and engineering, biological anthropology, anatomy,
primatology, and evolutionary biology, which provides the potential for
collaboration among scientists across these
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.