* 2051966
* SBIR Phase I:  Orchard Transpiration Irrigation
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,02/28/2022
* Joseph Gallegos, Drought Diet Products
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve the water usage in agricultural
operations. With growing water scarcity from the lack of natural rainfall and
depleted groundwater tables, the need to maintain agricultural wells and
agricultural production is dramatic. The proposed subsurface irrigation
technology will reduce irrigated water by 50% over drip irrigation. This could
enable significant reduction in water use and allow the groundwater tables to
recover and perform as water reservoirs during drought years. It potentially can
raise farm yields, improve weed control for organic farmers, and promote better
uptake of fertilizers - thereby minimizing the pollution of underground
aquifers. The proposed technology also can lead to energy cost reductions and
increased flexibility in scheduling power usage. At a systems level, it offers a
new paradigm for a resilient and sustainable irrigation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is focused on the development of an
easy-to-use moisture plume simulation calculator that enables farmers to self-
analyze how their soil type will react when installing a virtual water table
irrigation system. The latter is designed to eliminate water lost by surface
evaporation and deep percolation. The research approach taken is an
interdisciplinary collaboration to mathematically model the physics of how
liquid transports from the subsurface feed pipes through the porous soil to the
roots of the plants in an efficient manner with adequate accuracy. The
predictions will be compared with more comprehensive industry-standard
hydrological model predictions and also with the experimentally collected
moisture data from the field. The technical risks lie in determining whether the
basic soil properties collected by the non-scientist farmers would be adequate
as inputs to generate an accurate prediction of moisture plume profile across
many soil types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.