* 2051497
* Collaborative Research: Functional Analysis of Lithic Artifacts
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Justin Pargeter, New York University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 18,686.00

Humans have the capacity to modify their environments through a large set of
inter-generationally transmitted engineering skills. The archaeological record
addresses questions about the origins of these skills and can test hypotheses
about why, when, and where they evolved. Building from this broader context,
this project examines whether prehistoric people discovered, and then
transmitted, a way to increase adhesion between individual components of their
toolkits called “backing” (blunting). This research impacts human technological
evolution by exploring if backing influenced stone tool function. This project
takes a substantial inter-disciplinary step forward via the integration of
archaeology, materials sciences, 3D morphometrics, and adhesive engineering in
both controlled and actualistic experiments. The experimental collections
generated from tests will be available for general study. The data will be
permanently stored and freely accessible for download in the Open Science
Framework (OSF) and through public education and outreach activities. Since
backed stone tools are frequent implements found at sites relevant to the
broader late Pleistocene human global dispersals, this project will advance
understanding of the behavioral and technological adaptations that determined
how our species came to colonize the planet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The stone
tool manufacturing technique of “backing” refers to the blunting of a flake’s
edge(s) at, or near to, a 90° angle. Backed tools have a long prehistory,
extending over 250,000 years. But why blunt a sharp edge that toolmakers can
otherwise use for a variety of practical tasks, such as butchery, engraving, or
processing plant material? One functional hypothesis is that backing enabled
early humans to attach stone tools more effectively to wooden handles. If the
functional hypothesis is true, then backing represents a significant Stone Age
innovation in adhesion engineering. This project involves a systematic program
of robust, controlled experimental tests investigating the apparent adhesion
advantages of backed versus un-backed tools used as projectile weapon inserts.
This project constructs backed and un-backed tools using four common rock types:
chert, quartz, quartzite, and heat-treated silcrete. These tools are then used
in four controlled tests to understand whether backed tools offer significant
adhesion advantages over un-backed flakes. Regardless of a positive or negative
result, this project has implications for understanding human behavioral
evolution, technology, and tool use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.