* 2051184
* Biological Impacts of Colonial Practices: Bioarchaeological Reconstruction of Health and Demography
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Debra Martin, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 11/30/2024
* USD 360,711.00

This bioarchaeological project examines the impact of colonization practices on
population health and mortality. Skeletal data on age, sex, pathologies, trauma,
disability, cause of death, and other indicators of morbidity are used to test
hypotheses about hardships, illnesses, and loss of life in the context of
colonization practices. These bioarchaeological outcomes can extend our
knowledge regarding the biological and cultural consequences of enslavement and
marginalization beyond what can be understood from limited and biased historical
records. The project engages underrepresented minority students in science-based
research and interpretation of empirical data involving their own community
history. The research represents a multidisciplinary cooperation that engages
the local community, directly involving them in the research process as co-
producers of scientific knowledge and critical stakeholders in ensuring that the
research findings are understood and communicated to the community and public
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Settler colonialism is typically understood to
be based on appropriation of resources and persistent removal of local,
indigenous cultures. This project involves the excavation and analysis of
skeletal remains from an historic cemetery in the American Southwest comprised
of indigenous people who were conscripted into servitude. Hypotheses will be
tested with the demographic, health and trauma data derived from the skeletal
remains of infants, children, and adult males and females to expand our
knowledge about the effects of enslavement and marginalization during
colonization. Retrieval and analysis of the skeletal remains, and the reburial
of these remains in the local church cemetery, is part of a larger undertaking
that will establish this location as a heritage site with an educational
component featuring data retrieved from the skeletons about life, health, and
death in this historic location. The outcomes of this project will provide a
solid basis for future studies on colonial practices, morbidity and mortality.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Biological
Anthropology Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.