* 2051917
* SBIR Phase I:  Long-Lasting Insect Repellent Systems Based on Fatty Acids and Their Derivatives
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Dawn Clarke, INSECTAPEL, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 11/30/2023
* USD 207,799.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to enhance public health by the introduction of safer
insect-repelling textiles. The Phase I SBIR effort will lead to the development
of textiles embedded with a new long-lasting insect repellent system derived
from coconut fatty acids. This project will advance a safer insect repellent to
reduce vector-borne diseases and to eliminate the health issues resulting from
currently available synthetic products. The insect repellent market is currently
valued at $5.64 billion, and the proposed work will address issues generated by
synthetic repellents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes
to test new coconut fatty acid-based compounds that enable the prolonged release
of insect repellent fatty acids via textile impregnation. With growing health
concerns over the use of DEET and increasing occurrences of permethrin-resistant
strains of mosquitos, active compounds based on coconut fatty acids are a viable
option for safe and effective replacement. The proposed research is to develop
and to test the release system that will gradually supply insect-repelling fatty
acid via the degradation of labile chemical bonds which hold the compound. These
developmental products are envisioned to provide prolonged insect repellency
compared to the supposed gold standard synthetic repellents such as DEET and
permethrin. The SBIR Phase I research will include proof of concept trials,
development of analytical methods for accurate analysis of the active ingredient
(chromatographic or spectroscopic), release studies, application trials (using
standard methods established in the textile industry), and field performance
testing on live insects (via surveys designed for agricultural research). A
technical challenge for this project will be ensuring efficient impregnation of
fabrics/textiles with the proposed insect repellent system and obtaining a
suitable release timeframe after all steps of the fabric
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.