* 2051670
* Efficient discharge monitoring using whitewater sounds
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Jacob Anderson, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 03/31/2024
* USD 391,347.00

Natural and artificial whitewater features like rapids, waterfalls, spillways,
and weirs are important acoustic sources in the infrasound, audible, and
ultrasound bands. However, their sounds have received little scientific study
despite their utility in monitoring streamflow and their environmental
significance as dominant features of the riparian soundscape. In this project,
the investigators will build on preliminary work and develop a tool for helping
researchers collect important but currently impractical discharge data. This
project will create a monitoring method that can enable hydrologists to collect
streamflow data more efficiently than is currently possible, removing the
constraint of stream-gaging logistics on data collection and permitting studies
that are currently impractical. To encourage widespread adoption of the method,
they will release a mature, user-friendly sensor/software combination with
comprehensive manuals and instructional videos demonstrating fieldwork and data
processing for new users. All instrumentation and software produced in this
project will be open-source. They will promote hydrological and STEM education
at multiple levels by including undergraduate and graduate students in research,
instrumentation construction, software development, and K-12 outreach to
underserved schools and community organizations. This interdisciplinary project
will help train student assistants to work across disciplinary boundaries and
teach transferable skills including electronic design and maintenance, field
data collection, analysis, and scientific
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will address two research
questions: 1) how can acoustic monitoring of whitewater features be used to
measure streamflow? 2) how does the spatial distribution of whitewater sounds
depend on characteristics of the stream and surroundings? The investigators will
address their first question with case studies of many scales, ranging from
waterfalls on rivers to riffles on mountain streams. In particular, they will
examine the utility of acoustics for recording low-order and intermittent
streams, which are under-monitored despite their hydrological, ecological, and
policy significance. To answer the second question, they will characterize
whitewater soundscapes by collecting snapshot spatial surveys of noise around
whitewater features and assessing how discharge, whitewater feature
characteristics, vegetation, and topography affect stream noise extent and
intensity. This question is relevant to wide-ranging communities including
hydrologists (site selection for acoustic gaging), geophysicists (understanding
a important and variable source of background noise), ecologists (stream sounds
aiding wildlife as navigational beacons, or impairing their ability to hear
predators or prey), and urban and recreational planners (background sounds have
measurable health effects on humans). This project is co-funded by the
Hydrological Sciences Program and the Instrumentation and Facilities Program in
the Earth Sciences Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.