* 2051599
* The PROMISE Engineering Institute
* ENG,EEC
* 12/31/2019,08/31/2023
* Rachel Jean-Baptiste, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 08/31/2023
* USD 314,699.00

&lt;p&gt;&lt;p&gt;The objective of the DEI PROMISE Engineering Institute (PEI)
is to improve the diversity of engineering faculty nationwide by building an
east-west alliance between the University California, Davis (UC Davis) and the
University of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC), along with their networks of
engineering schools within their respective regions. The effort&amp;#39;s
uniqueness lies with its plan to facilitate faculty diversity by actively
leveraging partnerships to provide underrepresented early-career and future
engineering professors with intentional professional national and international
networks. These networks are designed to increase participants&amp;#39; exposure
within the engineering community, retain them in the academy, and propel
research collaborations particularly related to the National Academy of
Engineering&amp;#39;s Grand Challenges, and strengthen engineering identity and
cultural competencies within engineering&amp;#39;s national landscape. The
project involves advanced graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, visiting
professors, and assistant professors from each of involved engineering schools
and colleges: The College of Engineering at University of California, Davis (UC
Davis); The College of Engineering &amp; IT at the University of Maryland
Baltimore County (UMBC), The Clark School of Engineering at the University of
Maryland College Park (UMCP), The Whiting School of Engineering at Johns Hopkins
University, and the Clarence M. Mitchell School of Engineering at Morgan State
University.&lt;/p&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;p&gt;The project will engage in three
activities: 1) Training: Participants will receive professional development and
training for collaboration through participation in national and international
efforts that will assist with providing them with a global network, key for the
engineering disciplines. Further, the training portion will provide scholars
with comprehensive research and pedagogical skills. 2) Placement: The involved
institutions will collaborate to develop new opportunities to attract diverse
scholars such as post-doc to tenure-track conversion models, and collaborative
industry-based visiting professorships. 3) Support: The project will facilitate
transitional support for new postdocs and assistant professors by bringing
together current engineering faculty mentors within departments where scholars
are placed, to discuss and develop strong support mechanisms that will
facilitate retention. The project will also build communities of practice among
the participating scholars that will assist with preparing for roles as
engineering faculty. This portion of the project is designed to facilitate
collaborative networks of engineering faculty from all races and ranks that
connect within and across the United States.&lt;/p&gt;