* 2051582
* Identifying hMSC interaction pathways in soluble interferon-gamma and stratified collagen/heparin coatings for the manufacturing of therapeutic cells
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Raj Rao, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 03/31/2024
* USD 486,442.00

Human mesenchymal stromal cells (hMSC) show promise for treating deadly
incurable diseases. One of the main limitations of hMSC production is the growth
of fully functional cells in bioreactors. Treatment with interferon gamma (IFN)
enhances the therapeutic potency of hMSCs but also inhibits growth. Coating
hMSCs with layers of collagen (COL) and heparin (HEP) reduces the inhibition
while maintaining the therapeutic enhancement, but it is unknown how the layers
cause this to occur. This project will identify the specific pathways by which
COL/HEP coatings enhance hMSC response to IFN. This knowledge will support the
design of optimal bioreactor platforms for the manufacturing of highly
therapeutic cells. Students from underrepresented populations will engage in
research at the interface between engineering and biology. This will help
develop a strong and diverse biomanufacturing
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central hypothesis of this project is that
COL/HEP coatings work synergistically with soluble IFN to modulate signaling
pathways regulating proliferation and immunosuppressive properties. This
hypothesis was formulated, in large part, based on preliminary data indicating
that COL/HEP coatings: induce expression of basic fibroblast growth factor
(FGF2) and reduce the anti-proliferative effect of IFN while enhancing
immunomodulatory cytokine secretion. The specific objectives are: (1) To
establish the relationship between the coatings and the activation of the FGF2
pathway in hMSCs, and its relation to proliferation; (2) To establish the
mechanism by which IFN activates hMSCs cultured on COL/HEP coatings; and (3) To
determine the extent to which COL/HEP coatings remain consistent when translated
to microcarriers for suspension-based bioreactors. This project will directly
impact the cell manufacturing field by merging polymeric materials with
biochemical signals to produce a technology that enhances hMSCs activation and
therapeutic potency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Cellular and Biochemical Engineering Program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.