* 2051644
* SBIR Phase I:  Automated Perception for Robotic Chopsticks Manipulating Small and Large Objects in Constrained Spaces
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Evan Drumwright, DEXTROUS ROBOTICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will use robots to mechanize one of the last
remaining fully manual tasks in logistics chains: unloading packages. Even
before COVID-19, shipping growth was severely straining the human workforce that
moves packages between shipping containers and distribution centers. The pool of
unskilled laborers willing and able to monotonously move heavy packages a few
feet at a time is much too small. COVID-19 made the importance of these supply
chains evident. Mechanization will both speed the supply chain and help
safeguard it from infectious diseases and other natural disasters. While
addressing a $32 billion year problem in the logistics industry, the project
will simultaneously enhance understanding of geometric modeling for more
accurate sensing and robotic manipulation of objects that exhibit significant
geometric variation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to establish machine vision algorithms
targeted to robotic manipulation applications in order to recognize objects from
RGB-D images (a combination of red, green blue images and its corresponding
depth image) via curated geometric models parameterizable with tuples of
numbers. The technology will also estimate the state and parameters of
recognized objects. The state-of-the-art in existing machine vision approaches
to model-based object recognition and state estimation use fixed models, i.e.,
models of objects with constant size, shape, color, and texture. Those
approaches have demonstrated the ability to identify scores of different objects
and localize them in space. But they work on only some specific images. This
project will pursue comparable accuracy, sufficient for robotic manipulation of
packages in supply chains, on the same identification and localization tasks for
multiple object categories. Research objectives specify the minimum performance
numbers for the precision and recall required to detect objects in a scene, to
estimate accuracy, and to calculate runtime performance (in frames processed per
second). The anticipated technical result is a semi-autonomous system that is
able to work with a human to speed object recognition and parameter
identification, and to provide estimations beyond a fully manual
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.