* 2051336
* Collaborative Research: Environmental Fate and Impacts of Quaternary Ammonium Compounds Following Increased Use During the SARS-CoV 2 Pandemic
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Christopher Marshall, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2024
* USD 195,361.00

The novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 is responsible for the global pandemic of
COVID-19. Disinfection use to kill SARS-CoV-2 on surfaces and for handwashing
has increased dramatically in response to the pandemic. A large number of
disinfectants have been approved for usage as SARS-CoV-2 disinfectants, many of
which contain quaternary ammonium compounds (QACs). QACs will inevitably be sent
to wastewater treatment plants and some will end up in receiving waters. The
effect of these disinfection chemicals on the operation of wastewater treatment
plants and receiving waters is largely unknown. These compounds may also
contribute to the spread of antibiotic resistance microorganisms, an issue of
global health importance. The goal of this project is to address these major
gaps in our knowledge on QACs to provide information to help limit any
environmental impact. The goal will be achieved by assessing QACs in wastewater
treatment plants and determine what happens to them in different plant processes
and receiving waters. Successful completion of the proposed research will
provide the information needed to assess the risk of QACs to protect public
health while minimizing environmental persistence and impacts. The project will
lead to collaborations with wastewater treatment systems operators to improve
operations and the development of educational videos for middle school
environmental science students to enhance scientific literacy of the
Nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quaternary ammonium compounds (QACs) are active
ingredients in over 200 disinfectants currently recommended for use to kill the
SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) virus. Increased use of these disinfectants for hand
washing and surface cleaning continues, and the biological impacts of increasing
chemical loadings to wastewater treatment plants and surface waters is largely
unknown. The goal of this work is to assess the potential impacts of increased
QAC loadings to wastewater treatment plants and subsequently aquatic and soil
environments. This goal will be achieved through specific research objectives
to: 1) Assess QAC levels in wastewater treatment facilities, surface waters, and
sediments; 2) Quantify degradation rate constants for QACs and predict
persistence in surface waters; and 3) Understand how increased QAC loadings to
anaerobic digesters and water environments affects antibiotic resistance. Twelve
wastewater treatment plants employing various biological and chemical treatment
processes will be sampled seasonally for three years to assess influent, liquid
effluent, and biosolids effluent QAC loadings. Sediment samples near outfalls
will also be sampled. A mass balance on QACs across individual unit operations
will be conducted at two treatment plants. Lab-scale biodegradation and
photolysis experiments will be conducted to generate rate removal constants to
predict persistence in environmental waters. Lab-scale anaerobic digester
experiments will be conducted to determine the impact of increasing
concentrations of specific QAC classes on antibiotic resistance. Samples from
full-scale plants will also be analyzed for changes in antibiotic resistance.
The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic brings large uncertainty regarding the amount of QACs
that will be used and their specific environmental impacts. By combining lab-
scale and full-scale studies we will generate data on classes of QACs and
individual QACs that can be used for risk assessments and assessing their
impacts on antibiotic resistance. This research is timely and transformative
given the expectation of increased loadings of QACs due to the COVID-19 pandemic
and long-term changes in consumer and business purchasing of products containing
QACs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.