* 2051443
* RII Track-4: Mechanistic Design of Hierarchical Metal-MAX Multilayered Nanocomposites
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Siddhartha Pathak, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 289,104.00

Nanocomposites are a class of composite materials where the size of the base or
constituent materials are on the nanometer length scale - one nanometer being
one-billionth of a meter. They can offer unprecedented properties beyond those
currently studied and used. The goal of this fellowship proposal is to augment
the advantages of a multilayered design in a metal-ceramic nanocomposite that is
hypothesized to exhibit tunable strength and toughness, by the selective
activation of deformation mechanisms at the nanoscale. The metal-ceramic
multilayered nanocomposite is composed of alternating metallic and MAX phase
layers with a lamellar thickness reduced to the nanoscale. Because of the ideal,
highly oriented structure that prevails across the film, each film contains
thousands of "like layers", and a high density of interfaces. MAX phases are a
family of ceramic materials consisting of laminated ternary carbide or nitride
materials, and they represent a novel class of layered solids, where Mn+1Xn
layers are interleaved with pure A-group element layers. These metal-MAX
multilayered nanocomposite thin films show uniform interface spacing (~2 to
100’s of nm apart) and uniform interface plane and crystallography throughout
the film. MAX phases have applications in multiple technological fields,
including high temperature structural applications, protective coatings,
sensors, tunable damping films for microelectromechanical systems, etc., along
with potential applications in cladding materials for nuclear use. The ability
to have a strong yet ductile metal-MAX composite with improved mechanical
behavior to satisfy the demands of such applications will provide considerable
technological and economic benefits. This research is an integrated
collaboration planned between the principal investigator (PI) and the Center for
Integrated Nanotechnologies, Sandia National Laboratories (CINT-SNL), which will
support a postdoctoral researcher, and enable extended collaborative visits and
infrastructure development opportunities at the nation’s premier national
laboratory at CINT-SNL. Undergraduate education in the capstone senior design
projects in the Materials department at the PI’s university will particularly
benefit from this collaboration by having mentors (and possible visitations to
CINT-SNL) from both national laboratory and university.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this fellowship project are to leverage
a fundamental understanding of the activation and confinement of deformation
mechanisms directly linked to the hierarchical structure at the nanoscale in
multilayered nanocomposite materials, to potentially enable tunable strength and
toughness. Unlike other various multilayered systems that have been pursued in
the past, the metal-MAX nanocomposites studied here are composed of a unique
hierarchical topology - as interfaces between the layers are in direct
competition with the internal interfaces within the MAX layers to drive the
tunable macroscopic mechanical behavior. Guided by experimental synthesis and
novel nanomechanical testing capabilities of the PI, computational modeling at
CINT-SNL will complement the experimental component to study the fundamental
mechanisms (e.g., dislocations and ripplocations) within the metal-MAX
hierarchical structure. Outcomes from the fellowship project will include the
development of correlations between the metal-MAX hierarchical structure, its
fundamental deformation mechanisms and the resulting mechanical properties,
namely strength and toughness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.