* 2051780
* SBIR Phase I:  Controlled Application of Shock Waves to Extinguish Wildfires
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,06/30/2022
* William Sutton, Rebel Research LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this SBIR Phase I project is the
potential to apply novel shock wave technology to wildfires in a way that can
directly save lives, protect property and infrastructure, significantly reduce
fine particulate air pollution, and prevent the permanent devastation of fragile
ecosystems that can no longer fully recover from the large and intense wildfires
that are increasingly commonplace in the American West. Current technologies for
responding to large wildfires do not typically achieve direct extinguishment and
are rather aimed at the gradual guidance and containment of fires - in the era
of regular megafires (greater than 100,000 acres), methods such as aerial drops
are rarely effective despite their enormous expense. As populations have further
expanded into the urban-wildland interface, environmental change has produced
extended droughts and weakened forests, and fuel loads have accumulated for far
longer than would be natural, fire seasons now approach perennial levels. As a
result, Federal annual spending on emergency suppression now regularly reaches
$2B to $3B, up from an average of less than $1B at the end of the 20th century,
and the holistic economic impact of a bad fire season may cost the broader
economy an order of magnitude more in lost Gross Domestic Product. The proposed
project implements a cost-effective, rapid-response shock wave technology to
extinguish large fire fronts. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project involves
technical innovation in the novel application of controlled, directed shock
waves to uncontrolled wildfire-scale flames fueled by organic material, with the
goal of achieving rapid extinguishment. Characterization of turbulent flame and
debris field response to a multitude of variables which are important for field
deployment will result from testing with a physical prototype device â€“ this
device features novel mechanisms for the safe, repeated delivery of tunable
shock waves. The unique data generated will in turn enable the optimization and
refinement of a portable product that can eventually proceed to industrial
application with firefighting agencies. The project work comprises detailed
design, fabrication, and experimental testing of the shock-generating device at
appropriate scale using high speed videography with density-based visualization.
This will be combined with high-frequency pressure and temperature sensing, to
demonstrate the effectiveness of the technique and further improve understanding
of the underlying fluid and fire dynamics as the shock wave interactions
occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.