* 2051752
* RAPID: Synergistic effects of habitat fragmentation and climate-change driven megafire on biodiversity in a large-scale experiment
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2022
* Brett Melbourne, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 11/30/2022
* USD 279,550.00

The natural world is changing in many ways that threaten ecological systems. A
big question is whether the threats interact, with some making others much worse
than otherwise expected. This project will examine the interaction of two
threats, fire and habitat fragmentation (the breaking up of large forests into
many small forest fragments), on insects in Australia. Researchers will test how
the location of small unburned areas may act as refugia (safe spaces) for
beetles, helping them recover in some burned fragments but perhaps not in
others. Without nearby refugia, impacts of fire may be especially bad. The
project will take advantage of a huge fire in January 2020 that burned through a
very big and long-running forest fragmentation experiment. The fire has provided
a fleeting opportunity to study how effects of fire may interact with those of
habitat fragmentation. Researchers will find and map refugia, relate them to
fragment size and habitat, and estimate how many species were wiped out by the
fire. Results will allow researchers to figure out how impacts of fire and
fragmentation may be related. Also, results will critically inform the
management of fragmented forest under increased fire risk.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Relative to their enormous biodiversity and importance in
ecosystem function, the impact of severe fire on forest invertebrates is poorly
studied. A long, continuous record of beetle biodiversity (over 700 species)
before the fire, together with the existing large-scale experimental
manipulation of the landscape into habitat fragments, provides a rare
opportunity to study possible synergistic effects of fragmentation and fire. The
study will provide the first data to evaluate such effects on biodiversity loss
and recovery, and the role of small refugia. Additionally, this study of initial
conditions and ecosystem trajectory after a severe fire will provide a baseline
for long-term study of the drivers of recovery in fragmented forest systems
impacted by extreme events that are becoming more
common.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.