* 2051041
* REU Site: Undergraduate research in estuarine and coastal marine systems
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Richard Forward, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 05/31/2024
* USD 345,996.00

The Duke University Marine Laboratory (DUML), which is located on Pivers Island,
North Carolina, will host a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site
during the summers of 2021-2023. Student interns will be recruited each summer
and will live in the dormitories on Pivers Island surrounded by the estuarine
environment while completing a 10-week program. Interns will have a choice of
advisors in the general research areas of (1)sensory physiology, ecology and
behavior, (2) molecular biology and genetics, and (3) coastal and estuarine
physical processes. Throughout the program there will be sessions on safety,
scientific ethics, scientific writing, oral and poster presentations, graphics
skills, graduate school, and non-academic science careers. Students will give an
introductory oral report during week two and a progress report during week five.
The final week will involve completion of a scientific manuscript on the project
and a final oral presentation. Co-curricular activities include a Marine
Laboratory-sponsored seminar program, participation in selected field trips and
optional water related recreational activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed REU is organized to train students to frame research questions, to
design and undertake laboratory and field work to address these research
questions, and to develop the skills to communicate the results of their
research. Students will be recruited nationally and from a network of regional
universities who participate in the Marine Sciences Educational Consortium. The
program includes a collaboration with the REU program at Savannah State
University (SSU). Interns from SSU tour the Marine Laboratory, learn about the
research projects conducted at the Marine Laboratory, attend a session on
graduate school and go on field trips. The Marine Laboratory houses the Marine
Conservation Molecular Facility (MCMF), which is a shared-use molecular facility
designed for medium-to-high-throughput genotyping on marine organisms.
Additional facilities available to students and faculty for a variety of
research projects include the Duke Marine Robotics and Remote Sensing (MaRRS)
Lab, which supports marine scientists seeking to use unoccupied aircraft systems
(UAS) in ocean and coastal applications, the extensive animal care facilities,
such as running seawater and aeration facilities, and the next-generation
sequencing technologies through the Sequencing and Genomic Technologies core
facility on the main campus in Durham. Sensory Physiology, Ecology and Behavior
research projects focus on topics such as biological rhythms, migrations of
invertebrate larvae, metamorphosis, photobiology, marine mammal behavioral
ecology and bioacoustics, use of drones to study the ecology and map
distributions of local organisms and ecosystems, behavior and genetic analyses
of invertebrate species, salt marshes, sea grasses, mangroves, oyster reef, deep
sea and coral reef ecosystems, the use of underwater drones in the deep sea,
biochemistry, cell physiology, fish biology, and species distribution modeling.
Molecular Biology and Genetics of Marine Animals topics focus on microbial
ecology, biogeochemistry, carbon fluxes involved in photosynthesis, biological
oceanography and marine biotechnology, the use of molecular tools to address
basic questions in marine systems, and genetic projects on sharks, bony fish and
crabs. Coastal and Estuarine Physical Processes topics focus on shallow water
and coastal physical oceanography using a combination of observations, numerical
models and theoretical analyses; lagoon-ocean exchanges in tidal and wave-driven
flows, stratified turbulence, boundary layer flows over coral reefs, and
physical-biological interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.