* 2051355
* Collaborative Research: Coupled Explicit Thermodynamics of Plasticity - An Innovative Model for Twinning Crystals
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Curt Bronkhorst, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2024
* USD 319,149.00

Most metallic materials are polycrystalline in nature and behave as aggregate
composites of single crystals as the basic building block. Metallic materials
generally deform elastically by atomic bond distortion or plastically by atomic
bond rearrangement. Plastic deformation takes place by the mechanisms of
dislocation motion and deformation twinning. Dislocations are atom sized
features which move by applied stress and have been relatively well studied and
are described by many advanced theories. Deformation twins are single crystal
sized features and are not well understood or represented by theories of
deformation. This award supports fundamental study of deformation twinning and
overcoming limitations to modeling of this plasticity mechanism. The new
knowledge and computational capability will have a broad range of applications
to advanced manufacturing, structure survivability, and transportation. In
addition, the project will support the education of graduate and undergraduate
students in the areas of computational micromechanics, materials science, and
crystal plasticity. The collaborative nature of the award will also afford the
students the opportunity to engage across the two
campuses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plasticity in metallic materials is mediated by
both dislocation slip and deformation twinning. The disparity in characteristic
length between the two mechanisms is a limitation to crystal plasticity finite
element simulation of polycrystals as deformation twins cannot be represented by
volume average. The objective of this project is to develop a computational
framework for the explicit representation of deformation twins based upon an
embedded weak discontinuity technique. The embedded weak discontinuity is driven
by single crystal theory which accounts for twin nucleation, propagation, and
growth within a consistent thermodynamic and physical basis. Dislocation slip
will also be represented with a thermally activated based theory and will allow
slip to occur in both twinned and untwinned regions. The interaction of
dislocations with the twin boundaries will also be modelled during the twin
growth phase. This project will focus upon the model material of high-purity
titanium. Validation experiments will be conducted on large grain samples to
allow for detailed characterization. These deformation experiments will be
conducted at different initial temperatures and sample temperatures will be
measured during deformation to evaluate the model prediction of the Taylor-
Quinney factor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.