* 2051568
* Robust Persistence and Permanence in Biological Interaction Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Gheorghe Craciun, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

Persistence and permanence refer to the capacity of a system to maintain all its
variables within fixed limits in a robust way. The phenomenon is the focus of
much modern biological and biomedical research, and is found at all scales, from
the molecular and cellular, to tissues, organisms, populations, and ecosystems.
For example, at the cellular level, persistence in gene and protein networks
plays a key role in the establishment of homeostasis, which is the ability of
the cell to regulate key variables, so that internal conditions remain
relatively constant. Persistence at the population-dynamics level plays a role,
for example, in the spread of infectious disease. This project aims to develop
new mathematical methods and computational algorithms for analyzing persistence.
This will allow biologists and biomedical scientists to better investigate
persistence properties of diverse biological networks of interest. A more
complete characterization of persistent systems will improve our understanding
of the conditions that allow an infectious disease to become endemic and of the
changes that may drive it to extinction. The project involves training of
undergraduate and graduate students through involvement in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Persistence is one of the most important features
of biological interaction networks. Understanding the role played by specific
biological interactions (for example the role of a signaling pathway in a cell,
or the effect of introducing a foreign species in an ecosystem) can be
challenging due to positive and negative feedbacks, nonlinear interactions, and
other complex signaling between the nodes of the network. These challenges are
due to the inherent complexity of the dynamics of nonlinear systems. This
project will analyze persistence as a fundamental theoretical concept that
traverses levels of biological complexity and will develop mathematical and
computational tools to understand persistence in general biological interaction
networks. The project will especially focus on population dynamics models, with
the aim to provide mathematical and computational tools for drawing precise
connections between the structure of the network of interactions between
populations and the persistence properties of its associated dynamical
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.