* 2051931
* SBIR Phase II:  A single-cell-interaction platform for accelerating discovery of bispecific antibodies
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2025
* George Wu, Amberstone Biosciences, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alastair Monk
* 03/31/2025
* USD 1,549,976.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to accelerate development of
immunotherapeutics and make them broadly available and affordable to patients in
need. Immunotherapeutics, which work by engaging the immune system to tackle
diseases, have demonstrated tremendous potential to cure, or improve quality-of-
life of patients with cancer, autoimmunity, or other disorders. Unfortunately,
only a handful of these treatments are currently available. Furthermore,
immunotherapeutics are costly and unaffordable for the healthcare system and
patients including the disadvantaged populations. These challenges can be
attributed to the costly and inefficient therapeutic discovery processes with
conventional drug screening platforms. This project aims to develop a high-
throughput, single-cell based functional screening technology that can enable
rapid discovery of many immunotherapeutics, specifically bispecific antibodies
(“BsAbs”), to treat a broad range of debilitating diseases, and therefore can
make significant and broad societal impact. Meanwhile, the BsAb market is in its
early exponential growth phase and will reach $10 billion global sales in the
next few years. The proposed technology will be quickly deployed to enable
pharmaceutical and biotechnology clients to identify their therapeutic leads
with unprecedentedly rapid turnaround and high success rate (commercial
value).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to further develop,
optimize and launch the first dedicated commercial platform for functional
discovery of bispecific antibodies (“BsAbs”). The conventional trial-and-error
approach, in which BsAbs are empirically designed and then must be evaluated
individually for their functionality, is tedious, time-consuming, and expensive.
The proposed technology represents a new paradigm in BsAb discovery by employing
an ultra-high throughput, single cell-based functional screening, enabling
efficient discovery of rare functional BsAbs with differentiable properties. The
objectives of this project are to develop, optimize and quality control (QC) the
entire platform workflow including upstream BsAb library and reporter cell
preparations, midstream droplet assay and sorting, and downstream target
validation and characterization. By the conclusion of this study, a robust and
streamlined system will be ready for commercial launch, enabling pharmaceutical
company partners to discover new BsAb immunotherapeutics. This project will
result in new tools and methods in single-cell therapeutic discovery and make
significant intellectual contributions including complex cell library
construction, multiplexed reporters, and potentially new therapeutic candidates.
Furthermore, the unique ability to interrogate many variables in a combinatory
and high throughput fashion can lead to new insights of the modes of action and
inform future design of immunotherapeutics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.