* 2051235
* Collaborative Research: Processes and Consequences of Somatic Mutation Accumulation in Plants
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Mitchell Cruzan, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2024
* USD 863,278.00

This project will address the long-standing question of whether mutations during
stem growth (somatic mutations) in plants undergo natural selection within the
adult plant, are passed to offspring, and affect the fitness of those offspring.
Mutation is the ultimate source of variation for evolution and adaptation, but
unless a mutation is inherited in the next generation, it will not affect
evolution. In animals, only mutations that occur during the development of the
sperm and egg are heritable. However, plants differ from animals, because they
can accumulate additional somatic mutations. Despite this extra source of
genetic variation in plants, overall mutation rates are similar between plants
and animals. One potential explanation for this paradox is that somatic
mutations are filtered by natural selection as plants grow. This process is
predicted to remove harmful mutations and to retain beneficial ones, which could
affect plant vigor in subsequent generations. Using the yellow monkeyflower
(Mimulus guttatus), this project will provide the first comprehensive tests of
this filtering process. The results from this project will also have important
applications for the fields of plant breeding, agriculture, and conservation
biology. Additionally, this project will involve high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students in hands-on research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite
the potential for somatic mutations to generate novel genetic variation in plant
populations, their role in plant evolution remains almost entirely unexplored.
Preliminary findings demonstrate that individual stems can possess unique
complements of somatic variants, and that somatic mutations can have substantial
effects on seedling vigor. Moreover, models predict the maintenance of moderate
numbers and constant turnover of somatic mutations as stems grow. This project
will test the assumptions and predictions of these models by: i) examining the
distribution of shared somatic mutations in reproductive and vegetative tissues,
ii) estimating rates of mutation turnover under high and low salinity stress,
iii) identifying the genomic effects associated with the appearance of
beneficial mutations, and iv) evaluating the consequences of somatic mutations
on seedling vigor. Genomic sequencing will allow somatic mutations to be tracked
through time along individual stems to estimate rates of turnover and to reveal
the presence of beneficial mutations. Finally, this project will test the
potential for somatic mutations to contribute to adaptive evolution by
contrasting the responses to stress in selection lines propagated by different
mating strategies. The outcomes of this work will reveal the genomic and
phenotypic consequences of somatic mutations in plants and will improve our
understanding of plant evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.