* 2051636
* Fatty Acid Amide Hydrolases and Chemical Communication in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Kent Chapman, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,013,884.00

Plants use small molecules as signals to synchronize their growth, development
and responses to their environment. This project seeks to understand how an
evolutionarily-conserved group of plant enzymes utilizes chemical signals to
regulate growth and to influence their microbial environment. Specific research
aims include the discovery of new enzymes and their substrate molecules that act
as communication signals. Broader applications of this research may offer new
strategies to enhance agricultural outputs by manipulating plant-microbe
interactions in crop and soil systems. In addition, the proposed research
activities are integrated with undergraduate training opportunities through a
research course at the University of North Texas, a large minority-serving,
public university. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three-dimensional structure of the
Arabidopsis fatty acid amide hydrolase (AtFAAH) complexed with a diverse range
of acylamide substrates helped to identify key residues involved in substrate
interactions. By comparing FAAH sequences from 87 plant species, conserved
differences in these key residues in the binding pocket revealed two distinct
groups of FAAHs, expanding further the types of small molecule substrates that
might be recognized by these enzymes. Based on these new, structure-driven
inferences, and the demonstrated promiscuity of AtFAAH (group I), this proposal
will investigate the role of FAAH proteins more broadly in the interaction of
plants with their microbial environment and in the internal modulation of plant
growth. The overarching hypothesis is that FAAH acts in an axis of communication
through hydrolysis of small molecule acylamides to both surveil the biotic
environment and adjust plant growth and development. The hypothesis will be
tested in two plant species with multiple FAAH genes and with known microbial
interactions that involve FAAH substrates through three aims. 1) Characterize
the effects of FAAH suppression on plant growth and microbiomes of both G.
hirsutum and M. truncatula. 2) Evaluate the metabolite changes in FAAH-altered
plants through metabolomics platforms. 3) Examine substrate ranges for group I
and group II FAAH through ex vivo lipidomics analysis and in vitro enzyme
assays. The objectives of this research proposal will be integrated more broadly
with training opportunities for 32 undergraduate students through two offerings
of a classroom undergraduate research experience (CURE) at the University of
North Texas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.