* 2051935
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Uncovering Native-Lived Colonialism in Old Harbor, Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Ben Fitzhugh, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 02/28/2023
* USD 55,339.00

This dissertation research examines how the Indigenous Sugpiaq (i.e., Alutiiq)
people of the Kodiak archipelago, Alaska, experienced contact with Russian
colonists and fur traders from the 1780s to 1860s. Colonialism brought
unprecedented challenges to Sugpiaq communities, including violence, epidemic
disease, forced labor, resettlement and religious conversion. This project
brings together data from archaeological excavation and analysis of two
colonial-period Sugpiaq village sites with oral history and archival records to
produce a fuller picture of Sugpiaq life during the Russian colonial period. The
project involves collaboration with the modern Sugpiaq community in Old Harbor
to co-produce knowledge about the past, providing archaeological field and
laboratory training for graduate students and Old Harbor youth through an
internship program, an archaeology camp, and curriculum development with the Old
Harbor school. These initiatives will increase the participation of Alaska
Native students in archaeology and enhance the Old Harbor community’s capacity
to document and care for their cultural heritage. The work will advance
archaeological knowledge of Alaska Native lives during the colonial period and
explore the potential of community-based practices in anthropological
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project employs archival, archaeological,
and ethnographic methods to reconstruct nineteenth-century Sugpiaq lifeways.
Archival research focuses on Russian American Company documents, which provide
data on trade and demography. Limited excavation at two sites—Ing’yug and
Nuniaq—will focus on middens and houses, building upon previous research by the
PI team. Site components will be dated using historic beads and ceramics;
artifacts, flora, and fauna will be analyzed to reconstruct household activities
and social organization. Finally, semi-structured ethnographic interviews with
Old Harbor Elders will provide information on long-term use of the landscape,
including subsistence practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.