* 2051220
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Endocrine disruptors and developmental programming in humans
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Claudia Valeggia, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2023
* USD 25,200.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the role of the
natural and cultural environments in early life growth and development is
important for advancing knowledge about human biological variation and
plasticity. This doctoral dissertation project utilizes a biocultural framework
to investigate early life exposure to endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs),
which may have longer-term consequences for human physiological function. The
investigator is examining the impacts of EDC exposure on infant hormonal
profiles, adding to an understanding of global and temporal patterns in exposure
to EDCs as well as the sensitivity of the developing endocrine system to EDCs.
The project provides training in a STEM field to a female graduate student and
involves outreach in a local community. The researcher is also creating
informational reports to deliver to stakeholders and is collaborating with local
organizations to generate recommendations for policy change based on the results
of the study. The project also includes science outreach to middle school
students and the general public through various science communication
initiatives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary aim of this study is to quantify
the effect of EDC exposure on infant hormonal profiles in different
environments. Using a novel, nontargeted metabolomics approach, the investigator
is quantifying EDC exposures across three biological matrices and two
environmental sampling methods from mother-infant dyads. The investigator is
drawing upon theoretical frameworks employed in biocultural research to
understand and interpret the impacts of EDC exposure. The project builds on the
Developmental Origins of Health and Disease Hypothesis by investigating the
sensitivity of the developing endocrine system to EDCs using hormonal and
exposure profiles. From an Evolutionary Medicine perspective, the project also
addresses whether current sources and levels of EDCs overwhelm evolved defenses
to environmental exposures, creating an evolutionary mismatch. Incorporating the
concept of Locally Situated Biologies, the project includes collection of
qualitative data to contextualize how patterns of exposure to EDCs as well as
their health consequences are influenced by aspects of the local
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.