* 2051254
* Acquisition and Upgrade of Instrumentation for Noble Gas Geochronology and Thermochronology
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2023
* Kip Hodges, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 05/31/2023
* USD 496,592.00

This award will result in the installation and commissioning of new mass
spectrometry instruments that will greatly enhance the analytical capabilities
of the Group 18 Laboratories at Arizona State University (ASU). These
capabilities will be used predominantly to develop an enhanced understanding of
a variety of geoscience processes, especially the evolution of major fault
zones, the topographic evolution of mountain ranges, and the depositional
history of active and ancient sedimentary basins. This instrumentation will
enable state-of-the-art dating of geologic materials with extremely high spatial
resolution and precision. In addition to supporting ASU geoscience research, the
investigators are dedicated to making these instruments available for the
support of research projects from external, federally funded research by
scientists at other universities and research facilities. All of the work
supported by these instruments will promote the advancement of geoscience in the
United States, in particularly through studies of topics related to energy and
strategic mineral resource development and natural hazards. Through the
associated development of freely available, web-based tutorials based on the
design, building, and commissioning of these instruments for the purpose of
training future laboratory technicians, we hope this project will have lasting
impact on geoscience research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the
acquisition of a new, multicollector, noble gas mass spectrometer (Isotopx
NGX-600) that will be incorporated into an ultraviolet laser ablation microprobe
(UVLAMP) analytical system. This system will be unusually capable for UVLAMP
work, which will permit us to develop improved mircoanalytical protocols for
40Ar/39Ar geochronologic studies of unusually young samples with very high
spatial resolution. The project also involves an electronics and software
upgrade of an existing GV Instruments Helix SFT to enable rapid throughput laser
ablation (U-Th)/He dating of detrital minerals. Together these instruments will
accelerate and improve our geoscience research output, will allow us to serve a
larger number of external users, and will expand the types of studies that we
can accommodate. We will take advantage of the acquisition part of this project
to develop an educational program specifically aimed at graduate students
nationwide, with the goal of providing them with a sense of the complexity of
this endeavor and a better understanding of the instrumentation side of
geochronology and thermochronology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.