* 2051343
* LTREB: Thirty-Four Years of Tidal Marsh Response to Environmental Change
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2026
* J. Patrick Megonigal, Smithsonian Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Robyn Smyth
* 02/28/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Coastal wetlands are some of the most productive ecosystems on Earth, and are
critical transition zones between terrestrial and marine habitats. Salt marshes,
hotspots of biological activity, have a remarkable ability to sustain
themselves, largely due to their vegetation, and maintain coastlines as sea
level changes. However, the annual loss of thousands of hectares of low-lying
coastal wetlands to open water each year threatens fisheries, wildlife habitat,
water quality, soil carbon stocks, and adjacent human infrastructure. The
objective of this project is to learn how coastal wetlands, salt marshes in
particular, will respond to intensifying environmental change. This project
plans to extend experiments examining the influence of rising atmospheric CO2,
nutrient pollution, invasive species, and sea level rise on the structure and
persistence of salt marsh vegetation. It aims to take advantage of an
unparalleled thirty-four year record of plant, microbe and soil responses to
global change to identify the most important factors for marsh survival. These
results should be relatable to other coastal ecosystems, and are likely to
improve predictions of future marsh loss as well as inform management strategies
for maintaining wetlands. Data from the project will be incorporated into
undergraduate classes at two institutions, undergraduates will assist with data
collection and use data from the project for senior theses, and the general
public will be given tours of research site and given the opportunity to
participate in citizen science initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
includes three complementary, long-term field experiments that
manipulate&lt;br/&gt;atmospheric CO2 and N enrichment in different plant
communities, that leverage the inter-annual variability in other critical
factors such as sea level, salinity and precipitation. The team plans to test
the hypothesis that sea level rise, as the ultimate driver of change in coastal
wetlands, will cause the two plant species with the highest flood tolerance
(native sedge and invasive Phragmites australis) to replace those with lower
flood tolerance (C4 grasses) over the next decade. Because the sedge and
Phragmites also respond strongly to elevated CO2, the team predicts that plant
community composition will initially shift and increase the ecosystem-scale CO2
response, but it will ultimately decline due to increasing flooding stress. The
marsh is expected to cross a threshold in the next decade as rates of relative
sea level rise accelerate to the point that the marsh becomes unstable due to
declining productivity. However, the areas dominated by Phragmites, particularly
plots with added N, yield the greatest productivity on the marsh, and have the
best chance to keep up with accelerating sea level. Finally, the team
hypothesizes that an increase in methane emissions expected with increased
flooding will be offset initially by higher rates of rhizosphere methane
oxidation from the flood-tolerant sedge. The results from this experiment can
continue to inform models and global change syntheses. The site and extensive
dataset are used as a hands-on case study in ecology courses at Villanova
University and Bryn Mawr College. This project plans to train researchers at all
levels, to engage the public in the long-term and forward-looking science that
arises from this LTREB site, and to promote the application of this basic
science to support coastal wetland protection, conservation, and
restoration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.