* 2051059
* REU Site: Lasers and Optics
* MPS,PHY
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Cornelis Uiterwaal, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 02/29/2024
* USD 310,555.00

This project is jointly funded by the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) and the Department of Defense in partnership with
the NSF REU program.

The Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site "Lasers and Optics" at
the University of Nebraska - Lincoln (UNL) offers research in physics,
chemistry, and engineering, with a specific focus on the use of lasers and
optics. Each summer in the period of 2021â€“2023, eight REU participants will have
a 10-week, first-hand research experience. Students will conduct research under
the direct supervision of faculty who are established experts in their fields.
Recruitment focuses on underrepresented groups in physics, chemistry, and
engineering and on academic institutions with insufficient scientific research
resources. In addition to research in state-of-the-art laboratories, the program
includes student professional development and community outreach. Unique to this
site, suitable student projects will be selected to create virtual or augmented
reality presentations for a general audience to stimulate public engagement with
science and technology. The first-hand research experience the REU students will
have gained will prepare them for scientific careers and strengthen the nation's
competitiveness on a global scale.

With a specific focus on research supported by lasers and optics, this REU Site
offers research in physics, chemistry, and engineering. A team of eight
scientific experts will mentor students in a broad range of topical research
projects. This includes cutting-edge research with laser-driven multi-fiber
nanotip electron sources, imaging of femtosecond molecular dynamics, generation
of femtosecond X-ray pulses, spectroscopy, metamaterials for photonic and
optical applications, the propagation of laser pulses in liquids, programmable
spatial light modulation, and femtosecond laser surface processing. Students
will also create virtual and augmented reality projects. This prepares them for
a future in which these novel tools will be used to do research and present data
and thus contribute to the national scientific workforce's global
competitiveness. Publications co-authored by REU students, their poster
presentations, and their talks will advance and spread knowledge in this broad
field of research and applications. The project also includes workshops for
professional preparation and development, including preparation for graduate
school.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.