* 2051226
* Constructing Race-Specific Driving Patterns to Address Racial Profiling
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Danielle Wallace, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 03/31/2024
* USD 430,000.00

While there is substantial evidence suggesting the presence of racial and ethnic
bias in police treatment of people of color throughout the United States, there
is little to no empirical evidence indicating that police profile people of
color for police contact. Identifying whether and the extent to which the police
are profiling people of color for traffic stops is notoriously difficult. This
lack of empirical evidence undermines efforts to correctly diagnose and
intervene in racially biased policing behavior. Further, in addition to the
negative experience(s) that minority groups have with police, when people feel
treated unjustly by the police, they lose their faith in law enforcementâ€™s
authority to fairly represent and administer the law. When this occurs,
individuals are less likely to obey the law. Therefore, when the police target
people of color for traffic stops, it feeds a cycle of distrust for both
parties, potential criminality, and stereotypes that have plagued societal
relations, policing and crime rates in the United States, for decades. In short,
it is absolutely essential to accurately measure racial profiling by the
police.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this research is to synthesize and
analyze a disparate suite of publicly available transportation data that
includes the Census Transportation Planning Products (CTPP), accident data, as
well as data from the National Household Travel Survey (NHTS) and its
oversamples to develop a methodological framework for constructing race-specific
driving patterns to address racial profiling of drivers by the police. The first
objective of this project focuses on the design of innovative methods to
integrate both geographic and transportation data with varying spatial and
temporal resolutions for resolving the denominator problem and creating a
generalizable framework for estimating racially motivated traffic stops. The
second objective focuses on measuring and establishing the validity of the
methods used to determine racial profiling by using open source policing data to
evaluate the racial and ethnic distribution of individuals who would be stopped
if the police were not racially biased while simultaneously accounting for
police activity in a location. The third objective focuses on the design of an
open-source distribution platform for the developed methods and redistributable
data, and made available through well-documented Python and R front ends to
facilitate the use, re-use and expansion of the methods and data used for this
project. When combined, these measurements, methods, and statistical models will
inform policymakers and law enforcement agencies about biased police practices
and provide a blueprint for improving outcomes and reducing the cycle of
distrust between the police and communities of color.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.