* 2051255
* RCN: Ecological and Evolutionary Effects of Extinction and Ecosystem Engineers (E6)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Cynthia Looy, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 08/31/2026
* USD 400,219.00

Ecosystem engineers are organisms that change the environment in which they
live, and can create or eliminate habitats for other taxa. Ecosystem engineers
therefore can be important drivers of local and regional diversity. Our own
species – humans – offer a powerful example. Humans have adopted behaviors that
have created, modified, and/or destroyed habitats used by a wide variety of
animals and plants. The effects of these activities are leading to dramatic
changes in the structure and function of ecosystems, and the current global
biodiversity crisis that has been termed the ‘6th mass extinction’. Thus, some
consequences of human activities are comparable to the environmental
perturbations associated with mass extinctions, whereas others may be creating
new ecological opportunities. A key question is therefore: what effect will
human ecosystem engineering behaviors have as we continue to modify the global
environment? This Research Coordination Network will bring together ecologists
and paleontologists to synthesize information on the effects of ecosystem
engineers in different kinds of biological systems at different times to develop
predictive models for how human activity is expected to affect ecosystems. The
researchers will also conduct outreach activities designed to increase diversity
in STEM fields using partnerships with local community colleges, an
undergraduate course taught concurrently at member institutions, and a
conference workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key to predicting the
effects our activities may lie in the past. Although humans are among the most
recently emerged ecosystem engineers with powerful effects, they are not the
first. The evolution of biological groups such as oxygenic photosynthesizing
cyanobacteria, marine animals capable of burrowing beneath the sediment surface,
a wide variety of reef-building organisms and land plants are all thought to
have had dramatic effects on global biodiversity. This Research Coordination
Network will synthesize existing data across nearly 600 million years of
evolutionary history to address the questions: 1) to what extent are the effects
of new ecosystem engineers on communities predictable? And, 2) to what extent do
we expect humans to continue to drive the 6th mass extinction, and/or create new
ecological and evolutionary opportunities? The E6 RCN will unite scientists from
the fields of paleobiology, geology, ecology, statistics, conservation, and
phylogenetics to contrast the ecological and evolutionary consequences of
ecosystem engineers. Activities will include twice yearly workshops and training
of graduate students, postdocs, and faculty. In partnership with the University
of California Museum of Paleontology, researchers will develop and run a
paleobotany and paleoclimatology lab for Bay Area community college students. An
interdisciplinary course on Extinction and Ecosystem engineers will be taught
concurrently at participant institutions, and a workshop on approaches for
studying ecosystem engineers and community ecology at large spatial and temporal
scales will be developed for national and international
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.