* 2051502
* Empowering Engineering Scholar-Activists through Community-driven Research Experiences
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2025
* Maura Borrego, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 05/31/2025
* USD 473,913.00

Despite efforts to advance diversity and inclusion resources on college
campuses, engineering culture remains a chilly climate for students with
marginalized identities. While prior studies have focused on investigating the
experience of engineering students from underrepresented populations, they
largely ignore students at the intersection of multiple marginalized identities
and they often lack significant action to help create more inclusive
environments. This project will take the next step to move beyond merely
describing the experiences of marginalized engineering students. The ultimate
goal of this work will be to change engineering culture by growing a
collaborative, student-driven research community of underrepresented engineering
students and allies. This community of scholar-activists will employ their
scholarship on marginalized engineering student populations to advocate for
personal and institutional change. Students will read and discuss relevant
engineering education and sociology literature, reflect on their own experiences
and actions, engage with activists across campus, conduct their own research on
engineers from marginalized groups, and lead future community outreach and
organization efforts. This project aligns with the Broadening Participation in
Engineering (BPE) program to enhance the diversity and inclusion of
underrepresented groups in engineering, particularly in its innovative approach
to creating inclusive research communities that will improve retention of
students from underrepresented groups and that can be replicated in other
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the pursuit to develop scholar-activists among
students historically marginalized in engineering, this project will engage
students in a vibrant research community where they are supported in pursuing
their own undergraduate and graduate research projects for and about broadening
participation in engineering. Key components of the project will include a
research group that provides constructive feedback and support of student-
initiated qualitative research, a network of faculty and graduate researcher
mentors, journal clubs with an open invitation for marginalized students and
allies to read and discuss the literature on BPE, and opportunities for all
engineering faculty to learn inclusive practices. Our theoretical stance will
follow the tenets of critical theory: (1) We will center the voices of the
students in the research by engaging them as researchers. (2) We will value
lived experience as an important qualification for doing this research. (3) We
will empower the students leading the research, which will strengthen their
social identities and potentially their activist identities. (4) We will
integrate research and action and are prepared to deal with the inherent
contradictions. To enact this critical approach and develop scholar-activists,
we will use resistance and social justice literature from within and beyond
engineering education. The overall model of creating a student-centered research
community around marginalized engineers is potentially transformative and has
potential for adoption at other institutions and for other engineering student
populations. This project will train marginalized engineering students to build
community wherever they go next. Additionally, this project is likely to improve
climate and retention by creating additional (and increasing visibility of) safe
spaces for marginalized engineering students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.