* 2051002
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary, Multiscale Materials Modeling (I3M)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Joel Fried, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2024
* USD 380,083.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site supports the training of
9 undergraduate students (fellows) each summer from 2021 to 2023 at the
University of Louisville in Louisville, KY. Students will participate in a
10-week program that focuses on developing their skills as researchers though
training in research ethics, data collection and analysis, and reproducibility
of scientific results. The theme of the REU site is Interdisciplinary Multiscale
Materials Modeling (I3M) which combines concepts in chemistry, physics, biology,
materials science, engineering, mathematics, and computational sciences with the
goal of better understanding the origins of specific material properties on size
scales from single molecules to macroscopic devices. Fellows will work as
researchers with faculty mentors who all currently supervise active research
teams in I3M thematic areas. During the program, fellows will participate in
several professional development activities to advance competence through team-
building experiences, a professional seminar series, a public poster symposium,
and a field trip to a national laboratory. The I3M program will improve
students’ communication skills, grow networks of research colleagues, and
develop the students’ awareness of contemporary issues in research. The
scientific/engineering knowledge and professional skills gained by fellows
during the 10-week program will promote the growth of a more well-informed,
well-trained, and diverse workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team of 18 faculty
mentors have developed 16 projects for REU fellows that cover a wide range of
scientific topics, applications, and methods. Several projects include both
computational and experimental aspects. Projects topics include but are not
limited to predicting biomimetic polymer properties, developing empirical models
for colloidal self-assembly, probing interactions between viral particles and
medical devices, improving models of cancer growth and drug transport,
discovering new electrocatalysts, and non-invasively diagnosing coronary artery
disease. Models and methods span several orders of magnitude in time and space
and utilize density functional theory, molecular dynamics, Monte Carlo,
computational fluid dynamics, and continuum models. Non-research activities will
give fellows a wider perspective on what it means to be a professional scientist
or engineer through training in ethics, accurate data recording, and reliable
and reproducible methods. The I3M REU site emphasizes the recruitment and
training of diverse cohorts of student fellows who represent the country at
large while promoting the advancement of historically underrepresented groups
and marginalized students. Fellows will graduate the program with the skills and
drive to become future leaders in the field of materials science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Division
of Engineering Education and Centers (Directorate for Engineering), and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.