* 2051387
* I-Corps:  Transimpedance amplifier (TIA) for sensing systems that converts sensor current to voltage and amplifies the signal
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2021
* Sylvia Thomas, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of small, portable technology for medical devices to improve the
quality of life for patients. Current point-of-care technology in healthcare is
often cumbersome, requiring repeated charging, large area/capacity, and many
device components. The proposed technology reduces the number of device
components, uses less power, and is lightweight while enhancing the measurement
sensitivity. The initial proposed application is to measure changing glucose
levels for diabetic patients. In addition, this design may be used for other
sensing applications, such as disease tracking and other healthcare monitoring,
the internet of things, wearable electronics, RF transceivers, photodetectors,
military and space applications, electro-encephalograms (EEG), microgyroscopes,
biohybrid robotics, and electro-cardiographs (ECG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of integrative circuitry that may
boost the response signal of devices requiring low power and experiencing low
noise or interference. Based on technical models, simulations, and biosensing
input data, the designs are expected to provide more accurate device responses,
exhibit low input impedance, low input-referred noise current, low power
consumption, low noise, high transimpedance gain, and operate at low voltage
compared with current market integrated circuits for monitoring systems. For
example, this technology integrates a signal amplification device
(transimpedance amplifier, TIA) that will convert the change of glucose levels
to a more accurate measurable signal. In addition, this device may be used for
many different sensing applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.