* 2051710
* Collaborative Research: Life cycle evolution in Rotifera: The influence of sexual reproduction on contemporary systematics of Monogononta
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2025
* Robert Wallace, Ripon College
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 03/31/2025
* USD 112,054.00

Rotifers are tiny (â‰¤2 mm) invertebrate animals that can be found anywhere there
is liquid water. For instance, they inhabit shallow sea water, lakes, ponds,
streams, irrigation ditches, ephemeral basins in deserts, meltwater puddles on
glaciers, and thin layers of water on soils and plants. Rotifers play vital
roles in ecological systems as both predators and prey, and the nutrients they
contain are passed up the food chain to insects and fish. Scientists study
rotifers to better understand aging, aquaculture, ecology, development, and the
evolution of reproductive modes. A fascinating feature of rotifers are their
complex life cycles: some alternate generations, whereas others primarily
reproduce by creating clones of themselves. This work will use genetic analyses
and comparisons of anatomy that rely on advanced microscopic imaging to
determine the evolutionary history of a major group of rotifers and examine how
life cycles and reproductive mode changed as the group evolved. Many species
from diverse habitats will be considered, and the research will also result in
better characterization of the life cycles of species that are poorly known. As
part of the project, educational workshops and museum displays will be produced,
contributions will be made to online databases, and a scientific symposium will
be held at a national meeting. Further, a postdoctoral scientist, along with
graduate, undergraduate, and high school students, will be trained to conduct
studies of this diverse animal group. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to build a comprehensive phylogeny of rotifers with a focus on the
Class Monogononta, the most speciose and diverse lineage in the phylum. This
research will provide a framework for testing how the diversification of the
group is associated with the origins of different reproductive modes. The
project has three aims. (1) It will produce a comprehensive phylogeny of
rotifers using molecular sequence data and morphology; the morphological studies
will utilize conventional electron microscopy, focused ion-beam scanning
electron microscopy, atomic force microscopy, and confocal laser scanning
microscopy; the morphology of at least 100 species representing nearly 90% of
family diversity will be considered. (2) It will use the phylogeny and ancestral
state reconstruction methods to investigate questions concerning the evolution
of reproductive traits in rotifers. In particular, (a) how did the maternal
provisioning of nutrients (i.e., matrotrophy) and internal brooding evolve from
egg-laying species? (b) how did the ability to produce both mitotic and meiotic
ova in a single animal evolve from cyclical parthenogenesis? (c) do eggshells
produced by species with different reproductive modes show similarities in
morphology, chemistry, and mechanical properties, and are these correlated with
life history traits? And (d) has the small size of certain life cycle stages
evolved more than once? (3) The phylogeny will also be used to identify
monophyletic groups, present a predictive classification of rotifers, revise or
produce new diagnoses for taxa above the genus level, and produce species keys.
Additionally, because Rotifera is the most diverse clade (&gt;2000 species) and
the only gonochoristic group within the larger lineage Gnathifera (~3575 species
from five higher taxa: Chaetognatha, Gnathostomulida, Micrognathozoa, Rotifera,
Acanthocephala), rotifers are ideal candidates to provide insights into
gnathiferan evolution and help answer questions about the evolution of
reproductive diversity, jaws (e.g., Gnathifera), and parasitism (e.g.,
Acanthocephala).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.