* 2051072
* REU Site: Fostering Inclusive Excellence at the Texas A&amp;M Cyclotron Institute
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2025
* Mike Youngs, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 02/28/2025
* USD 447,698.00

Uncovering the mysteries of how the world works and inspiring and educating the
next generation of students to continue to pursue elucidating nature's secrets
is the goal of this program. This award supports the renewal of the Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site in nuclear science at Texas A&amp;M
University. The site will support ten undergraduates per year in ten weeks of
research during the summer months. Involvement in research at the undergraduate
level is a critical component in increasing the numbers and preparation of
students entering graduate programs and STEM careers. This site primarily
targets students who lack opportunities to research in nuclear science at their
home institutions. However, all students are considered for
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The student research projects are at the
leading edge of nuclear science, including sub-fields such as nuclear
astrophysics, weak interactions, nuclear dynamics and thermodynamics, nuclear
structure, the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC), atomic ionization, and
radiation effects. Students will complete projects that can primarily be
described as theoretical, experimental, or analytical. However, all students
will learn about each research aspect during the program. The Cyclotron
Institute is a Department of Energy (DOE) Nuclear Physics Center of Excellence.
The facilities include a K500 superconducting cyclotron, a K150 cyclotron, and
associated state-of the art detector systems. The Cyclotron Institute and the
physics department are also home base for involvement in experiments at other
facilities. The faculty are leading scientists in the field and have a history
of working with undergraduates in their research
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.