* 2051553
* Neural, Hormonal and Epigenetic Adaptations for Fatherhood
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* James Rilling, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2024
* USD 599,891.00

This project examines hormonal and neurobiological changes that human males may
experience during their transition to fatherhood, and whether these changes are
correlated with levels of attachment and caregiving. The research engages with
evolutionary theories about human life history and parental care to advance our
understanding of the role of human males in direct caregiving. By identifying
biological changes associated with fatherhood, this project can generate
hypotheses and potentially inform public health knowledge about parental
motivation and how this motivation varies across a range of circumstances. The
project also facilitates laboratory training and professional development of
multiple undergraduate researchers, including those from groups that are
underrepresented in STEM research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in bi-parental
non-human species suggests that males experience a number of biological changes
that prepare them for fatherhood. This project investigates whether human males
experience similar changes that prepare them for a caregiving role. The
researchers examine if and when hormone levels change with the transition to
fatherhood, and whether these changes are correlated with paternal involvement
and attachment during infancy. Levels of the hormones oxytocin, vasopressin and
testosterone are measured for expecting fathers (and non-father controls) at
multiple intervals until their infants reach 1 year of age, and parents report
on paternal involvement and attachment. The researchers also examine if and when
methylation of genes that code for oxytocin, vasopressin and androgen receptors
changes with the transition to fatherhood, and whether those changes are
correlated with paternal involvement and attachment. In addition, MRI and fMRI
scans are collected from participants pre- and post-natally to examine if
regional cerebral gray matter volume and neural responses to infant picture
stimuli change with the transition to fatherhood and if those changes are
correlated with paternal involvement and attachment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.