* 2051062
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Research Experience on Accelerated Deep Learning through A Hardware-Software Collaborative Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Hui Zhao, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 02/29/2024
* USD 398,684.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site Program at the
University of North Texas will enhance the knowledge and research skills of a
diverse cohort of undergraduate students through empowering, innovative, and
interdisciplinary research experiences in developing Deep Learning applications
and systems. The program aims to 1) expose undergraduate students to real-world
and cutting-edge research focused on accelerated deep learning through combined
hardware and software development; 2) encourage more undergraduate students to
continue their academic careers and seek graduate degrees in computer science,
computer engineering, and related disciplines; 3) develop research skills and
improve communication and collaborative skills in undergraduate students. The
emphasis of this program is on the interdisciplinary research experience for the
REU students to gain hardware-software codesign skills. REU students will be
mentored by experienced researchers in the area of AI/machine learning
algorithms, computer system and architecture, biomedical informatics and
computational life science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ten students will be hosted on
the University of North Texas campus each summer where they closely collaborate
with faculty and graduate students in performing innovative research that will
address the timely and critical problems in developing Deep Learning systems and
algorithms. Through their projects, the students will be able to observe the
connections and interactions between different disciplines involving hardware
and software. The REU students will also be formally trained in the process of
collaborative and responsible research including ethics, teamwork and
leadership. The program will also help the students to improve their
communication abilities and writing skills through activities such as oral
presentations and technical reports. Through this program, the students will be
empowered with research skills and experience to empower their journey to become
successful researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.