* 2051417
* SBIR Phase I:  Food Allergy Management Platform
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Javier Evelyn, ALERJE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 06/30/2022
* USD 255,331.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to help the 32 million people in the US
suffering from Food Allergy (FA). FA brings psychological, medical and financial
consequences for patients and their relatives. The proposed project aims to
leverage the latest advances on behavioral science and digital tools to create a
platform that supports the implementation of the newly FDA-approved Oral
Immunotherapy (OIT) treatments. OIT is a proactive approach that, contrary to
other reactive treatments, achieves better patient outcomes. The proposed
project will increase scientific understanding about FA through data collection.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project seeks to help FA patients and clinicians in the implementation of OIT
treatments. OIT has enormous potential to minimize the severity of an FA
reaction before it happens, even eliminating the eventual health risks and
inconvenient experiences compared to traditional treatments. Still, the
preliminary OIT experiences have shown limitations due to needs for
customization for each patient and data flow between patients and doctors. The
main objective of this research is to develop and validate a digital platform
that leverages behavioral science approaches and Machine Learning (ML) to
facilitate adherence to OIT treatments, dosing management, treatment
personalization, and patient-clinician communication. The specific work will
involve: 1) Developing, training and evaluating a series of proprietary ML
algorithms capable of providing new insights and predicting events; 2)
Developing and testing other software assets required for the completeness of
the platform (mobile app, HIPAA-compliant database and API to integrate with
3rd-party systems); and 3) validating the system in real experiences with FA
patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.