* 2051747
* Upgrade of an Isotope Ratio/Mass Spectrometer for Compound-Specific Isotope Analysis in Organic Biogeochemical Research
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Ann Ojeda, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 110,081.00

This award supports the upgrade of specialized instrumentation at Auburn
University that can help answer research questions about the sources,
transformations, and cycling of carbon-based compounds in the natural
environment. The upgrade will allow an existing isotope-ratio mass spectrometer
(IRMS) to perform carbon and hydrogen compound-specific isotope analysis (CSIA)
of organic molecules. The upgrade will boost cutting-edge research in
geosciences, biology, ecology, and engineering at Auburn. The upgrade will also
enable interdisciplinary collaborations across diverse research fields. For
example, CSIA can link isotope signatures to sources and transformations of
organic compounds in industrial and oil spills, which in turn, informs
remediation efforts. CSIA of organic molecules in the sediment and rock record
can help reconstruct Earthâ€™s past climate and help pinpoint regional and global
changes in vegetation in response to climate change. The upgrade will also have
broader impacts on Auburn and the larger scientific community in several ways.
First, the upgrade will enhance the infrastructure at Auburn, fostering new
connections between Auburn and other institutions in the southeast. In addition,
the instrument upgrade will support undergraduate and graduate thesis work,
providing students with technical knowledge and skills that are transferrable to
the workforce. Finally, the award supports an isotope workshop at Auburn
providing stipends for underrepresented students to acquire data using the
instrument and learn analytical and laboratory
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, Auburn will acquire a Thermo TRACE
gas chromatograph (GC) and key interface devices to configure an existing Thermo
Delta V Plus IRMS for CSIA. Together, these components will create a continuous
flow GC-IRMS system that combines the chromatographic separation of complex
mixtures via the GC with stable isotope measurements. Currently, the instrument
is configured with a Thermo Gasbench equipped to measure both carbon and oxygen
isotopes of carbonate rock samples. After the upgrade, the instrument will be
capable of both carbon and hydrogen CSIA for target analyses like hydrocarbons,
chlorinated hydrocarbons, fatty acid methyl esters, and similar compound
classes. Compound-specific isotope signatures will provide a level of detail not
attainable through traditional techniques or bulk isotopic measurements and
allow a wider range of analytical targets to support interdisciplinary research
supporting senior thesis at Auburn University. This award received co-funding
from the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR)
office.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.