* 2051257
* SBIR Phase I:  Rendering Malware Benign
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2021,02/28/2022
* Homayoon Tajalli, ONSYSTEM LOGIC, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 02/28/2022
* USD 254,421.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 1
project will result from providing organizations and software developers the
best available protection against harmful malware and application flaws in
completely standalone and air-gapped environments. In cybersecurity,
applications are now the new perimeter and have become the last frontier in
malware protection, which is where all current endpoint security products are
routinely turned off or otherwise bypassed by attackers. The Phase 1 project
focuses on stopping and/or detecting hidden malware regardless of how it gets
into an application or how it changes its behavior inside an application. The
Phase 1 project result overcomes the fundamental technical flaw in current
solutions – attempting to enforce least privilege mechanisms from outside
applications – by delivering a solution that operates within the application
where it can see and act upon malicious code. The solution will protect
individual data and corporate assets in all types of organizations, including
organizations running operational technology vulnerable to cyberattacks. Wide
adoption will boost application and endpoint security, significantly reducing
the worldwide problem posed by the continuing rise in successful malware
attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project seeks to address the core technical challenge associated with
the development of an enforcement engine for implementing all current least
privilege mechanisms on various operating systems inside applications. The
challenge is to construct both the algorithms and the engine to recognize and
protect against modern malware misusing the dynamic code privileges of
applications. As proof that this protection is needed is the near 100% incidence
of all recent, successful malware attacks that were all designed to take
advantage of this specific vulnerability of current antivirus software. The
first and most immediate application of this new technology, which is the
subject of the phase I project, is to define the use of dynamic code in each
application as a privilege, learn if and where within its code an application
uses this privilege, and enforce it once the behavior has been learned. The
outcomes from Phase 1 will result in a software solution that can produce in
real time a map of how any healthy program uses dynamic code and stop any
attempt by malware to subvert that process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.