* 2051011
* REU Site: Program in Chemical Biology
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* David Cliffel, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 04/30/2024
* USD 384,575.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Vanderbilt
University, located in Nashville, TN, will support the training of 10
undergraduate students for an immersive 10-week research experience during the
summers of 2021-2023. The program provides research opportunities in chemical
biology within the laboratories of seasoned Vanderbilt faculty mentors, as well
as exposure to new areas of research through interdisciplinary scientific
seminars. In an effort to prepare and support students for their future
scientific careers, a complementary professional development seminar series is
included in the summer research experience and covers essential topics such as
research ethics, safety training, abstract writing, and poster presentation
techniques. Seminars on applying to graduate school, seeking out funding
opportunities and a separate GRE preparation class are also available to
participants to help prepare them for post-secondary education opportunities.
Ultimately, this program aims to promote and train a diverse body of students
for careers in the scientific workforce by providing them with immersive
interdisciplinary research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Vanderbilt
chemical biology-themed REU program aims to recruit a diverse group of
undergraduate students who are majoring in chemistry, biochemistry and biology
for careers in trans-disciplinary chemical or biochemical research. Research
topics include proteomics, structural biology, chemical synthesis, and synthetic
biology. Diverse role models, including alumni and faculty, offer pictures of
success pursuing research directions that integrate human health and basic
science. Through personalized mentoring and an authentic research experience,
this program is designed to help students develop the understanding and tenacity
necessary for a career in cutting-edge chemical biology
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.