* 2051607
* STTR Phase I:  Nanocellulose-based Adjuvant for Reducing Herbicide Drift
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2022
* Joseph Batta-Mpouma, CELLUDOT LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 04/30/2022
* USD 275,913.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR)
Phase I project is in addressing the pressing problem of herbicide drift. For
years, farmers growing organic, non-genetically modified (non-GM) and specialty
crops have incurred crop damage and financial losses due to drift of volatile
herbicides, such as dicamba. The EPA estimates that up to 70 million pounds of
pesticides, including herbicides, are lost to the environment due to drift each
year. In 2017 alone, 3.6 million acres of soybeans were destroyed due to dicamba
drifting away from its site of application. This project addresses the problem
with a novel technology that reduces herbicide volatility and drift. This
technology will help farmers growing GM-crops who face litigation because they
spray drifting dicamba, and those who grow non-GM-crops and do not want drifted
dicamba to impact their produce. Agrochemical companies currently facing EPA
restrictions, product bans, and billions of dollars in lawsuits, can use this
technology to improve the application efficiency of their products. This
technology offers significant environmental benefits. Furthermore, beyond its
agricultural use, the bio-based formulation is a platform technology that may be
used to develop other applications from food to pharmaceuticals to
cosmetics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The innovation proposed in this STTR Phase I
project is a bio-based emulsion adjuvant, derived from renewable resources, with
the combined functionality of a drift control agent, buffering agent, and
surfactant, to reduce the volatility and off-target movement of herbicides, and
improve their efficacy. The proposed adjuvant offers encapsulating,
environmental and financial benefits relative to the state of practice. The
project has the following objectives to evaluate and demonstrate the technical
feasibility of the innovation: 1) develop and optimize the composition of the
formulation, 2) characterize properties important for its use in herbicide spray
mixtures, such as surface tension, thermal stability, fluid flow, water
conditioning and defoaming behavior, 3) conduct humidome tests and field trials
to validate the effectiveness of the formulation with respect to fine spray
droplets suspended in the air and herbicide activity against pigweed (Palmer
amaranth), using dicamba as the model herbicide, and 4) determine the
biodegradability profile of the formulation in soil and water environments and
its aquatic toxicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.