* 2051920
* I-Corps:  Soil-derived mycobacteria for the treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and other anxiety disorders
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Christopher Lowry, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of novel therapeutics for the treatment of mental health disorders,
specifically, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). While PTSD is most commonly
associated with military personnel, it is estimated that roughly 7-8% of
Americans will suffer from PTSD at some point in their lives resulting from
everyday trauma, such as car accidents and sexual trauma. Further, it is
anticipated there will be dramatic increases in the incidence of PTSD as a
result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The proposed therapeutics would be most
effective as part of an integrative approach to treating PTSD. The proposed
innovation is also a fit for the burgeoning complementary and alternative
medicine industry. This industry supplements the health needs of roughly 36% of
Americans and is estimated to reach $296 billion in global revenues by
2027.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development and
testing of novel strains of mycobacteria that may be incorporated into
nutraceuticals for public consumption. Mycobacteria have been shown to reduce
inflammation and modify the immune system of the brain. These characteristics of
mycobacteria have important implications for mental health. Specifically, it has
been shown that administration of heat-killed mycobacteria prior to stress
enhances stress resilience and prevents stress-induced exaggeration of
inflammation, spontaneous colitis, and anxiety in animal models. These effects
specifically address two of the main symptoms of PTSD: avoidance and alterations
in excitation or reactivity. These symptoms are associated with well-known
behaviors in individuals with PTSD, such as irritability, sleep problems,
difficulty concentrating, and avoiding experiences associated with
trauma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.