* 2051465
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effects of Food and Water on Movement and Gut Microbiome Diversity
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Amanda Fuchs, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 04/30/2024
* USD 17,987.00

Nonhuman primates employ different strategies to locate resources such as food
and water that support survival and reproduction. This doctoral dissertation
research project examines how wild Kinda baboons’ movement strategies vary
according to the distribution of resources in complex environments, and how
their dietary choices affect the distribution of bacteria in their guts. Results
from the study will provide important insights linking evolutionary strategies
to search for foodstuffs to physiological outcomes in a social primate. While
conducting the work, the doctoral student will participate in educational
science programs for under-served K-12 students and engage in public science
through scientific blogs and social media. Additionally, the project will
provide scientific training opportunities for diverse undergraduate students and
a U.S.-based graduate student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research investigates
how the distribution of key nutritional resources – food and water – affect how
baboons move through their environments. Research suggests that consuming
different dietary resources impacts primate gut microbiomes, the microorganisms
inhabiting the gut, which, in turn affect primate biology and health. This
research uses data drawn from individual baboons residing in natural settings to
complement scholarship that is based on environmental and climate proxies rather
than direct evidence of nutritional choices. It also adds an explicit focus on
water - a critical resource in dry environments and a source of gut bacteria -
to understand how diverse dietary choices among individual baboons relate to gut
health. The investigators will follow a habituated troop of Kinda baboons to
collect behavioral (e.g., diet and movement) and biological (e.g., baboon fecal
and water sample) data. Next, they will employ cutting-edge movement ecology
analyses (e.g., hidden Markov models) to test different hypotheses related to
baboon movement strategies. They will then quantify baboon microbiome diversity
and analyze its relationship to water microbiome diversity and pathogen levels
(e.g., E. coli and Giardia abundance).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.