* 2051577
* THE SCOPE AND SIGNIFICANCE OF TUNGSTEN ISOTOPE VARIATIONS: IMPLICATIONS FOR MANTLE EVOLUTION
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Katherine Bermingham, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2024
* USD 345,352.00

Tungsten isotopic variations have been documented in modern and ancient rocks
over the past decade, yet their role in constraining mantle evolution remains
debated. This is because their origin and mode of preservation in the mantle are
unclear. Tungsten isotopic compositions, however, could provide unparalleled
constraints on mantle evolution as tungsten is one of the few isotopic tracers
able to track the final stages of accretion, early planetary differentiation,
and potentially ongoing core-mantle interaction. To effectively utilize this
tracer, the scope of tungsten isotopic variations must be robustly identified
and incorporated into physical mantle evolution models. Our starting point is a
survey of the most ubiquitous rock type sampling the mantle: mid-ocean ridge
basalts. We will test hypotheses of the origin and preservation modes of
tungsten isotopic anomalies in the mantle by synthesizing new and existing
tungsten isotopic data with numerical models of thermochemical mantle
convection. The proposed integration of data, techniques, and interpretations is
novel and has the potential to significantly advance the understanding of mantle
evolution beyond the tungsten isotope community. Three additional broader
impacts planned. (1) Development of interdisciplinary partnerships by
coordinating early career scientists who are experts in different disciplines.
This includes support for a postdoctoral associate to conduct state-of-the-art
research. (2) Advancement of teaching and participation in science by providing
a structured research program for an undergraduate student at Rutgers University
facilitated by the Aresty Research Center for Undergraduates and diversity and
inclusion centers affiliated with the university. (3) Further development of the
planetary science research track at the Department of Earth and Planetary
Sciences, Rutgers University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the recent
discoveries of tungsten isotopic heterogeneity in ocean island basalts, it is
now necessary to understand if mid-ocean ridge basalts possess tungsten isotopic
variation and investigate what causes these variations. Using proven analytical
methods, we will measure high-precision tungsten isotopic compositions in
samples from compositional diverse mid-ocean ridges. This task will address the
issue that little research has been reported to define mantle reservoirs which
are purportedly normal for tungsten isotopic composition. To advance broader
scientific implications provided by tungsten isotopic studies to the community,
we will test the plausibility of the leading hypotheses of the origin of
tungsten isotopic anomalies in the mantle by integrating our new and existing
tungsten isotopic data with numerical models of thermochemical mantle
convection. These results are anticipated to have broad implications for our
understanding the dynamic evolution of our planet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.