* 2051014
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Paleontological and population genetics approaches for reconstructing hominin evolutionary history
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* David Strait, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 28,998.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation
project reconstructs evolutionary relationships among ancient populations of
Homo erectus, a pivotal human ancestor, using dental and skeletal data. The
project integrates paleontological and population genetics approaches for
reconstructing evolutionary history, thereby advancing knowledge about how
hominins, including our species, Homo sapiens, evolved. The project promotes
interdisciplinarity by using approaches typically used in the field of
bioarchaeology, increases diversity in the field of paleoanthropology by
supporting the scholarship of a female paleoanthropologist, and fosters
international research collaborations. The investigator conducts public and K-12
science outreach through a weblog about human evolution and through science
activities with middle and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Homo
erectus, represented in the hominin fossil record, is morphologically diverse
through both time and space. The current understanding of how populations of H.
erectus were related to each other is limited. Bony and dental anatomy provide
the primary basis for assessing evolutionary relationships between populations
in the fossil record, but the genetic basis of anatomical traits is not always
well understood. This research examines H. erectus temporal and geographic
patterns in the relationships among past H. erectus populations using
biodistance methods and comparative data. Matrices of dental and neurocranial
shape distances will be compared separately using Mantel tests to a matrix
describing the temporal, geographic, or genetic distances between
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.