* 2051550
* The First Billion Years of the Geodynamo
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Rory Cottrell, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 03/31/2024
* USD 465,000.00

Earth's magnetic field, generated in the liquid iron core, shields the
atmosphere from particles streaming from the Sun, known as the â€œsolar wind".
Without this shield, the atmosphere would have been eroded, and water would have
been lost, especially when Earth was young and solar winds were intense. Hence,
knowledge of Earth's earliest magnetic field can provide unique insight into the
evolution of our planet's core and atmosphere. Because water is essential to
life as we know it, this knowledge also bears on the origin of Earth's
habitability. The only known material that can accurately record this early
magnetic history is the mineral zircon, now found as tiny grains in younger
sedimentary rocks. Some of these zircons are remarkable because they contain
even smaller inclusions that can preserve signals of the ancient magnetic field
from billions of years ago. But because these zircons are so small - only a few
times thicker than a human hair - the measurement of their magnetism is
extremely challenging. The investigators have developed and applied new
techniques to characterize the nature of magnetic inclusions in zircons and to
retrieve their magnetic signals, using a host of highly sensitive instruments.
Their measurements indicate the presence of a magnetic field at least 4.2
billion years ago. These data indicate atmospheric shielding was in place. They
also place constraints on the physical conditions in the core that resulted in
the generation of a strong magnetic field. The investigators will fill gaps in
the magnetic field history, generating data from new zircon localities in
Western Australia, India and southern Africa. They will work with a team of
international collaborators spanning 6 countries in multidisciplinary laboratory
studies. The team will then use these new data to test the fidelity of the
magnetic history, and to further explore the implications for magnetic shielding
and Earth evolution. The work will support graduate and undergraduate students
who will receive broad training in the field and in multidisciplinary analyses,
and will include outreach to Rochester secondary schools through programs hosted
for instructors and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of the earliest
history of the geomagnetic field can provide key insight into our understanding
of the evolution of the core, atmosphere and Earth's habitability. The only
known materials that can be accurately dated and that are able to record this
history on the multi-hundred-of-million-year time scales required to advance our
understanding of these fundamental issues of Earth evolution are Eoarchean to
Hadean zircons bearing minute magnetic inclusions that are now found in younger
sedimentary units. However, the magnetic measurement of zircons, and
interrogations of their magnetizations to determine if they preserve primary
signals, are formidable technical challenges requiring a multidisciplinary
approach. The investigators have recently presented new paleomagnetic, electron
microscope, geochemical, and paleointensity data that indicate the presence of
primary magnetite inclusions in select zircons from the Jack Hills of Western
Australia. These new data further support that select Jack Hills zircons record
primary magnetic signals of the geodynamo, with a record extending back in time
to ~4.2 billion years ago. These analyses thus indicate that shielding of the
atmosphere by the magnetosphere was in place very early in Earth history. The
new analyses also suggest a strong magnetic field in the Late Hadean at ~4
billion years ago which could be a signal that chemical precipitation in the
core was powering the geodynamo. The team will use a paleomagnetic approach to
further test and fill gaps in the paleointensity record building on recent
discoveries of Eoarchean to Hadean detrital zircons at other global sites.
Specifically, they will generate records spanning hundreds-of-millions of years
from new localities in Western Australia, India and southern Africa. They will
work with a team of international collaborators spanning 6 countries in
multidisciplinary laboratory studies [including light and scanning electron
microscopy, focused ion beam slice and view and lift-outs, transmission electron
microscopy, magneto-optical Kerr effect measurements, ultra-sensitive
3-component direct current superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID)
magnetometry, scanning SQUID microscope magnetometry, sensitive high-resolution
ion microprobe (SHRIMP) analyses, and secondary-ion mass spectrometry (SIMS)].
The team will use these new data to test the internal fidelity of each record,
test consistency between records, and further explore the implications for
planetary magnetic shielding and chemical evolution of the core. The work will
support graduate and undergraduate students who will receive broad training in
multidisciplinary analyses. The work will contribute to Ph.D. and M.S. theses.
The investigators will continue outreach to Rochester secondary schools by
hosting programs for instructors and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.