* 2051851
* SBIR Phase I:  Advanced computational methods for forecasting multiple types of economic and social returns
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Dejan Duzevik, SIMPACT CO.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is providing social enterprises with software
that performs social-impact forecasting and tracking using machine learning,
computer simulation, and data visualization. These digital tools provide social
enterprises with better visibility into where their resources can be invested
for maximum impact. The adoption of quantitative data analysis has made
commercial enterprises more formidable, but these tools are slow in coming to
the $7 trillion world of non-profits, charitable foundations, international
development agencies, impact investors, and government agencies. The software
informs investment strategies by providing a quantitative estimate of impact-
per-dollar. The software will also track the ongoing social impact of each
resource allocation, enabling social enterprises to iteratively adapt and
improve the efficacy of their operations, and provide more accountability to
their funding sources. These software tools can help address some of the most
vexing societal concerns than span health, sustainability, poverty, and access
to education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project makes use of software data analysis tools including Agent
Based Modeling (ABM), machine learning (such as Gradient Boosted Machines and
Artificial Neural Networks), and Interactive Data Visualization. Agent Based
Modeling involves building a digital simulation of the target ecosystem,
capturing the essential actors and behaviors. For example, for the opioid
epidemic, this may be the addicts/drugs/doctors/pharma agents, along with their
attributes, histories, and interactions with each other. This modeling allows
simulation of intervention scenarios and quantification of outcomes. Machine
learning techniques, once trained and calibrated with past data on the target
ecosystem, provide forecasting and allow the exploration of what-if scenarios. A
bottom-up model is built for each target social issue, shared by relevant social
enterprises, and calibrated using their collective data and subject matter
experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.