* 2051826
* RUI: Investigating the pathways and regulation of lysosome-related organelle biogenesis.
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Greg Hermann, Lewis and Clark College
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 06/30/2024
* USD 549,879.00

The project will discover how intracellular compartments are formed during
embryonic development. Animal cells contain compartments called organelles that
often gives individual cells their specialized function. One of these
compartments, called a lysosome-related organelle (LRO), mediates important
activities, including the creation of body pigments, the storage of nutrients,
and signals for aging. This project will discover when these organelles are
first created during animal development, investigate how material is directed to
these compartments, and study how their number and size are regulated. Each
year, 30-40 undergraduates will be mentored in collaborative, investigative, and
original research as part of the project. The project will provide hands on
scientific training for a large and diverse group of students, most of who will
likely progress on to careers in science and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little is currently known about how the
trafficking pathways to LROs emerge during cellar differentiation, whether
endolysosomes, such as late endosomes or lysosomes, function in LRO protein
delivery, and how biogenesis pathways are regulated to control LRO number and
size. To investigate these processes, this project analyzes the biogenesis of
gut granules, LROs found in C. elegans intestinal cells. The research will use
genetic approaches to examine whether LRO biogenesis genes function in the
germline or embryo, and after determining when LRO proteins are first made
during development, evaluate their distribution relative to endosomal organelle
markers using quantitative fluorescence microscopy. In addition, whether gut
granule cargo is routed through endolysosomes will be using pulse chase and add-
back approaches, as well as live-cell fluorescence imaging of interactions
between endolysosomes and gut granules. When pathways directing LRO protein
trafficking are active will be determined by tracking gut granule cargo
following its targeted expression at different stages of development combined
with newly developed methods to potently disrupt the function of LRO biogenesis
proteins. Finally, a collection of C. elegans mutants with enlarged gut granules
will be assessed to identify potential regulators of LRO
homeostasis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.