* 2051800
* IUCRC Phase I University of Miami: Center for Accelerated Real Time Analytics (CARTA)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Mitsunori Ogihara, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 04/30/2024
* USD 308,000.00

CARTA (Center for Accelerated Real-time Analytics) is a multi-university
Industry-University Cooperative Research Center that started in 2018. As more
devices are deployed that produce real-time data, technologies beyond simply
storing and archiving future use data are in demand. CARTA aims at developing
such techniques by exploiting artificial intelligence and machine learning,
which would make an impact on a wide range of areas, including science,
engineering, medicine, marketing, and finances. University of Miami will join
CARTA as a new partner site (called “CARTA Miami”), support the mission of
CARTA, and expand the scope of research of CARTA.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
real-time analytics research at CARTA Miami will be focused on neuroscience,
signal processing, IoT, genetics, UAVs, and marketing. Initial research projects
will focus on a) using real-time EEG feedback from portable EEG systems to
produce music recommendations for controlling mood, b) combining real-time audio
and video captured with UAVs to detect anomaly, c) adding genetic information to
real-time product recommendation, d) delivering real-time recommendations to
shoppers, and e) collecting IoT signals in smart homes to make real-time
decisions. CARTA Miami will leverage the high-performance computing available at
the Institute for Data Science and Computing at the University.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;CARTA Miami will offer a unique opportunity for graduate students to
improve their research and communication skills. They will participate in
collaborative research with industrial partners. The experience will teach the
graduate students how to succeed in industrial R&amp;D, which is essential for
their careers. Furthermore, the industrial partners can expand their research
portfolio by exploring new ideas at CARTA. Because CARTA is a multi-site center,
sharing of information across sites can bring additional benefits to both its
partners and students. The site will communicate its activities through research
publications, conference presentations, and reports.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;At
all partner sites of CARTA, the private industry partner data is kept
confidential. CARTA has a center-wide 6-month embargo policy. CARTA Miami
follows this Center-wide policy. Under the policy, publicly-available data
generated at CARTA Miami will be made available after a 6-month embargo through
the University of Miami’s data repository. Interested researchers, both CARTA
members and non-CARTA members, may request copies of data stored in the
repository via email.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.