* 2051076
* REU Site: Summer Opportunities in Agricultural Research &amp; the Environment: Strategic Work in Applied Geoscience (SOARE: SWAG)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Candice Duncan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 450,239.00

The geoscience field faces a unique challenge in STEM: a lack of visibility to
minoritized and marginalized students in pre-college programs. The Summer
Opportunities in Agricultural Research &amp; the Environment through Strategic
Work in Applied Geoscience (SOARE: SWAG) offers opportunities for a group of 10
sophomore and junior students to engage in applied geoscience research in
faculty-led laboratories. The 10-week summer program includes professional and
career-oriented workshops, weekly lunch-and-learn sessions, and social
activities (with graduate students) designed to build community and provide
opportunities to explore geoscience topics of interest. Collaborative
partnerships with Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and
Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs) will allow recruited students to
participate in an applied research experience and geoscience learning ecosystem
at the University of Maryland, College Park (UMD). The SOARE: SWAG summer
research experience aims to take advantage of the breadth and depth of the
geoscience field to provide future scientists with hands-on skills to advance
their knowledge through meaningful engagement with their mentors, networking
opportunities, and conversations about social justice, equity and inclusion in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SOARE: SWAG REU site program will provide
maximum impact through applied geoscience research projects conducted at UMD.
The UMD REU program has three main objectives designed to provide experiential
learning for a cohort of 10 students. The PIs will 1) recruit and retain
minoritized, first generation, and women students enrolled in HBCUs and MSIs to
participate as REU fellows in a mentored, hands-on research experience with
trained faculty mentors, 2) pair the selected fellows with UMD faculty
conducting research in applied geoscience-related topics that are of interest to
the student, and 3) increase participants’ awareness and understanding of
geoscience sub-disciplines, graduate programs, and career opportunities through
strategically-designed career shuttles, workshops, and activities. The proposed
research experience will enhance the fellows’ technical skills and increase
their expertise in geoscience fields. Through a mentoring network, fellows will
receive strategically guided support as they matriculate through the summer
program and subsequently into geoscience graduate programs and geoscience
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.