* 2051074
* REU Site: Research Experience for Neurodiverse Students: Transforming the Nation's Aging Infrastructure by Advancing Radical Solutions
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Alexandra Hain, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2024
* USD 406,696.00

Supported by the NSF Division of Engineering Education and Centers, this REU
Site develops capacity in an area of national priority by increasing the number
of individuals with expertise and creative problem-solving abilities in the
field of aging civil infrastructure. This program addresses a critical need for
research and training while targeting the needs of traditionally underserved and
underrepresented groups of neurodiverse students in engineering programs,
including those with ADHD (attention deficit hyperactivity disorder) and/or
dyslexia, who are at high risk of academic failure. The REU Site will directly
benefit participants by providing a positive research experience that recognizes
and builds on their unique strengths to improve their self-image, encourages
their persistence in engineering careers, and enhances their participation in
engineering research. Additionally, the program aims to increase understanding
of the challenges of neurodiverse students in traditional engineering education
settings. This knowledge provides a foundation for the future development of
specialized programs that increase participation and foster the unique assets of
this underrepresented group. The principal investigators will use formal and
informal opportunities to inform engineering researchers and educators about the
program to promote awareness about the unique talents and diverse learning needs
of neurodiverse students within the engineering community. The information
disseminated through this project may contribute to a change in how neurodiverse
individuals are perceived by our society and our education system. It may lead
to significant enhancement in the wellbeing of these individuals and their
families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This unique program nurtures the out-of-the-box
thinking potential of neurodiverse students to advance radical solutions to the
problems facing the nation’s aging water, power, or transportation
infrastructure. This is accomplished by promoting the application of big data,
machine learning (ML), and artificial intelligence (AI) in tackling the
engineering challenges caused by the interconnectivity, interdependency, and
complexity of infrastructure systems. The magnitude of the problem demands
advancing nontraditional, data-driven assessment methods and highlights the
potential for incorporating AI and data-driven damage quantification methods in
decision-making processes. The knowledge gained and solutions developed will
establish the application of AI as a powerful tool for addressing the complex
and pressing challenges posed by our nation’s aging infrastructure. This project
capitalizes on the untapped strengths of an underserved population to promote
creativity by encouraging novel, transformative, and radical approaches. The
knowledge generated through this project regarding the experience of
neurodiverse students and the obstacles they face in traditional engineering
education and research settings may significantly encourage future research in
learning environments and workforce development. It is anticipated that this
work may also contribute to the development of more inclusive engineering
programs for neurodiverse students. If retained, trained, and mentored, this
underserved population of students presents significant potential to benefit
society in areas in which innovation and creativity are most
needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.