* 2051885
* Translational regulation and novel translated small ORFs in Arabidopsis ABA responses
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Polly Hsu, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 02/28/2026
* USD 900,000.00

Abscisic acid (ABA) is an essential hormone regulating plant tolerance to major
stressors such as drought, salinity, and extreme temperature. In anticipation of
climate change and increasing demand for food, there is an urgent need to
understand how ABA controls plant tolerance to stress as a first step in
developing crops with greater resilience to stress. At the cellular level, plant
stress responses can be controlled in various ways: DNA transcription into mRNA
can be regulated, as can the translation of mRNA into proteins, which are
ultimately responsible for executing the response. This project aims to discover
all of the mRNAs translated into proteins that occur in the model Arabidopsis
plant in response to ABA. The ultimate goal of this project is to understand the
global and gene-specific regulation of transcription and translation that gives
rise to plant stress tolerance. This research will have important impacts on
society by providing crucial information needed to breed crop plants that better
adapt to environmental stress. In addition to offering interdisciplinary
training for graduate students and postdoctoral researchers in genomics,
bioinformatics, and plant molecular biology, this project will be integrated
with undergraduate research programs and will engage the research community by
organizing a workshop to teach others how to do similar research with other
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will test the hypothesis that
genes/transcript isoforms whose translation increases in response to ABA enhance
plant tolerance to stress. Cutting-edge Ribo-seq and RNA-seq techniques, newly
developed computational analyses, and advanced molecular biology tools will be
applied. Specific aims include (1) the profiling of the translational dynamics
of individual genes and the characterization of genes that are translationally
regulated in response to ABA, (2) the investigation of the selective translation
of transcript isoforms in response to ABA, and (3) the identification and
characterization of novel ABA-regulated translated sORFs. Together, these
results will provide comprehensive insights into posttranscriptional regulation
in stress responses and enable the development of crops that more rapidly
respond to and tolerate environmental stress. Workshops and training for
students and post-docs will disseminate the use of Ribo-seq throughout the plant
biology community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the
Plant Genome Research Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systemsâ€™&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.