* 2051052
* REU Site: Polymer Science and Engineering at The University of Akron
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Mesfin Tsige, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 02/29/2024
* USD 367,012.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The Akron-REU site in Polymer Science and Polymer
Engineering provides a holistic research experience for undergraduates. The REU
site activities includes dissemination of the foundational aspects of polymer
science and engineering, followed by an immersive experience in cutting-edge
research in the field. Students participating in the Akron-REU program come from
universities across the nation, representing the diversity of the student talent
pool. The core mission of the program is to broaden research participation, with
particular emphasis on students from primarily undergraduate institutions and
historically underrepresented populations including women, minorities and
students with disabilities. The REU site provides a research experience that is
tailored towards achieving increasing independence of the undergraduate
researcher through the course of the 9-week program. Students participate in
leading-edge research in polymer chemistry, polymer physics, polymer processing
and macromolecular bioscience. These projects span the spectrum from sustainable
materials, energy materials, high-performance materials and biomaterials. The
REU students partake in activities such as visits to local industries and
government laboratories to broaden their perspectives on research outside of the
academic environment. The REU site engages with experts to provide their insight
to students through panel discussions on topics ranging from research to career
avenues and soft-skills development. The diverse program portfolio of the Akron-
REU site prepares undergraduate participants for graduate school or for entering
the workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Undergraduate
researchers in the Akron-REU site engage in research designed to address current
and future challenges in polymer science and polymer engineering. By
participation in the collaborative environment of more than twenty research
laboratories working on all aspects of the field, students obtain an advanced
knowledge of the field. REU students work on topics of polymer chemistry,
polymer physics, polymer processing and macromolecular biosciences. Topics in
these fields range from computational advances for materials development,
synthesis and characterization of sustainable polymers and stimuli responsive
materials, interfacial characterization of polymeric materials, advanced
fabrication methods and materials for 3D printing, mimicking and incorporating
designs from nature, improved materials and processes for coatings and adhesives
and bioinspired materials for tissue engineering. The REU participants present
their research findings to their peers and faculty members through the course of
the program. At the end of the program the participants present their research
in an undergraduate symposium jointly hosted by other REU programs in northeast
Ohio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.