* 2051896
* Leveraging Informal Organizational Networks for Successful Digital Transformation
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Paul Leonardi, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 05/31/2024
* USD 333,293.00

Digital transformation is a much more complex process than is often recognized.
This is because behind headline-grabbing stories of digital advances, digital
technologies fundamentally reshape an organization’s relationships with data.
Once a firm’s senior leadership decides to “go digital,” as many often describe
it, they need to deal with the backend complexity by focusing on the
relationship between digital technology, data, and the organization of work.
Despite the importance of the role that data collected, stored, and accessed
through digital technologies plays in successful digital transformation, we know
very little about how certain types of technology use affect and use data in
ways that produce changes to the informal organization of work than we do about
how to set corporate strategy for digital change. In this study, we begin with
the assumption that new digital technologies provide only potential for new ways
of organizing and getting work done. To bring about a successful digital
transformation, the new data-related capabilities enabled by digital technology
must be made into resources that people can actually use. &lt;br/&gt;To
understand how the transition to digital technologies affects organizations and
what how data provided by digital technologies are activated into communication
networks, digital transformation needs to be studied both before and after new
digital technology implementation. One timely opportunity is the fact that many
cities across the country are planning for major initiatives to install several
advanced digital technologies to better manage water across their
municipalities. We will conduct a multi-year ethnographic study at five
municipal water agencies to investigate how data affects tasks, roles and
networks before, during and after implementation. We will use both qualitative
and quantitative methods to answer the following questions: 1) How do
stakeholders within water utilities select and prepare for data-intensive
technologies? 2)How do organizations use data from new data-intensive
technologies for the work of leak detection, preventative maintenance and
disaster preparedness? 3) What effects do digital technologies have on the
organization of water utilities regarding tasks, roles and networks within the
organization? 4) How does information use compare between different types of
departments and different occupational groups? The findings of the study will
shape our understanding of what work technology is equipped to do, how
organizational members should be trained to work with new digital technologies
and the analytic capabilities they require, and how to mitigate unintended
consequences of using the digital technologies to guide the work and
communication practices in organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.