* 2051335
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The evolution of human balance
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Jeffrey Laitman, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2024
* USD 30,264.00

During hominin evolution, the transition to upright posture and bipedal
locomotion was associated with many anatomical changes. This doctoral
dissertation research project examines an understudied aspect of inner ear
anatomy that contributes to our sense of balance during movement. The
investigator compares aspects of inner ear anatomy for humans, primates, and
fossil hominins, and examines its relationship with head and neck posture and
cranial anatomy. Results from this project advance our understanding of how
anatomical structures associated with balance changed with the transition to
bipedalism during hominin evolution and may allow for better reconstructions of
postural behavior from fossil specimens. The project also contributes to medical
treatment by providing insights into the potential for vestibular dysregulation
in humans and creating a quantifiable and reproducible visualization of
vestibular anatomy that aids precise surgical targeting and development of
vestibular prostheses. During the course of the project the investigator will
incorporate 3D printed models, illustrations, and animations of the results into
public outreach programs in New York City designed to teach human evolutionary
concepts to the public. These include programs at the American Museum of Natural
History; undergraduate courses at Lehman College; and an undergraduate seminar
on the use of multimedia and interactive design in science
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vestibular system consists of the
semicircular canals (detecting angular acceleration) and the otolith organs
(detecting linear acceleration and head tilt relative to gravity) housed within
the bony vestibule of the inner ear. In contrast to considerable study of the
semicircular canals in primates, the comparative functional morphology of the
otolith organs is largely unknown. This knowledge gap has limited our
understanding of the evolution of primate, and more specifically human, head and
neck posture (head positioning and range of motion). This project uses both
Micro-Computed Tomography and Synchrotron Resonance Phase Contrast Imaging to
create a morphometric model of the encasing bony morphology (bony vestibule)
specific to otolith organ geometry in order to investigate the evolution and
functional morphology of the bony vestibule in humans, primates, and fossil
hominins. The investigator examines modern human bony vestibule variation and
function, consider correlations between bony vestibule morphology and head
position and anatomy in a comparative primate sample, and compare modern human
and reconstructed fossil hominin bony vestibule features. The research clarifies
how the vestibular system and head and neck posture changed alongside one
another throughout human evolution and allow future study into the way(s) bony
vestibule morphology is correlated with extant primate and reconstructed hominin
postural behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.