* 2051179
* Collaborative Research: Trace Elements in Pyrite—Validation and Calibration of a Novel Paleoenvironmental Proxy
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Timothy Lyons, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 05/31/2024
* USD 267,389.00

Life in the oceans is often limited by the availability of nutrients, such as
nitrogen and phosphorus. Other elements occurring in far lower abundances are
also bioessential and potentially limiting—particularly trace metals such as
iron and molybdenum. These metals are co-factors in many biological processes,
and their distributions through time and space are strongly coupled to oxygen
levels in the oceans; weathering of the continents; evolving atmospheric
composition; and biological evolution. All of these factors tie intimately to
climate change as a critical driver and consequence of metal cycling on land and
in the oceans. Yet, despite extensive study of metals in modern and ancient
oceans, basic gaps remain in our knowledge because of inadequate testing of
certain chemical methods, particularly in the modern oceans. These methods, once
refined, would allow for more confident exploration of a vast array of past
conditions at Earth’s surface—far beyond those seen today. From that reinforced
vantage, researchers can begin to imagine more rigorously and comprehensively
what may lie in our future. One of the most promising methods for ‘time travel’
through Earth’s evolving oceans is elemental analysis of pyrite, an iron sulfide
mineral common today and in the past that may provide easily accessible and
highly preservable historical archives. Surprisingly, despite the advantages
that may lie with this approach and hints of success already, no previous effort
has attempted to validate and calibrate the pyrite tracer in modern oceans where
present environmental conditions, local and global, can be tied directly to the
composition of the mineral. This study is the first comprehensive investigation
of these relationships in modern systems, strengthened by targeted experiments
and novel analytical techniques. The principal expected outcome is an improved
understanding of the controls and consequences of change at Earth’s surface as
expressed in evolving ocean chemistry—past, present, and future—and the cause-
and-effect relationships with co-evolving life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
studies are now using a technique called laser ablation-inductively coupled
plasma-mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) to measure trace metal contents of pyrite
as a tracer for past marine conditions, and the initial results are encouraging.
That said, there is still little mechanistic understanding of how and when trace
elements are incorporated into pyrite and how these patterns and controls vary
across environmental gradients. These uncertainties weaken their utility. The
relationships among local controls and the capture of potentially global signals
remain largely unknown. Thus motivated, this study is designed around a two-
pronged approach: (1) sampling in five classic, well-studied modern marine
environments with a well characterized diversity of primary environmental
conditions and (2) complementary, carefully conceived laboratory simulations
designed to provide unprecedented insight into the mechanisms of trace metal
uptake by iron sulfide minerals and their sensitivity to environmental
backdrops. The ultimate goal is to expose the strengths and weaknesses of the
proxy and best practices while revealing new opportunities, such as the
possibility of tracking the availability of bioessential trace metals in the
ancient deep biosphere. Plans include analyzing pore waters and sediments from
diverse settings in modern oceans and interpreting those data within the
framework of experimental results to reveal how trace metal content scales with
conditions in the surrounding environment. The utility of the approach will be
explored further using novel, highly sophisticated analytical methods applied at
high resolution to characterize experimental and natural samples. This will be
the first systematic study that correlates pyrite metal contents with metal
availability in surrounding fluids and relates such data more generally to the
wide range of environmental parameters and proxies often included in studies of
Earth’s ancient biosphere. The impacts of this study will extend broadly through
outreach opportunities targeting middle and high school students and UCR
undergraduates placed in the Lyons lab, while championing diversity and
inclusion at all levels. That community footprint will be expanded through a
recurring public lecture series and an on-campus science festival presented
entirely in Spanish, among other already tested community-directed efforts. At
CMU, plans include a geochemical study at two middle schools in Flint (MI)
emphasizing water quality and use of those data to construct a new, much-needed
community-driven water quality database for Flint.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.