* 2051113
* REU Site: Artificial Intelligence Powered Robotics in 5G Network
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Yufang Jin, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2024
* USD 403,354.00

The REU site at the University of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA) will host ten
undergraduate students from colleges nationwide to conduct research on
applications of artificial intelligence (AI) into autonomous vehicles based on
5G communications. Rapidly deploying 5G core networks have enhanced mobility and
service provisioning while increasing the amount and complexity of the data.
Integrating AI into 5G networks could effectively orchestrate applications such
as autonomous driving of unmanned vehicles and optimal charging management of
electric vehicles. Autonomous vehicles, 5G communication network, and AI have
been identified as national priorities to enhance the leadership of the U.S. in
future technologies. However, there is a lack of students entering the workforce
or graduate schools in this area, in particular female and underrepresented
students. The REU site at the University of Texas at San Antonio is designed to
train undergraduate students with hands-on research activities on AI, autonomous
vehicles, and 5G networks with direct mentorship by faculty mentors. The REU
site also seeks to encourage the REU participants to pursue their studies for
graduate degrees in STEM, which is imperative to enhance the competitiveness of
the future workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to equip
undergraduate students with knowledge and skills of the latest engineering
research on AI, robotics, autonomous driving, and optimal charging of electric
vehicles in 5G mobile networks. The designed REU projects address the frontier
research problems through hands-on applications, such as practical assembly of
real robotics, data collection with 5G mobile devices, data processing with AI
algorithms, building charging converters for electrical vehicles, and
establishing a framework for control and communication between multiple unmanned
vehicles. These are valuable activities for novice undergraduate researchers to
gain direct research experiences. The REU site will also integrate the learn-
practice-service cycle into research activities, encourage team spirit, and
build students’ self-esteem by recognition and rewards for achievements. The REU
program integrates research and education activities to enable REU students to
develop essential skills through various training sessions, hands-on lab
activities, and seminars on research and career development. The research
activities are also integrated with outreach activities to local communities
including field trips to the NIWEEK event and local
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department of
Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.