* 2051127
* REU Site: Blockchain Technology for a Secure Data and Communication Future
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Gaby Dagher, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 03/31/2024
* USD 393,905.00

Boise State University will establish a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) Site centered around blockchain technology. Blockchain technology is
revolutionizing the way information is encoded, secured, and distributed. It is
a technology that can improve safety and security of existing processes in
society and enable development of systems that could not previously exist.
Potential applications of blockchain are far-reaching, including how ﬁnancial
institutions exchange currency, governments protect the integrity of electronic
voting, and medical providers secure health information systems. This REU
project will provide undergraduate students impactful and effective learning and
research experiences. Students will learn how a transformative technology such
as blockchain can be approached in depth from different perspectives with
diverse methods and techniques, and they will gain valuable experience in
reporting their research results and making real contributions to the ﬁeld.
Technical content will be infused with ethical principles and processes
underpinning expectations and demands of democratic societies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site will facilitate the growth of ten
undergraduate students each year into researchers, by providing them with the
foundational knowledge and skills needed to navigate the design, development,
and implementation of blockchain technologies for securing critical information
systems. The REU Site will facilitate theoretical and practical advances in
blockchain technology knowledge through mentored team-based research processes.
In support of their professional development, students will participate in a
mini-course on blockchain technology, a mini-course on ethical considerations of
blockchain technology, three different seminars for creating synergy among
research project and for debrieﬁng, as well as a culminating experience where
students present the results of their work at the Idaho Conference for
Undergraduate Research. The objectives of the proposed REU Site Program are: (1)
Prepare students to perform research in a collaborative setting in support of
their professional development, (2) Establish a strong and diverse applicant
pool of students who have the knowledge, skills, and expertise to become the
future leaders in blockchain technology, and (3) Contribute to building the next
generation of computer scientists in a way that promotes participation of
qualiﬁed members of groups that are not fully represented in STEM in the U.S.
Research results will be disseminated to the public through journal
publications, conference proceedings, and conference presentations. Students
will be recruited from underrepresented groups in response to needs for
technically proﬁcient and diverse professionals to lead innovations in
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.