* 2051846
* Collaborative Research: Glacier-sediment interactions during onset of tidewater glacier retreat
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2025
* Jason Amundson, University of Alaska Southeast Juneau Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 06/30/2025
* USD 566,927.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tidewater glaciers are glaciers
that flow into the ocean. Although tidewater glaciers make up a small percent of
all the glaciers in the world, they are important for climate because they
contain large volumes of ice and because they can change rapidly. Our ability to
predict future sea level rise depends on how well we understand these glaciers.
Most tidewater glaciers are currently retreating. Until recently, one of the few
tidewater glaciers that was advancing was the Taku Glacier in Southeast Alaska.
Photos and satellite imagery indicate that the glacier has recently started to
retreat, but it is unknown how quickly the glacier will retreat. This project
will investigate the early stages of the glacierâ€™s retreat by using time-lapse
photography, drone surveys, satellite data, and computer models. The project is
expected to lead to a better understanding of tidewater glacier retreat and
improve our ability to predict sea level rise. The project will support early
career researchers and students, who will also be involved in a field course at
the glacier. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tidewater glaciers are known to undergo
cycles of slow, centennial-scale advance and rapid, decadal-scale retreat that
are driven by processes occurring at the glacier-ocean interface, including
iceberg calving, submarine melting, and sediment deposition and erosion. These
cycles can occur in a steady climate, but climate can modify the timescales of
advance and retreat as well as act as a trigger. Since the advance phase is
longer than the retreat phase, in a steady climate one would expect the majority
of tidewater glaciers to be advancing. This is not the case at present, as the
majority of tidewater glaciers around the world are retreating or in a quasi-
stable configuration. Until recently, Taku Glacier in Southeast Alaska was one
of the rare advancing tidewater glaciers. Recent observations indicate that, due
to a warming climate, the glacier is now thinning over its entire area and has
begun to retreat off of the terminal moraine that it developed and prograded
over the past 125 years. This project will investigate the processes by which a
tidewater glacier transitions into retreat, and the evolving glacier sensitivity
to climate during this transition, by integrating field and remote sensing
observations of Taku Glacier with numerical modeling experiments. By advancing
understanding of tidewater glacier stability, the project will lead to improved
estimates of sea level rise. The project will support a postdoctoral scholar and
undergraduate research assistants, and field work for this project will occur in
parallel with a field course that will be held at the glacier
terminus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.