* 2051192
* I-Corps: Automated pavement condition survey system to improve cost-effectiveness
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2021,03/31/2023
* Feng Wang, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a more cost-effective, automated, pavement condition data
collection system. In a pavement management system (PMS), accurate, precise, and
reliable pavement condition data will assist pavement engineers to make sound
maintenance decisions. While a manual data collection method is labor intensive,
time consuming, and frequently impossible or unsafe to perform, the automated
data collection methods are receiving more attention in industry and replacing
manual surveys in recent years. There are problems with inaccuracy with the
existing automated pavement data collection methods. The collection technology
proposed in this project is designed to improve the data quality of automated
pavement data collection at a sustainable cost. A successful application of the
proposed technology may help maintain transportation infrastructure and the
technology may be extended to other infrastructure systems such as airport
runways, railroads, bridges, and dams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
is based on the development of a more cost-effective, automated, pavement
condition data collection system. To overcome the inaccuracy problems associated
with existing automated pavement data collection methods, the proposed
technology is expected to use more sophisticated and smarter image processing
algorithms. In addition, the proposed system seeks improvements in data quality
assurance by using data analysis capabilities to screen and validate the data,
locating problematic data and reducing errors in the data. The core components
of this system are: 1) a cost-effective 3D image acquisition hardware system; 2)
artificial intelligence-enhanced pavement image processing algorithms; and 3)
systemic design and optimization-based data quality assurance. The design
utilizes sensor technologies, statistical theories, 3D reconstruction models,
deep learning algorithms, and synthetic ground truth data functionality in the
development of this technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.