* 2051578
* RAPID: Understanding Evacuation, Sheltering, and Reentry Decisions During the Dual Threat of Hurricane and the COVID-19 Pandemic
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Lauren Clay, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 08/31/2023
* USD 90,515.00

This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project will study emergency
mangers’ and households’ evacuation decisions and their sheltering
considerations during Hurricane Laura as individuals cope with the COVID-19
pandemic. It is important for the scientific community, policymakers, and
emergency managers to understand how the simultaneous threats of a hurricane and
a pandemic affect individual and household decisions about protecting themselves
during these events. The findings from this project will help emergency managers
and policymakers develop appropriate public health and population protection
strategies to help communities be prepared for future events. With a better
understating of the determinants of hurricane and pandemic protective actions
(e.g. evacuation, social distancing, sheltering) compliance, emergency managers
can develop better evacuation plans and warning messages to help reduce the
impact of both the pandemic and hurricane, as well as to advance national health
and welfare. More specifically, the scientific progress generated by this
research will increase understanding of differences between emergency mangers’
and citizens’ concerns regarding the maintenance of shelters, sheltering
locations (public shelters, hotels, friends’, and relatives’ house), evacuation
routing, and evacuation modeling during a pandemic. Emergency managers will be
able to better design and locate shelters and encourage households to take
appropriate protective actions in the future when facing similar
threats.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the state of science
about households’ and emergency mangers’ protective action decision-making
processes by using a sequential mixed methods design. This study will use survey
and interview methodologies to collect both quantitative and qualitative data
from emergency managers and households in the Hurricane Laura risk areas in
Texas and Louisiana. Because of the complexity of the event, this project
requires the integration of variables in both the Protection Motivation Theory
and the Protective Action Decision Model. The results of this study will build a
new theoretical model that captures individuals’ protective action decision-
making process in a dual hazard environment (hurricane and pandemic). This
project will contribute to emerging research on pandemics and disasters in the
United States, but with a focus on how the pandemic is shaping protective action
decision-making, which has generalizability to other compound
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.