* 2051105
* REU Site: Memphis Neuroscience Techniques and Research Training Program (NeuroSTART)
* SBE,SMA
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Deranda Lester, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 04/30/2024
* USD 285,908.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate and is supported by the Department of
Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program. It has both scientific and
societal benefits in addition to integrating research and education. To maximize
scientific progress, it is important to welcome contributions from a diverse
group of individuals. However, there is substantial national disparity in the
number of underrepresented racial and ethnic minority (URM) students admitted to
graduate neuroscience programs. There is excellent diversity within the
undergraduate (UG) population among the institutions of higher education in
Memphis, TN. This grant is to support the Neuroscience Techniques and Research
Training (NeuroSTART) Program at the University of Memphis designed to increase
the number of URM UG students from the greater Memphis area actively involved in
behavioral neuroscience (BN) research. By taking advantage of the excellent
diversity among UGs at Christian Brothers University, LeMoyne-Owen College, and
at the University of Memphis, as well as the large proportion of URM students
from local community colleges that transfer to these institutions, the goal of
this project is to increase the number of competitive URM applicants
successfully applying to graduate neuroscience programs. The NeuroSTART program
focuses not only on professional development, networking, and promoting
scientific literacy and technical skills training among the participants, it
also nurtures affective factors (self-efficacy, sense of belonging, and a
supportive scientific network) shown to influence the retention and success of
URM UG students transitioning into scientific graduate programs. Increasing the
number of competitive UG URM applicants to graduate programs will subsequently
increase URM graduate trainees and ultimately increase the diversity of
individuals that are part of the neuroscience
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NeuroSTART participants that are part of this
REU are fully integrated into the University of Memphis psychology department
behavioral neuroscience research laboratories where they interact with other
faculty, graduate students, technicians, and UG research assistants. While
receiving a stipend, they engage in two semesters of independent study during
which they complete an empirical research project (under the mentorship of a
behavioral neuroscience faculty member) and then present the results of their
work in a mock defense, at the annual Society for Neuroscience conference, and
as a manuscript submitted to a peer-reviewed neuroscience journal. The
NeuroSTART participants also join other neuroscience researchers in a series of
monthly seminars to promote career development and training in responsible
conduct in research and attend a retreat in the fall intended to prepare them
for the process of applying to graduate school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.