* 2051573
* Understanding the role of olfaction in regulating male primate behavior and physiology
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Amanda Melin, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 06/30/2026
* USD 564,711.00

Differences in appearance, behavior, and physiology are associated with
differences in male status across primates. Achieving dominant status has
important consequences for primate males, including in terms of their ability to
sire offspring. While the role of hormones in regulating the achievement of
dominant status is well characterized, much less is known about how odor and
olfaction contribute to status outcomes. The researchers use an integrative
approach to measure phenotypic, physiological, and behavioral variation among
male white-faced capuchin monkeys to advance a comprehensive understanding of
the roles that olfactory communication plays in regulating rank achievement. The
research contributes to a broader understanding of what roles olfaction plays in
the biology and behavior of primates. Throughout the project, the research team
will engage in K-12 STEM education outreach by providing workshops to students
and teachers. Additional STEM talent building will occur through the training
and mentorship of a diverse group of young scientists, including undergraduate,
post-baccalaureate, and graduate students, as well as an early-career
postdoctoral scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this research is to test
the hypothesis that odors regulate the expression of dominant and subordinate
male morphs in male white-faced capuchins. Specifically, the investigators will
1) quantify the morphology and physiology of capuchin male morphs in relation to
rank (dominant versus subordinate); 2) characterize olfactory behavioral
variation (e.g., sniffing, urinary marking) in relation to rank; and 3)
determine the chemical basis for differences in scent in relation to rank. The
researchers use cutting-edge, integrative methods to track changes in
morphology, behavior, and physiology, including digital photogrammetry,
behavioral observation, and assessment of hormonal changes, to facilitate causal
understanding of the temporal sequence of changes related to attainment of
dominant status. Moreover, by simultaneously measuring behavioral and biological
variation involved in male rank morphs in a wild primate, this research
contributes creative, original insights to advance knowledge of the proximate
mechanisms underlying rank, with important implications for understanding status
and phenotypic differentiation – as well as the roles played by sensory biology
– in primate evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.