* 2051411
* SBIR Phase I:  Rapid Solution to COVID-19 and Future Viral Pandemics
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,02/28/2022
* Timothy Childs, TLC MILLIMETER WAVE PRODUCTS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/28/2022
* USD 255,973.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Research
Innovation (SBIR) Phase I project is a demonstration of a millimeter wave Rapid
Pathogen Detector System (or “RPDS”) to autonomously detect and instantly
identify pathogens at tiny concentrations as even these samples may cause health
threats to individuals or to a community. The “in the field” demonstration
utilizes a database of captured and learned the characteristics (i.e.,
electronic signature) of the pathogen using a unique machine learning/artificial
intelligence model. Once the RPDS is “trained” to recognize the pathogen, the
RPDS may detect and identify pathogens in human and non-human samples in the
field with high accuracy. The model target pathogen of this project is the SARS-
CoV-2 virus. This target is to be followed by a selection of other viruses,
proteins, biomatter, defective cells (cancer), and small inanimate objects as
well. The RPDS system capabilities seek to increase the testing rate by an
orders of magnitude compared to the current state of the art detection and
diagnostic systems. Also, the instant results can be streamed to authorized
individuals and officials in seconds using the local WiFi/ ethernet systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to develop and demonstrate an autonomous and remotely operated
millimeter wave (MMW) device that identifies pathogens in seconds in the field.
The chemical-free, mobile mini table top systems is to help expand the number of
pathogen test stations throughout the USA. This effort utilizes transmitted MMW
signals reflected from nanosize pathogens in a manner that captures their unique
characteristic via digital signal processing assisted artificial intelligence
(AI) structures and stores a reliable unique model of the target pathogen.
Utilizing machine learning (ML), the detector autonomously recognizes the
pathogen identity within each of the million scans (reflected response packets)
of the unidentified samples, each second.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.