* 2051691
* A Robust Temporal Framework for the Paleoproterozoic Crash of Atmospheric Oxygen
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Ann Bauer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 05/31/2024
* USD 419,135.00

The protracted rise of atmospheric oxygen has important implications for the
trajectory of biological evolution and global nutrient cycling. This work will
test ties between large-scale environmental changes and biotic macroevolution in
the Paleoproterozoic. Investigators will obtain age constraints for sediments
within the Onega Basin of Russia and the Lastoursville Basin of Gabon to
evaluate the synchroneity of carbon burial episodes potentially associated with
an overshoot and crash of atmospheric oxygen levels in the Paleoproterozoic era.
The geochemical constraints they obtain will allow to critically evaluate the
synchronicity and extent of marine conditions and oxygen levels at the
termination of what may have been the most dramatic disturbance to the carbon
cycle in Earth history. These efforts will be paired with a science video-
logging series, Terralingua: Reading the Rock Record, which will be broadly
disseminated through the TravelingGeologist platform on social media, reaching a
total audience of over one million globally. This series will provide content
highlighting the variety of tasks that geoscientists complete, including field
work in Russia with a team of international collaborators, geochemistry
laboratory and mass spectrometry work, and will also cover common barriers to
entry in the geosciences and academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to improve our understanding of the trajectory of atmospheric oxygen
during the ~2.3-2.0 Ga Lomagundi-Jatuli (LJ) positive carbon isotope excursion
and the subsequent Shunga negative carbon isotope excursion in the Onega Basin
of Russia and the Lastoursville Basin of Gabon. The proposed research will
address: 1) How did oxidative weathering vary during these carbon isotope
excursions? 2) Do the end-LJ and the Shunga Event occur synchronously in the
Onega and Lastoursville Basins? The petrologic, isotopic and temporal
constraints to be determined will permit global correlations and shed novel
insights into the rise of oxidative weathering and global carbon cycling at this
critical juncture. This will support education, outreach, and diversity
initiatives through the training of a PhD student and postdoc and the production
of a broadly disseminated videologging series (Terralingua: Reading the Rock
Record) focused on geochemistry as well as promoting inclusivity in field- and
laboratory-based geoscience fields and more broadly within
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.