* 2051120
* REU SITE: Assessment and sustainable management of ecosystem at the nexus of food, energy, and water systems
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Marty Matlock, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 432,083.00

This REU Site award to the University of Arkansas, located in Fayetteville, AR,
will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2021- 2023. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily identifying
as American Indian and other under-represented groups, will be trained in the
program; many of these students will come from schools with limited research
opportunities. Students will participate in structured lectures combined with
computer programming workshops using R, laboratory and field research. They will
attend seminars and other events featuring professionals in sustainability
fields, and cultural enrichment activities that emphasize the process of
science, the ethic of sustainability, sustainability of food, water, and energy
systems, and the cultural connections of ecology and sustainability with tribal
traditions. Students will develop and complete an independent research project
with the aid of their mentor(s), attend and present at a professional meeting,
and complete a manuscript. Student program assessment will be completed using
the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the program to
determine their career paths using Facebook, LinkedIn, and other web resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this REU program is to provide an
integrated research experience focusing on sustainable management of ecosystem
services at the nexus of food, energy, and water, primarily for American Indian
undergraduates and those from other under-represented groups in STEM. The goal
is for students and an interdisciplinary group of faculty mentors from three
colleges to explore sustainable management of provisioning services across
landscapes and cultural traditions. Research projects focus on effects of food
and energy life cycles on water quantity and quality, integrated with tribal
management of ecosystem services. Classroom activities include computer
programming workshops, scientific communication, and cultural enrichment
activities that emphasize the ethics and the cultural connections of ecology
with tribal traditions. Undergraduate students who are interested in doing
research about environmental systems or sustainability are encouraged to apply.
More information about the program is available by visiting
http://ecoreu.uark.edu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Michelle Evans-White at
mevanswh@uark.edu) or the co-PIs (Dr. Marty Matlock at matlock@uark.edu or Dr.
Kusum Naithani at kusum@uark.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.