* 2051396
* RUI: Complex Dynamics in Glass-forming Oxide Melts
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2025
* David Sidebottom, Creighton University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 05/31/2025
* USD 222,705.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Oxide glasses feature prominently in important
commercial applications ranging from high-speed optical fiber communications to
shock-resistant touchscreens found in a myriad of smart devices. Development of
these materials is informed by their unique "ball and stick" atomic structure,
wherein atoms (balls) are interconnected by covalent bonds (sticks) to produce a
continuous network where bond density largely determines the response (rigid or
flexible) of the material to applied shear forces. However, several recent
observations are inconsistent with this simple model and appear to be better
explained by appealing to an alternative network of "weakest linkages" obtained
when certain redundant connections are omitted. The project seeks to attain
deeper understanding of how atomic-level glass structure ultimately determines
material properties by generating much needed new observations of the glassy
dynamics that can definitively test model predictions. Work is performed
primarily by undergraduate students who gain valuable research skills as part of
their trajectory toward advanced studies. The project also offers non-science
students a peek at the excitement of science and engineering research through
the creation and delivery of a new hands-on materials science course that
incorporates service-learning activities in the surrounding K-12
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The properties of oxide
glasses vary from floppy to rigid depending on the degree to which mechanical
constraints imposed by a network of covalent bonds percolate within the
structure. Properties also include the complex dynamics (both non-Arrhenius
rates and non-exponential decay) of the viscoelastic relaxation of melt which
has rarely been studied in network-forming oxides. Recently, two competing
models propose differing ways in which thermodynamics might be integrated with
static bond constraints to predict viscoelastic properties like the glass
transition temperature and fragility. One assumes atomic constraints with an
hierarchy of thermal strengths while the other emphasizes a mean field structure
obtained by coarse-graining over certain pockets of rigid matter. Here, dynamic
light scattering (together with high-resolution Raman spectroscopy) is performed
on a selection of oxide systems to provide a critical test of the two models
while also providing much needed characterization of the relaxation in these
refractory melts. These studies, conducted primarily by undergraduate students,
provide hands-on experience with multiple forms of spectroscopy and serve to
train the next generation of science practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.