* 2051253
* SBIR Phase I:  Conformable High Pressure Gas Storage Systems
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,02/28/2022
* Chris Kondogiani, NOBLE GAS SYSTEMS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 02/28/2022
* USD 255,946.00

The broader impact/ commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to address two critical issues related to the
commercialization of conformable hydrogen tanks, which are safer and more
practical than traditional cylindrical carbon overwrapped cylinders and have the
potential to accelerate adoption of the next generation of hydrogen powered
vehicles. Migrating to hydrogen fuel may significantly reduce carbon emissions,
particularly in the transportation sector, but several challenges remain in the
economic and practical benefits compared to traditional carbon-based internal
combustion engines. Conformable tanks are poised to address the concerns
relative to high pressure storage of hydrogen. Providing additional sustainable
fuel options will reduce carbon emissions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This objective
of this SBIR Phase I project is to address two technical areas relative to the
practical use of conformable tanks to store hydrogen at high pressure. First,
due to the heat of compression, filling a high-pressure tank at high rates
required by a maximum fill time of 3 minutes, can result in unacceptably high
temperatures within the tank. For conformable tanks, this problem is confounded
by the stratification of gas pockets within various parts of the tank. The first
goal of this project is to build and test a physical test specimen to validate
an innovative approach to thermal management during fast fill events for
conformable tanks. Additionally, a conformable tank without epoxy resins in the
reinforcement overwrap provides improved weight efficiency and safety benefits.
However, the manufacturing and operation of these tanks creates imbalances and
inconsistencies in the bend areas between main body portions of the tanks. The
second goal of this project is to develop solutions to address these concerns,
leading to stronger and more consistent production of efficient high pressure
conformable tanks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.