* 2051090
* REU Site: Advanced Manufacturing for a Sustainable Energy Future
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* David Estrada, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 07/31/2024
* USD 365,212.00

The Advanced Manufacturing for a Sustainable Energy Future Research Experiences
for Undergraduates (REU Site) offers a 10-week summer research program for 10
undergraduate students each year for three years at the Center for Advanced
Energy Studies (CAES) in Idaho Falls, ID. Through hands-on research experiences
and networking opportunities students will develop their STEM identity and
literacy, helping them succeed in the classroom and in their career. The REU
experience will provide a pathway to educating members of the next generation of
engineers in STEM fields, while also providing them professional development
opportunities for careers in the energy sector. Through CAES, the students will
be provided the opportunity to engage in a diverse, active, and collaborative
research center focused at the intersection of advanced manufacturing and energy
research. Being that CAES is a consortium of three Idaho universities and the
Idaho National Laboratory, the students will network with and learn from world
renowned energy researchers, gain the opportunity to share their work with an
active research community, and co-author publications and presentations based on
their research findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advanced Manufacturing for a
Sustainable Energy Future is the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Site program at the Center for Advanced Energy Studies (CAES) in Idaho Falls,
Idaho. This REU site is structured to enable innovative outcomes in the
development of the future advanced manufacturing and sustainable energy
workforce. Specifically, the REU Site objectives are to: (1) Expand knowledge
and learning for REU participants at the intersection of advanced manufacturing
and sustainable energy in support of STEM workforce development; (2) Create
authentic and engaging research opportunities that enhance REU participants’
STEM identity and literacy; (3) Establish a strong and diverse applicant pool of
students who can successfully transition into the graduate programs of CAES
universities; (4) Improve the technical skills of REU participants while also
expanding their professional network in support of future career objectives; and
(5) Increase the awareness of effective mentoring practices amongst faculty and
government laboratory scientists to help ensure a positive and lasting impact on
REU participants. Integrated research experiences, professional development, and
social activities will result in an authentic cohort experience and provide new
technical skills to participants. A comprehensive mixed-methods evaluation
program is used to gauge the impact of faculty mentoring and program activities
on participants’ STEM identity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Division of Engineering Education and Centers (EEC) and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.