* 2051378
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Marketplaces in the Development of Complex Society
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Eleanor King, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 281,040.00

This multidisciplinary pilot project identifies prehispanic marketplaces and
establishes a set of marketplace indicators that can be applied elsewhere in the
world. In the process, the project works with students to train a new generation
of archaeologists currently underrepresented in the field. The objectives
address a research gap that impedes archaeology’s contributions to economic
theory. Pre-modern markets offer particular promise for adding diversity to
economic ideas. Isolated from global capitalist forces, these markets allow
researchers to re-examine foundational concepts – such as money, credit, debt,
and investment – in non-Western contexts, expanding understanding of how culture
influences economic behavior. For both theoretical and methodological reasons,
however, archaeologists have only recently begun to establish the undisputed
existence of pre-modern markets. Previously prevailing Western theories created
a false dichotomy between past and present economies and suggested that market
exchange – the transfer of alienable goods and services between strangers –
could not exist outside of capitalism. While recent research has challenged
these theories, archaeologists still lack sound methods for investigating the
physical manifestations of markets, market systems and marketplaces, which are
often ephemeral, barely leaving a material imprint. Few archaeological projects
worldwide have even tried to identify marketplaces, and their locations remain
an important missing component in pre-modern market
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To help fill this gap, eight independent research
programs are cooperatively investigating a possible prehispanic regional market
system by identifying marketplace locations. Economic investigations in the
region have lagged due to several factors, including a historical
mischaracterization of the past society which had been conceived as less complex
than those of other neighboring groups. Researchers now however have begun to
search for marketplaces as a sign of economic complexity. While marketplace
investigations across archaeological sites have already had some success,
varying metrics have hindered the research. Additionally, the dense vegetation
covering sites makes it difficult to employ conventional approaches such as
examining item distributions, which rely on surface collections. To ensure
comparable results, collaborators on this project are examining marketplace
indicators by using a cross-cultural set of marketplace indicators that depend
on a combination of approaches from archaeology, botany, soil science, and
physics. Researchers are analyzing both old and new data according to common
protocols to produce joint results that address the central research hypothesis:
an integrated system of large and small markets existed in the region, allowing
access to similar goods for households within it. These results will further
establish precedents for future research in terms of both methodology and cross-
program cooperation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.