* 2051356
* CRII: CIF: Fundamental Research on Energy Efficiency and Security of RF Energy Harvesting Wireless Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/17/2020,10/31/2023
* Lina Pu, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 10/31/2023
* USD 114,922.00

To meet the ever-growing energy need for powering numerous wireless devices in
applications of smart city, precision agriculture, and public safety, energy
harvesting is emerging as a promising alternative to traditional power grids and
batteries. Through scavenging radio energy from the surrounding environment, the
radio frequency (RF) energy harvesting device can run semi-perpetually without a
battery replacement. The energy harvesting feature, however, raises unique
vulnerabilities in RF energy harvesting wireless networks. The investigator
identifies a radically new threat model, called malicious energy attack: the
adversary energy source threatens the information security by intentionally
charging specific nodes to manipulate routing paths in the network layer. This
project explores the non-linearity in energy harvesting systems and investigates
reinforcement learning-enabled energy attack and defense mechanisms. It aims to
develop efficient and secure communications for RF energy harvesting wireless
networks. The project is expected to support development of sustainable and
secure wireless networks, thereby leading to a broad impact on industrial
sectors relying on energy harvesting techniques. The material generated from
this project will be integrated into multiple courses on computer security and
wireless networks.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is organized around two
research topics. The first topic develops offline and online optimal data
transmission strategies based on a new nonlinear recursive energy harvesting
model that considers the energy clamp phenomenon caused by dynamic RF
environment, the nonlinear charging of the battery, and the nonlinear harvesting
circuits. The second topic proposes a reinforcement learning-enabled intelligent
energy attack method, where the adversary energy source can intelligently charge
and control the energy level of each infected node based on the partial
information of the traffic distribution in the network. Meanwhile, two defense
mechanisms are developed to protect RF energy harvesting wireless networks from
malicious energy attacks. In performing the above tasks, this research will
build an RF energy harvesting wireless network testbed to facilitate radical
breakthroughs over the practical design of models, algorithms, and protocols in
forked projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by CISE CCF
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.