* 2051992
* SBIR Phase II:  A Non-invasive Screening Tool to Detect Overweight Trucks on Roads in Real Time
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Shervin Taghavi Larigani, STL SCIENTIFIC LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2023
* USD 974,356.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project focuses on the detection and deterrence of overweight
vehicles on roads. This technology is developing a practical, economical, and
reliable real-time screening tool that does not interfere with traffic flow.
Overweight commercial vehicles are a significant contributor to the nation's
crumbling roads and bridges because the damage to a road surface increases
substantially with the relative load, e.g., the road damage caused by an
80,000-pound truck is thousands of times that of a car which is twenty times
lighter than the truck. Any efforts to renovate or build new infrastructures
will be hindered without addressing this issue broadly. Nearly 71% of U.S
freight ― representing $700.3 billion in economic activity in 2017 ― moves via
trucks. Also, overweight trucks are a significant safety risk. Being overweight
reduces the maneuverability of the massive vehicle and causes the truck's
mechanical components to be prone to failure, which in turn often causes
crashes, with significant human and economic tolls, especially if the load is
hazardous. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is to
effectively and reliably measure the weight of a vehicle and consistently detect
overweight trucks without interfering with the traffic flow or the integrity of
the pavement. The proposed fully-automated system is a disruptive technology
that is non-intrusive and infers the weight of vehicles from a distance using a
novel, ultra-high-spatial-resolution, electro-optical system. The product is a
user-friendly mobile application that displays to subscribers (government
agencies or firms in the private sector) the weight of the relevant vehicle in
real time. The proposed system is an internet-of-things system, a combination of
proprietary electro-optical system, algorithms, signal processing, artificial
intelligence and deep learning, system design and
integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.