* 2051962
* SBIR Phase I:  A novel, microfluidic device to improve collection and analysis of biopsy samples from ocular paracentesis
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,07/31/2021
* Alex Gorsuch, VISIONAIRE PRODUCTS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve diagnosis of eye conditions with a
better tool for ocular fluid biopsies. Ocular fluid biopsies are important in
diagnosis and treatment, but this procedure is under-utilized due to flaws with
the current method for collecting fluid; furthermore, the fluid in the eye is
isolated from the rest of the body, so blood work does not help in diagnosis.
Because of this, most ocular infections are diagnosed and treated based on their
clinical appearance without additional data from fluid testing. This research
will advance a new tool to collect ocular fluid safely and effectively. This
will aid in diagnosis of sight-threatening conditions including macular
degeneration, glaucoma and ocular infections, enabling earlier diagnosis and
improving patient outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) I Project will advance a new medical device for ocular fluid
biopsies. Ocular fluid biopsies can be used for conditions beyond infections in
the eye. The proposed instrument will be designed specifically for collection of
fluid from the front of the eye. Tasks include: (1) optimization of the needle
to decrease the force of entry to enhance the surgeonâ€™s control and decrease
risk of injury; (2) investigation of the fluid dynamics of collection with the
integration of a microfluidic chamber and specialized collection system designed
to handle small fluid volumes because the current method leads to fluid loss and
inaccurate results. Additional work will evaluate advanced engineering features
to enhance safety for this procedure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.