* 2051525
* THERMAL TRANSPORT IN TWO-DIMENSIONAL SEMICONDUCTOR MATERIALS
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Xianfan Xu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 07/31/2024
* USD 332,957.00

Semiconductor thin films are building blocks for all modern electronics devices.
In recent years, new semiconductor thin films consisting of crystalline single
layer of atoms or stacks of a few crystalline atomic layers have been found to
possess extraordinary properties. These new materials promise new devices in
information technology, energy, and health care, and possibly in quantum
technology. Understanding thermal transport in these new materials is important
as heat dissipation has a large influence on the device performance. Thermal
transport is also closely related to energy conversion processes such as
thermoelectrics and photovoltaics. This project will investigate the fundamental
and important issues of thermal transport in semiconductor materials to enable
thermal design and thermal management in these materials and
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is built upon investigator’s
extensive expertise in thermal transport processes, especially in the
development of experimental methods for thermal transport research. The proposed
project will employ advanced experimental tools to investigate the following
fundamental problems: (1) the individual contributions of electrons and phonons
to thermal transport in semiconductor thin films, (2) the relation between
electrical and thermal transport by electrons in semiconductors, and (3) the
bipolar diffusion which contributes to thermal transport in semiconductors,
especially in low-bandgap two-dimensional semiconductor materials. Collectively,
these studies will allow for measuring electric thermal conductivity, phonon
conductivity, and total thermal conductivity, determining the value of the
Lorenz number, evaluating the effect of bipolar diffusion, and investigating
ultrafast energy scattering processes that are fundamental to the energy
transport processes. The experimental work will be supplemented by computational
studies to provide insights to the experimental results. The research outcome
will contribute to many on-going studies in thermal transport in micro and
nanoscale materials and devices, lead to much improved fundamental
understandings of thermal transport by different energy carriers in
semiconductors, and provide possible means to control thermal transport in
semiconductor devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.