* 2051685
* LEAP-HI: Safety and Learning from Errors and Near Misses in the Human-Automation Interaction of Socio-Technical Infrastructure Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Konstantinos Triantis, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,999,999.00

Modern socio-technical infrastructure systems operate in dynamic environments
where there is a high level of interaction between human operators and
increasingly autonomous technologies that carry out safety-critical tasks. This
Leading Engineering for America's Prosperity, Health, and Infrastructure (LEAP-
HI) project will research the balance between safety, workload, and economic
considerations in these semi-automated socio-technical infrastructure systems to
provide improved design and policy tools to both infrastructure providers and
regulators by integrating the disciplines of systems engineering, human factors
engineering, decision and organizational theories, and economic production
theory. This scientific research contribution supports NSF's mission to promote
the progress of science and to advance our national welfare. The expected
benefits include improvements in the organization of work, health outcomes
associated with the work, and the economic viability of socio-technical
infrastructure systems. The project will also support outreach activities to
stimulate interest in the socio-technical domain area for students going into
STEM-related fields.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project uses a systems-level
theoretical approach that provides a computable safe area of operation for
modern socio-technical infrastructure systems. It develops a new metric of
mental workload that includes distributed situational awareness as determined by
multiple physiological measurements and subjective human perceptions. It
explores new regions in decision theory by studying how cognitive biases
influence trust in automation and decisions to delegate tasks to automated
technologies. It also examines the identification and attribution of causes of
errors, near misses, and incidents as part of organizational learning in these
modern systems. Additionally, the research builds on economic production theory
to integrate workload, safety, and economic perspectives in determining an
infrastructureâ€™s safety envelope. Finally, the research assesses the dynamic
trade-offs among workload, marginal safety, and economics within the safety
envelope to improve infrastructure decision-making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.