* 2051603
* SBIR Phase I:  Highly resource-efficient protein engineering using machine learning
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,11/30/2021
* Surojit Biswas, NABLA BIO, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 11/30/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve, accelerate, and alleviate costs
of protein engineering across diverse industries including industrial
biocatalysts, biomanufacturing, food technology, and therapeutics. Today, late-
stage protein engineering represents a major time, labor, and financial
bottleneck. Since real-world translation is the focus of late-stage development,
assays are more reflective of their end-use application and therefore
necessarily require more time, labor, and capital. This precludes many variants
from being screened at this stage. Failure at these late stages of development
is costly, and often results from a change in environmental parameters from test
conditions in early high throughput screens. Accurate prediction of protein
variants based on minimal data but with high likelihood of function under end-
use conditions is a critical unmet need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will demonstrate the feasibility of leveraging a machine learning model,
trained on raw protein sequences, mutagenesis datasets and natural sequence-
function pairs, to predict highly functional variants of a protein of interest
(POI) without sequence-function datasets specific to the selected POI and
application. Such an approach, known as zero-shot learning, has not been applied
to protein engineering to date. To achieve this, a large-scale language model
will be trained with almost 5 billion curated unlabeled protein sequences from
public and private databases and a collection of mutagenesis datasets. This
general knowledge model can then be fused with an application-specific top model
derived from natural sequences (distinct from the POI) paired with parameters of
their natural environments. This training is hypothesized to imbue the model
with a notion of which sequence features improve protein function in a general
sense, and under particular environmental conditions (e.g., high temperature,
high salinity, etc.). To demonstrate the feasibility and utility of this
approach, the model will be used in virtual directed evolution experiments to
optimize two therapeutically relevant enzymes, optimized for function in non-
native environments, and assessed for this function in
vitro.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.