* 2051965
* SBIR Phase I:  Leveraging smartphone data to improve clinical decisions in concussion care
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Kathryn Van Pelt, SYNAPTEK LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 06/30/2022
* USD 216,269.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to develop a more objective measure of symptoms after
a concussion. Each year, 42 million individuals worldwide suffer a concussion,
and cost $1.3 billion per year in direct medical costs in the United States.
Concussions represent a clinical scenario that can highly benefit from advanced
remote monitoring tools. Symptom tracking (i.e. headaches, dizziness, fatigue,
etc.) is the most relied upon assessment clinicians use for critical decisions
regarding concussion diagnosis and rehabilitation. Unfortunately, symptoms can
fluctuate based on the time of day, activity, sleep, or other non-concussion
related factors. In addition, symptom evaluations often are also susceptible to
recall bias. These limitations lead to incomplete and inaccurate symptom
evaluations that hamper a clinicians ability to properly manage treatment
strategies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop
software to remotely monitor concussion symptoms using an individual’s
smartphone. This concept of digital phenotyping has been used for mental health
disorders but has not yet been applied to concussions. Studies investigating
digital phenotyping for mental health demonstrate improved diagnosis and
treatment by reducing time to treatment and developing objective measures.
Applying digital phenotyping to concussion symptoms can solve similar issues: 1)
time to treatment and 2) objectivity. The proposed solution uses real-time
monitoring to collect data from a smartphone’s sensors. Feature engineering and
supervised machine learning techniques are applied to the sensor data to develop
a model to predict concussion symptoms. The current proposal will leverage
established techniques from the digital phenotyping literature but will evaluate
other metrics and techniques for this novel
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.