* 2051450
* Exploring van der Waals heterostructure magnetic devices for high-efficiency and high-density memory
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Jing Shi, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2024
* USD 345,000.00

This proposed research will explore van der Waals heterostructure-based magnetic
devices capable of delivering highly efficient antidamping spin-orbit torque for
switching perpendicular magnetization. Reducing energy dissipation for switching
magnetic memory devices is increasingly challenging as the memory density scales
up, which calls for innovative ways to greatly enhance the energy efficiency.
Perpendicular magnetization with strong anisotropy is a requisite for the
stability of high-density memory devices. The proposed research deals with a
particular type of the van der Waals heterostructures which are composed of an
atomically layered magnet with strong perpendicular magnetic anisotropy such as
Fe3GeTe2 and another atomically layered Weyl semimetal with strong spin-momentum
locking and low crystalline symmetry such as 1T’-WTe2. Unlike spin-orbit torques
created by ordinary three-dimensional, high-symmetry materials, the unique
antidamping torque generated by 1T’-WTe2 is expected to result in a much lower
critical current density for switching the Fe3GeTe2 magnetization in this van
der Waals heterostructure. Along with the atomically flat, chemically and
magnetically sharp interface, the combination of these two materials provides
unparalleled intrinsic and extrinsic properties suitable for future generations
of high-density magnetic random access memory devices. The proposed research
will provide excellent opportunities to educate graduate students across
disciplines at PI’s institution, especially the underrepresented minority
students by enrolling them in a newly developed elective course by the PI on van
der Waals heterostructures and by training the student recruited for doing the
cutting-edge research in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of
this proposed research include (a) fabrication of the proposed van der Waals
heterostructure nanoscale devices by exfoliation; (b) characterization of
relevant physical properties including the perpendicular magnetic anisotropy
constant, and saturation magnetization, and their temperature and thickness
dependences, and tuning of magnetic properties such as magnetic anisotropy and
Curie temperature; (c) experimental determination of critical switching current
density and spin-orbit torque efficiency in the limits of few atomic layers in
thickness and sub-100 nm in lateral dimensions; (d) optimization of van der
Waals heterostructure materials, interfaces, and device geometry to maximize the
energy efficiency. Successful exfoliation and nanoscale device fabrication of
atomically thin magnetic materials are very recent scientific achievements and
demonstration of the special out-of-plane spin-orbit torque in low-symmetry,
atomically layered Weyl semimetal WTe2 was also accomplished recently.
Integration of these newly discovered van der Waals materials to form unique
heterostructures-based devices represents a bold endeavor that will lead to
discoveries of new phenomena and advance the current understanding of materials
science and physics of magnetic devices for high-efficiency and high-density
memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.