* 2051282
* Collaborative Research: CIBR: Incorporating Crystallography and Cryo-EM tools into Foldit
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Firas Khatib, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 557,571.00

The goal of structural biologists is to visualize biomolecules at atomic
resolution, which is a critical step in understanding all aspects of biology,
including diseases and their cures. The dominant experimental methods for
structure determination, called Cryo-Electron Microscopy and X-Ray
Crystallography, rely upon fitting the atoms from biological molecules into
three-dimensional “maps”, seeking agreement with experimental data. This fitting
process is laborious and difficult, but preliminary studies have shown that this
task could be performed very effectively by citizen scientists playing the
biochemistry computer game Foldit. As a premier citizen science computer game,
Foldit has already been played by over 600,000 people since its inception. This
project aims to improve the capabilities of Foldit to enable scientists and
citizen scientists alike to accurately build biological structures of varying
types and sizes. This capability could strongly improve science’s ability to
understand the basis of many biological phenomena. In addition to these
scientific benefits, this project benefits both science education and society as
a whole. This new capability will enhance the variety and quality of educational
options using Foldit, improving it as a major interface between the scientific
community and society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is an ongoing need for
improvements for methods to solve crystal and cryo-EM structures. Foldit is a
citizen science project in which users aid in many biochemistry problems,
including model building and real space refinement in protein structure solving
projects. Early tests suggest that these ventures produce high quality crystal
and cryo-EM structures, but many improvements are needed to make Foldit a go-to
option for structure solving problems. Recently, new versions of Foldit have
been introduced that can be used by single scientists or lab groups, in addition
to standard citizen science Foldit puzzles. These options will be leveraged to
create a multi-scale modeling toolbox for structural biology problems. The
additions proposed in this grant include integrating new crystallography
refinement capabilities within Foldit, and adding new modes that allow much
larger proteins to be handled in Foldit for cryo-EM. Together, these
improvements will make Foldit a state-of-the-art structure solving suite for
crystallography and cryo-EM. Significant updates in the results of the project
can be found at https://www.fold.it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.