* 2051024
* REU Site: Beyond Basic Science – Connecting Climate to Communities
* SBE,SMA
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Laurel Zaima, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 03/31/2024
* USD 338,649.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. It has both scientific and societal
benefits in addition to integrating research and education. The Beyond Basic
Science REU program will immerse participants in the transdisciplinary science
being done at the Earth Institute (EI) of Columbia University. Our overarching
goals include: 1) enhancing participant interest and experience in participatory
action research in climate science, 2) building confidence and competence in
research, 3) gaining fluency and insights into scientific processes and
practices, 4) connecting participants to layered mentoring structures, and 5)
providing learners with opportunities for engagement with stakeholders on real-
world challenges. This project will embed participants in the scientific process
and provide them with a window into research in individual and team settings. In
these experiences, participants will have the latitude that is appropriate to
their level of understanding in order to gain comfort with the research process.
The core foundations of each research project are grounded in basic science that
will introduce participants to the scientific process. Additionally, all
projects will have a strong practice and participatory aspect that involves a
range of partners, which will introduce participants to how mentors design and
conduct their research in order to develop shared knowledge that is practical
and can be used by stakeholders in decision and policy-making
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 3-year project will involve 10-week
research experiences annually that will embed students and educators in the
process and application of transdisciplinary science. The Beyond Basic Science
REU program demonstrates a powerful strategy for how organizations such as the
Earth Institute can transform the relationship between science and the public,
by ensuring that the knowledge we produce through our research is jointly
created, shared, and disseminated in a way that has meaningful impacts on the
people and communities that climate change is going to impact the most. The
Beyond Basic Science REU site will provide opportunities for undergraduate
students and educators in transdisciplinary research rooted in climate science
and participatory action. The activities proposed in this project are
strategically aligned with NSF’s goals of broader impacts and supports a diverse
group of participants in immersive research experiences. The project framework
supports participants to engage in team learning around a meaningful project,
participate in professional development activities beyond direct research, and
build learning and professional relationships through layered mentoring in a
world-renowned research environment. The pool of students targeted by this
program (i.e., community colleges and state schools) are substantially more
likely to be first generation college students and to identify as
underrepresented minorities in STEM. The project will likewise produce a cohort
of scientists and educators trained in participatory research approaches to
science that integrate basic research methods with meaningful stakeholder
participation. Our REU site has an opportunity to demonstrate that research
programs grounded in evidence-based practices that provide strong educational
and professional infrastructures for learners have an important role to play in
bringing diversity into our research communities and promoting inclusive
excellence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.