* 2051522
* SBIR Phase I: Genetically Engineered Dendritic Cell to Activate SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein specific-T Cell (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Aynun Begum, NEYROBLASTGX LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 12/31/2022
* USD 255,997.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a specific immunoprotective cell
therapy using the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein (Sp) to boost immunity against
COVID-19, especially with comorbidities. A durable competitive advantage
reflects immune cell engineering with novel coronavirus Sp as a new
technological advancement for stem cell-based immunotherapy (SCT) to treat viral
diseases, diabetes, autoimmune disorders, or cancer. Use of SCT against SARS-
CoV-2 or new virus strains will prevent COVID-19 and post-infection
complications, reduce the chance of future pandemics, and strengthen the local
and national economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovative
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a "DC-COV19" probe system to
eradicate severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), which
killed more than 400,000 people in the United States. Our long-term goal is to
develop a potent COVID-19 T cell-based immunotherapy (vaccine-like) for high-
risk populations to stop or reduce SARS-CoV-2 infections. The SARS-CoV-2
vaccines target neutralizing antibodies but only rely on the endogenous
production of T cells. Major Gap: COVID-19 patients showed a significant
reduction in the number and function of T cells and required robust vaccine or
immunotherapeutic strategies to boost SARS-CoV-2-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cells.
NeyroblastGX LLC (NGL) proposes to develop a probe from dendritic cells (DCs)
derived from established genetically engineered human embryonic stem cells
(hESC) transfected with SARS-CoV-2 spike protein (Sp). This "DC-COV19" probe
will be used to produce high numbers of functional SARS-CoV-2-specific CD4+ and
CD8+ T cells ex vivo. Autologous immune T cells will be transferred into
COVID-19 patients as a rapid and robust adaptive T cell-based immunotherapy. NGL
works with world-class immunologists and clinicians to develop several Sp
constructs engineered to transfect DCs to selectively activate SARS-
CoV-2-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cells to fight
COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.