* 2051762
* RAPID: Monitoring and modeling watershed-scale post-wildfire streamflow response through space and time
* GEO,EAR
* 11/15/2020,10/31/2022
* Belize Lane, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 10/31/2022
* USD 49,811.00

Wildfires alter hydrologic processes, accelerate erosion and increase sediment
transport rates. In the western U.S, these changes pose considerable risks to
downstream infrastructure and ecosystems, and natural resource managers urgently
need practical and reliable predictive tools to support post-wildfire
management. The active Grizzly Creek wildfire in Glenwood Canyon, CO, presents a
unique, time-sensitive opportunity to collect necessary field data to monitor
these processes and develop transferable analytical tools. The watershed has
active long-term USGS gauges both up and downstream from the study area as well
as highly variable topography, land cover and burn severity, making the Grizzly
Creek fire an ideal candidate to capture a range of post-wildfire hydrologic
responses within the same watershed. Ultimately, this data will directly support
and inform post-wildfire management and restoration, which costs tens of
millions of dollars across the western U.S. each year. Data collection is in
coordination with the USGS Post-Fire Debris-Flow Hazards team to ensure efforts
are complementary and support larger hydrologic and geomorphic research efforts.
Results will be conveyed to the post-wildfire research and management community
through presentations to major stakeholder groups, such as the USFS, NRCS, Utah
Division of Natural Resources, water conservation districts, dam operators, and
other relevant groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrologic field data collected for
this project will support evaluation and improvement of post-wildfire hydrology
and sediment dynamics models, as well as advances in fundamental understanding
of hydrologic processes. Reasonable hydrologic forcing remains a major
limitation of network-scale modeling frameworks to assess post-wildfire sediment
dynamics. To fill this gap and improve our understanding of post-wildfire
hydrologic response across a watershed requires rapid mobilization to capture
the initial response in a recently burned watershed with long-term streamflow
records and variable watershed and burn characteristics. Monitoring sites
capture similar watershed characteristics (e.g., slope, land cover) along a burn
severity gradient, and are paired with nearby analog unburned catchments.
Precipitation, streamflow and hillslope infiltration rates will be monitored
through time throughout the burned area. This perishable data will be used
within a novel analytical framework to answer critical research questions
related to variability in the post-wildfire rainfall-runoff response through
space and time, beginning immediately following a burn. The research will help
determine how the spatial distribution and severity of burned areas within a
watershed impact post-wildfire runoff, distributed streamflow response and,
ultimately, sediment flux rates. This research will advance long-term sediment
transport and storage predictions in this and other emerging modeling efforts
that inform resource management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.