* 2051796
* SBIR Phase I:  Designer polyamide for acid neutralizing personal protective equipment
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Matthew Borowiak, WORKERS FIRST LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to reduce hazardous acid-related injuries of
workers who use Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) in mining, the military,
first responder service, and other roles. Affected PPE surfaces can still
contain the non-diluted acid which may come in contact with skin, leading to
injury or disfigurement. This project proposes a new material for the surface of
PPE to be chemically reactive so that it can neutralize the hazardous acid on
contact. This material may be used as an additive to other materials for
chemical suits, lab coats, gloves, secondary containment, and protective
coatings. Moreover, this surface can be repeatedly reactivated, enabling
sustainability. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will advance
translation of a solvent-less reactive extrusion. Currently available polymeric
and the coatings on the materials that contain the acids act merely as
chemically resistant passive barriers and are inadequate. The proposed project
conducts a standardized set of experiments to optimize the temporal temperature
profile, minimize undesired side reactions, and maximize the throughput. The
technical plan includes determination of various parameters to tune product
properties. Furthermore, it will be blended as an additive to incumbent PPE
polymers to evaluate efficacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.