* 2051693
* SBIR Phase II:  Aqueous Lithium and Zinc Ion Batteries for Stationary Energy Storage Applications
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Adam Weisenstein, AESIR TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 04/30/2024
* USD 847,543.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the commercialization of an aqueous lithium and zinc
ion battery that is a replacement for lead-acid and lithium-ion batteries in
stationary energy storage applications. This battery has a nonflammable,
environmentally-friendly, water-based electrolyte and does not utilize cobalt or
nickel, reducing reliance on critical materials and helping to diversify battery
material supply chains. The battery chemistry combines the high safety and low
cost associated with zinc-based batteries with the long life of lithium-ion
batteries. This aqueous battery may help to advance the adoption of beneficial
energy technologies such as intermittent renewables and electric vehicles. The
battery utilizes zinc that can be sourced domestically and does not introduce a
dependency on foreign sources, promoting both national security and the creation
of US-based jobs. The battery is also fully recyclable using existing
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes to develop the
aqueous lithium and zinc ion battery technology by focusing on optimization of
individual battery components to improve cycle life and power as well as scale
up from pouch cells to larger-format prismatic cells. The research will include
refining the intercalation electrode design to increase capacity retention
during long life cycling, developing the zinc electrode design to suppress zinc
dendrite growth, improving separator functionality to maintain high-rate
capabilities and increase cycle life, and developing an electrolyte designed to
stabilize zinc while also allowing for faster reactivity with the zinc and
lithium ions. Larger format cells with optimized components will be built and
tested to evaluate scaled real-world performance metrics compared to Lead-acid
and lithium-ion batteries traditionally used in stationary energy storage
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.