* 2051967
* STTR Phase I:  A system for collection, transportation and accurate analysis of RNA virus specimens
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Avinoam Dukler, Kepler Diagnostics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to support a testing device for collection,
transportation and diagnosis of certain viral infections, such as hepatitis C
virus (HCV), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and measles. Recent viral
outbreaks of measles, Ebola, Zika, SARS-CoV, and the COVID-19 pandemic have
illustrated the need for fast and accurate diagnosis to contain the outbreak, as
well as for decentralized testing during periods of quarantine or general global
epidemiological surveillance. The technology will enable at-home or remote
location specimen collection without the need for traditional, costly, draw
stations and overnight cold-pack shipments. The initial target is hepatitis C
virus (HCV) infections. The United States Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) recommend that adults should be screened for HCV infection at
least once in their lifetimes, and women should be screened during each
pregnancy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project will focus on solving the inherent instability of RNA viruses.
RNA viruses, in liquid blood and especially dry, degrade rapidly. It is why
SARS-COV-2 is primarily a contact/aerosol transmission and not a problem with
packages. RNA samples have a high sensitivity to ribonucleases (enzymes that
catalyze the degradation of RNA) and degrade in a short period of time when
dried. Thiis project will create a special protective environment so that when
the specimen dries it does not degrade; it will consist of a device that retains
a fixed and known amount of specimen, desiccant for drying, and modified
atmospheric packaging (MAP) preventing specimen degradation at ambient
temperature for up to 14 days. The MAP prevents gas exchange during transit,
enabling collection and transport in any weather conditions including cold,
heat, and high humidity. Upon arrival at the laboratory, an extraction process
will recover the RNA virus for testing via RT-qPCR. This project will evaluate
the impact of drying time, inhibition of ribonucleases, gas content within the
MAP, transport media, extraction buffer, and RT-qPCR techniques to stabilize and
quantify HCV.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.