* 2051515
* Collaborative Research: Human and material mobilities among fisher-hunter-gatherers and pastoralists
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Elisabeth Hildebrand, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 09/30/2024
* USD 160,685.00

Mobility has long been recognized as a crucial aspect of human social
organization. Among herding societies, mobility allows flexible and dynamic
responses to aridification, social and political instability, and natural
disasters. This project uses new archaeological tools for documenting mobility,
to shed light on how people coped with climatic changes and other challenges in
the past. Survey and excavation are used to examine how and why resilient
herding systems and mobility patterns developed in the context of changing
biomes. New data on potential changes in human mobility patterns and interaction
spheres are contextualized by examining economic, technological, and cultural
changes before, during, and after major regional aridification. The researchers
emphasize advanced training and research support for junior scientists.
Fieldwork allows for student training in survey, excavation, and artifact
analysis and provides opportunities to participate in international fieldwork.
The team also works with underserved communities and schools near the field
sites, sharing scientific knowledge and building intellectually inclusive
research frameworks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Archaeologists working in dryland
environments have demonstrated the long-term resilience of pastoralist systems
across millennia of often dramatic climatic fluctuations. In some regions, those
systems were likely based upon residential mobility, livestock mobility, and
complex social networks, which allow peoples today to make flexible responses to
aridification as well as shifting social, economic, and political situations.
Even with high-resolution paleoclimatic records, archaeological studies need to
gather detailed data to test how frequently, where, and why groups in the past
may have moved – and how those mobilities may have been consequences of, or
catalysts for, other changes. In this project, new archaeological fieldwork
includes excavations at three sites. Isotopic analyses of human and livestock
teeth from these sites are analyzed to reconstruct mobility and diet during the
lifetimes of individuals, and geochemical sourcing of stone tools and pottery
are used to reconstruct movement or exchange of objects. These methods allow
critical assessment of how human, livestock, and material mobilities shaped –
and were shaped by – the social and ecological landscapes of a region central to
broader-scale narratives of pastoralist resilience, migration, and climatic
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.