* 2051995
* SBIR Phase I:  Hydrogen from Hydrogen Sulfide
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Ryan Gillis, THIOZEN INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 09/30/2022
* USD 254,400.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is advancing a technology that allows the economically
advantageous reduction of carbon emissions in many different fields of the
energy sector. Sour sulfur-rich gases are often a byproduct in settings
including biorefineries, gas processing facilities, petrochemical and fuel
refineries, landfills, pulp and paper manufacturing, and waste processing
facilities. The proposed technology has potential to provide a low cost and low
carbon hydrogen product. This hydrogen can be used locally to displace current
fossil fuel-based hydrogen feedstocks or sold as an additional alternative
hydrogen product. The technology has potential to both enable market incumbents
to meet their aggressive carbon emission reduction goals and facilitate new
technologies that require hydrogen as either a chemical feedstock or as an
energy source. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to
optimize a thermochemical hydrogen production technology based on a novel
sulfur-iodine cycle. Reducing the carbon intensity of hydrogen manufacturing
while keeping production costs commercially relevant has remained elusive
despite significant interest. The proposed project advances a new process with
significant reductions in energy requirements, improvements in heat integration,
and more facile process stream separations compared to predecessor technologies.
It also utilizes a low value waste stream as the principal feedstock. Technical
tasks include optimizing the mass transfer qualities of the gas-liquid contactor
by varying nozzle configuration, packing material, and reactor geometry,
preparing a highly detailed process and techno-economic model at both the
demonstration and commercial scale, and the design of a pilot demonstration unit
for use at a sour associated gas well-site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.