* 2051010
* REU Site: Directed Research for Undergraduates in Math and Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Mette Olufsen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 03/31/2024
* USD 488,397.00

In a world saturated with data, recipients of undergraduate degrees in
mathematics and statistics are in high demand by both industry and graduate
programs. These graduates possess the tools needed to extract meaningful
information from noisy data and to make fundamental contributions to science and
society. The overarching goals of the Directed Research for Undergraduates in
Mathematics and Statistics (DRUMS) REU program at North Carolina State
University (NCSU) are i) to get more undergraduate students with diverse
backgrounds interested in graduate degrees in mathematical and statistical
sciences and ii) to provide research opportunities that can generate high-
quality output. Each year, DRUMS will recruit a talented and diverse group of 12
students from across the country to engage in an intensive research summer
research project under the supervision of NCSU faculty. Project topics will span
applications in disease modeling, physiology, extreme weather events, and
finance, using and developing mathematical and statistical tools to facilitate
the integration of data with models. The research agenda will be paired with an
ambitious professional development plan that includes career guidance, training
on communication and research skills, and seminars on maintaining a respectful
environment. Students will be encouraged to present their research at national
conferences and to publish in peer-reviewed journals. DRUMS aims to produce a
diverse cadre of undergraduate researchers with technical and professional
skills needed for success in graduate programs and careers in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Directed Research for Undergraduates in
Mathematics and Statistics (DRUMS) REU program at North Carolina State
University (NCSU) is a summer research program designed to provide a diverse
group of undergraduate students with vital experience with high-quality research
and professional development. Pairing mathematics and statistics is natural, as
mathematics forms the foundation of statistics and statistics is increasingly
being used to refine and analyze mathematical models. The 12 undergraduates who
will participate in DRUMS each summer will be split into teams of 3-4 students,
each with a faculty mentor and a graduate student mentor, to engage in a 10-week
research program at NCSU. To ensure their work is mature and worthy of
publication, DRUMS will be supplemented with online preparation in the spring
and an online research module in the fall, facilitated by local mentors. The
program aims to expand participation in STEM by recruiting women, members of
underrepresented groups, and students at institutions with limited research
opportunities to pursue graduate school in mathematics and statistics.
Activities will include a comprehensive training program with technical
instruction, research seminars, professional development activities, and
information sessions about graduate school possibilities and application
procedures. The program will also draw on the large faculty and graduate student
population at NCSU to form a diverse group of graduate student mentors. This
vertical integration will provide a supportive environment, train graduate
students to be effective mentors, and ultimately provide the undergraduate
participants with the skills and motivation to pursue a STEM career or graduate
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.