* 2051416
* SBIR Phase I: Phage-amplified Identification and Antimicrobial Susceptibility Test
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Christopher Cox, COBIO DIAGNOSTICS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 03/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be the development of new diagnostic tools
that allow rapid, direct-from-specimen bloodstream infection testing in clinical
settings. The new technological innovations proposed here will more quickly
identify bacteria responsible for the vast majority of blood infections while
providing vital phenotypic data on antibiotics and dosages effective for
treating these infections. This will improve patient outcomes through faster
diagnosis and more precise antibiotic selection while also helping to combat the
growing incidence of multidrug-resistant infections by reducing broad
prescription of these drugs, which is critical to efforts to preserve the
usefulness of existing antibiotics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
will develop a new tests for direct-from-specimen identification (ID),
antimicrobial susceptibility testing (AST) and minimum inhibitory drug
concentration (MIC) determination against Escherichia coli in blood. A
significant limitation with existing standards-of-care is time required for
actionable results; current approaches require 18-72 hrs. Due to the time
required, physicians must make empiric antimicrobial therapy decisions that
often lead to negative patient outcomes. Genotypic approaches are limited
because of the varied mechanisms utilized by bacteria to evolve resistance,
which can lead to false-negative results. Mass spectrometry requires colony
isolation and provides ID only. Other time-consuming tests are then required for
AST and MIC. Rapid phenotypic approaches are needed. To solve these problems,
bacteriophage mixtures will be used that are highly specific and have
demonstrated overlapping host ranges from component phages, produce a measurable
signal quickly, and are well-suited to a simple automatable 96-well plate
immunoassay. Project objectives of are to: 1) develop a rapid ID and AST/MIC
immunoassay using phage-specific antibodies, and 2) prove feasibility of direct-
from-specimen testing in blood samples. Side-by-side comparison to the current
standard-of-care diagnostic strategies will also be performed. Anticipated
results include ID, AST, and quantitative MIC in less than 5 hours directly in
blood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.