* 2051369
* SocioMap: A tool for exploring, translating, and merging data across complex sociopolitical categories
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Daniel Hruschka, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Van Zandt
* 05/31/2024
* USD 161,528.00

Social scientists are increasingly using data from diverse, worldwide sources to
understand the causes and consequences of social stratification, migration,
economic development, cultural diversity and violent conflict. This work
frequently requires merging multiple datasets over fine-grained sociopolitical
categories (e.g., ethnicities, languages, religions, or provinces). However,
different datasets often encode corresponding sociopolitical categories with
different variable names, at different scales, and different points in. These
different encodings must be translated across datasets before merging, thereby
creating a substantial bottleneck to interdisciplinary, comparative social
science. This project will build a new data analysis platform called SocioMap
that will help overcome this bottleneck by providing tools for translating
across a large and growing body of international social science datasets and for
building new datasets from diverse existing datasets storing ethnic, religious,
linguistic, and administrative boundaries in disparate, and non-compatible
formats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SocioMap will be a user-friendly set of tools to
help translate sociopolitical categories and classification schemes across
multiple, external datasets. This project will focus on four kinds of categories
— ethnicities, languages, religions, and administrative boundaries — that are
commonly used in social science research. The beta version of SocioMap will be
injected with a critical mass of these categories and translations between these
categories across dozens of common standards and hundreds of demographic surveys
and censuses worldwide. Furthermore, SocioMap is designed to grow by permitting
registered users to add new categories and translations for re-use in future
projects. SocioMap’s tools will help users: (1) explore contextual information
about specific sociopolitical categories, (2) translate and share categories
from new datasets, standards, and published studies, (3) merge novel
combinations of datasets for researchers’ custom research needs, and (4)
document key aspects of the analytical workflow that often go unreported and, in
so doing, make analyses more reproducible. SocioMap complements existing
observational datasets by providing tools for linking these datasets with
social, cultural, and demographic data from a diverse and growing body of new
datasets. SocioMap’s capabilities will spur new interdisciplinary research,
encourage new analyses of publicly funded data and re-assessments of the
robustness and reproducibility of past findings. It will also create a
foundation for future work with other kinds of entities (e.g. political parties,
non-governmental organizations, industry and occupation classifications, and
firms) and for reconciling sociopolitical entities over longer historical
periods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.