* 2051032
* REU Site: Research Expericences for Undergraduates in Mathematics at Indiana University
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Dylan Thurston, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 08/31/2024
* USD 206,519.00

This award supports the Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site in the
Department of Mathematics at Indiana University, Bloomington. Preserving a
valued tradition dating back fifty years, the program will offer an intensive
summer research experience for talented undergraduates working with some of our
internationally recognized faculty on unique projects. By providing a well-
balanced and structured environment together with milestones for both oral
exposition and written reports of results, the IU REU lays the groundwork for
student success in their projects. Participant success is further encouraged by
a preparatory program for necessary background knowledge, the fostering of an
intense and collaborative work environment, and most importantly regular working
sessions with mentors. In addition to the abstract problem-solving skills and
intellectual stamina gained by the participants, their professional development
is enhanced through regular research presentations by faculty members, LaTeX
writing workshops, and other similar opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Indiana University REU program provides an immersive environment with a strong
mentorship-oriented approach to research. Nine students will work one-on-one or
in small groups with faculty members, spending eight weeks on IU campus tackling
carefully selected research problems. These problems are unsolved, accessible,
and mathematically significant. Topics in pure mathematics are chosen from a
broad swath of fields including geometric group theory, differential geometry,
combinatorial topology and knot theory, surgery theory, logic, complex and
symbolic dynamics, aspects of category theory, and several more. Topics in
applied mathematics are drawn from areas in computer science such as recursion
theory or homotopy type theory and areas of mathematical biology and chemistry
from polymer organization and cell function to phylogenetics. Housed together in
a dormitory and sharing common office space, students benefit from being
immersed in mathematics collectively and from the spontaneous collaboration that
naturally follows. Students disseminate their findings by delivering
presentations at a statewide undergraduate mathematics research conference,
giving formal lectures to peers, faculty, and graduate students, and writing a
formal self-contained research report detailing their findings. Some of these
reports are expected to develop into peer-reviewed research papers. Ultimately,
the program significantly helps prepare participants to be the leaders in
today's highly technical workforce, whether in academia or
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.