* 2051419
* SBIR Phase I:Development of a Multi-Robot System to Reduce End-to-End Labor Automation Costs in Local Food Production
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2022
* David Ashton, CANOPII INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 04/30/2022
* USD 255,147.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this SBIR Phase I project lie in the
greater availability of healthy, local, and affordable produce for all levels of
society through new methods of end-to-end labor automation and energy management
in urban agriculture. Through a low-footprint vertical greenhouse design, this
technology will enable individuals to grow produce on small areas of available
space for their community. The produce will be an attractive alternative to
large-scale industrial agriculture and foreign food imports, not only for
sustainability concerns, but through its superior freshness, quality, and taste.
This project will have an impact on the advancement of local farming
technologies to further the viability of commercial food production in urban
communities. Creating an economically viable urban farm will have lasting
impacts on the U.S. food system and environment as it will provide a means for
sustainable food production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Phase I effort will be
used to design, build, and demonstrate a subscale vertical farm prototype that
demonstrates cost-effective methods for all aspects of the farmâ€™s end-to-end
labor automation. This will advance the implementation of robotics in food
production by addressing the labor and energy barriers that local controlled
environmental agriculture systems currently face. To achieve this objective, key
challenges include (1) automation to completely remove human labor over extended
durations, (2) low-cost design for setup and ongoing operations, and (3) the
ability to adjust product outputs in real-time to market demands. Human
interaction with the grow process will be limited through high degree of system
automation, including computer vision for plant inspections and self-cleaning
processes. Novel plant growth and handling processes will allow for virtually
any type of produce. A variety of sensors are used to carefully monitor
conditions and adjust the system, allowing fresh produce in areas without
suitable agricultural opportunities. The prototype robotic farming system being
developed in the Phase I effort will demonstrate the end-to-end labor automation
and energy management technologies necessary to the expansion of urban
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.