* 2051132
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Research Experiences in Metrology &amp; Inspection
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Mathew Kuttolamadom, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 12/31/2024
* USD 405,000.00

This renewed three-year Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site
Program, Interdisciplinary Research Experiences in Metrology &amp; Inspection,
at Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU) will enhance the knowledge and skill-level of
a diverse cohort of undergraduate students through empowering, hands-on and
interdisciplinary research experiences in both traditional/advanced metrology
and (destructive and non-destructive) inspection technologies. Metrology, the
science of measurement, and inspection transcends scales, materials, and
disciplines; yet, rarely are its salient aspects emphasized. This site is
essentially a direct response to a specific concern raised by regional industry
partners and technical workforce recruiters about the lack of pragmatic
metrology/NDI-related knowledge and skills in their incoming workforce. The
impact of this site will be to create empowered future researchers and a
workforce well-rooted in metrology/inspection technologies, and motivate them to
pursue advanced STEM degrees and careers; they will become the future pioneers
in related STEM fields, and will help foster our nation's competitive advantages
and thirst for innovative solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each summer, 10
students will be hosted at TAMU, where they will be immersed in hands-on
research experiences comprised of a state-of-the-art research project, technical
sessions/seminars, lab practice, field tours, and professional-development
workshops. This experience will also serve the TAMU upper-level undergraduates
and graduate students with invaluable team and personnel management experience.
This site will advance scientific knowledge through inter-disciplinary research
projects, and help further the field especially in regard to the energy and
manufacturing sectors. Five vertically-integrated teams, each comprising two REU
students, one senior undergraduate and one graduate student (from TAMU) and a
faculty mentor, will work in concert on select research projects over 10 summer-
weeks. This on-site experience will be supplemented with follow-ups for
continued interaction, growth, and guidance for pursuing advanced study. Student
deliverables include public dissemination of research results, and a follow-up
plan tailored to each student's career interests. The impact of this site will
be to excite, empower, and educate students, and to enable/inspire them to
pursue advanced study and STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.