* 2051512
* From sensations to symptoms: The social shaping of functional illness experience
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Rebecca Seligman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 01/31/2024
* USD 235,861.00

Functional Neurological Disorder (FND) is a widespread, yet medically
unexplained illness that is associated with high levels of distress and
disability. Given the current lack of objective biological markers of FND, its
symptomology is sometimes characterized as bodily manifestations of underlying
psychological illness. Scientists now understand that the mind and body exert
strong influences on one another, such that the symptoms of FND and related
disorders are affected by mind-body interactions. Yet current medical research
focuses on the mind largely without consideration of the social and cultural
contexts that shape psychological experiences. This research enhances an
understanding of how socially learned expectations and meanings that people
associate with their bodily sensations shape their illness experience and
influence the way they perceive their symptoms. By analyzing objective markers
of FND alongside perceived symptoms and experiences of the disease, and sharing
results with clinical practitioners and populations, the research will provide
insights that are relevant to clinical practice and support of individuals
diagnosed with FND. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators test the hypothesis
that social contexts shape how individuals experience and understand their
symptoms, contributing to science in cultural anthropology that queries the
effects of shared culture on health and well-being. This contrasts with
hypotheses focused on how individual psychological attributes affect
symptomology, instead focusing on how social relationships can reinforce or
alter experiences of FND. The research uses an innovative set of research
methods to gather data about the lived experiences of people with FND. The
researchers test their hypothesis using mixed methods, involving intensive
interviewing, questionnaires, a journaling mobile app, and a heart rate
monitoring task. Findings from the research will elucidate the relationships
between mindsets, social contexts, and symptom perceptions, contributing
empirical evidence to test anthropological theories of embodiment and enhancing
understandings of the multiple levels affecting FND. Findings will thereby
contribute to scientific knowledge about how culture and biology interact to
shape health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.