* 2051037
* REU Site: Intelligent and Scalable Systems (Renewal)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Jeffrey Heflin, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 04/30/2024
* USD 402,332.00

The Intelligent and Scalable Systems Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) site provides a 10-week intensive research experience for 10 undergraduate
students per year. Participants will conduct cutting-edge research with
mentorship from faculty focusing on the intersection between two critical
research areas: machine learning and scalable systems. During the course of
their research projects, students will learn how to apply machine learning to
create systems that learn from data and apply what they have learned to produce
solutions to pressing societal and technical problems. Through a focus on
scalability, the REU site will ensure that students are able to produce research
artifacts that can make use of parallel computational resources, in order to
process data quickly without sacrificing accuracy. The REU Site will recruit
broadly, with an emphasis on encouraging women, underrepresented, and minority
students to participate. The REU Site will also offer an extensive program of
seminars and tutorials that ensure students have the necessary background in
machine learning, concurrency, and research methods, not only for the sake of
their summer projects, but also to prepare them for advanced career options and
graduate education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this REU Site will
be to mentor students and develop them into competent and successful researchers
who are inspired to pursue graduate degrees in computer science. Participants
will conduct research in fundamental topics in both machine learning and
scalable computer systems. Examples include new algorithms for training of
machine learning models, algorithms and techniques for increasing the speed of
processing training data, acceleration of inference, techniques for enhancing
the explainability of intelligent systems, and application of machine learning
to hard scientific and societal problems. Students will participate in a broad
series of seminars and workshops that will emphasize ethical use of machine
learning; new techniques for efficient computation and software development;
technical communication; novel applications of machine learning; the research
process and methodology; preparation for graduate studies; and how to succeed in
a career in Computer Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.