* 2051565
* Do slickenfibers record episodic tremor and slow slip?
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Randolph Williams, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 10/31/2023
* USD 157,100.00

The earthquake cycle encompasses a variety of seismic processes that are only
partially understood by geologists. For example, many large, earthquake-
producing faults around the world also exhibit persistent episodes of seismic
tremor (shaking that is only perceptible with modern instruments) accompanying
slow slip (at rates of millimeters per year rather than the meters per second
rates typical of earthquakes). This process, known as “episodic tremor and slow
slip”, has been proposed to be a potential precursory phenomenon that may
forecast larger earthquake ruptures. Leveraging this forecasting potential,
however, requires determining the physical mechanisms underlying episodic tremor
and slow slip, which is hindered by the lack of a definitive geologic record.
This research will test the validity of a recently proposed geologic record of
episodic tremor and slow slip: quartz veins that form incrementally following
micro-slip events in earthquake-producing faults. This work will quantify the
time scales of vein formation via hydrothermal experiments and assess their
compatibility with those of the recurrence of episodic tremor and slow slip
observed in active faults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although much of the formation
of incrementally developed quartz slickenfibers is consistent with seismological
observations of episodic tremor and slow slip (depth, presence of fluids, stress
drops, etc), a critical question remains unanswered: are the time scales of
slickenfiber formation compatible with seismologically observed repeat times?
For this to be true, quartz cements delineating microslip increments in
slickenfibers must precipitate over time scales from 3 months to ~2 years
depending on tectonic setting. Given typical fracture opening increments
observed in slickenfibers, this conceptual model implies quartz precipitation
rates of more than 10 μm / year. These rates are several orders of magnitude
faster than those predicted by current kinetic-rate models. Recent work has
argued that coseismic decreases in pore-fluid pressure may stimulate transient
increases in quartz growth rates, allowing slickenfiber formation over time
scales consistent with the recurrence of episodic tremor and slow slip. To test
this hypothesis, this research will utilize a novel approach that allows
accurate detection of precipitation rates as small as ~3 μm / year in
hydrothermal experiments simulating large coseismic decreases in fluid pressure.
Critically, these experiments will be conducted at temperature and pressure
conditions consistent with the crustal depths where episodic tremor and slow
slip occurs. Thus, the proposed work will be able to unequivocally determine if
the time scales of slickenfiber formation are compatible with those of episodic
tremor and slow slip, regardless of how much quartz is grown over the course of
the experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.