* 2051587
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Laminated soil carbonate rinds as a tool for investigating late Quaternary climate-vegetation links
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Thure Cerling, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 153,579.00

Drylands such as those found in the western United States are characterized by
high precipitation variability and seasonally-high temperatures. Climate change
is likely to affect both, increasing the chances of drought in the future.
Plants are the base of the food chain, so it is important to understand how they
respond to climate variability. This research seeks to further develop a new way
of creating detailed histories of past vegetation, soil temperature, and soil
water evaporation. These histories, which can go back tens of thousands of
years, are preserved in a mineral, calcium carbonate (CaCO3), that forms in
soils. These minerals grow incrementally, century after century, on the
undersides of rocks to form 'laminated soil carbonate rinds'. Prevailing
vegetation composition, temperature, and degree of soil water evaporation are
recorded in the carbon and oxygen chemistry (isotopes) that make up each layer.
Carbonate rinds from several locations in the Capitol Reef / Boulder Mountain
region of southern Utah will provide detailed records extending back
approximately 40,000 years. Isotopic records from these rinds will be compared
to other records regionally and globally to get a better understanding of the
causes of climate and vegetation change in southern Utah. The research will
answer questions such as: How do plant distributions change in response to
changes in soil temperature and evaporation? How does climate change influence
plant distributions at different elevations? How comparable are the records from
one location to another? In addition to the new knowledge about plant responses
to climate change, this study will benefit the national geoscience workforce
through (1) training a new generation of geoscience professional at the
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels (2) providing continuing
education for national park staff, and (3) bringing immersive scientific
outreach experiences to under-served high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laminated soil carbonate rinds form on the
undersides of soil clasts (ranging from pebbles to boulders) in many dryland
regions worldwide. On long-lived, stable geomorphic surfaces, rinds can grow for
10s to 100s of kiloyears, and can present ordered, continuous, and detailed
(century-scale) stratigraphies of past conditions, as recorded by stable
isotopes. The long-lived geomorphic surface and laminated rind are analogous to
a cave and speleothem; laminated rinds are by extension a promising, but
underutilized, critical zone archive recording past climate and vegetation
processes. In his previous work, the investigators developed a single rind-based
climate and vegetation record from the Capitol Reef region of southern Utah
spanning 5 – 35 ka. They showed how Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (SIMS)-based
delta 13C and delta 18O records, along with temperature information provided by
clumped isotope thermometry, can be used to reconstruct changes in the fraction
of C4 vegetation on the ancient landscape, delta 18O-soil water, and past soil
temperature. In the present work, they address important questions related to
replicability on local to regional scales and, within the context of existing
Quaternary records from the western United States, demonstrate the investigative
power of this critical zone archive for paleoclimate studies: Does each rind
record the story of just one soil, or can records be extrapolated laterally? How
does rind location within the soil (shallow versus deep) affect the record? How
do records change across an elevation transect? Are triple oxygen isotopes in
rind carbonate sensitive to evaporation? To answer these questions, they will
focus on a core set of four rinds spanning an elevation transect from 1750 to
2500 m on the Johnson Mesa and Torrey Bench geomorphic surfaces (paleo-debris
flows) near Capitol Reef National Park, Utah. Six additional rinds will be used
to investigate a wider geographic range, and to investigate the effects of soil
depth. They will develop a detailed radiocarbon age model for each profile, and
analyze rind delta13C and delta18O via high spatial-resolution SIMS (~10 µm
spot diameter; centennial resolution). Clumped and triple oxygen isotope
profiles will be generated in higher resolution (ca. 2-3 kyr/sample) for the
core rinds, and for key intervals (e.g. recent, mid-Holocene, LGM) for the six
additional profiles. They will make paleoclimate inferences based on modern
datasets of soil temperature, pCO2, soil moisture, and rainfall. The proposed
research will result in several detailed climate records with novel insight into
ancient dryland critical zones, a better understanding of what kind of
information the records provide, and a guide for how to best apply the stable
surface – laminated rind approach elsewhere. Broader societal impacts of the
work include the training of undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students
in the geosciences, continuing education for Capitol Reef National Park staff in
local geology and geomorphology, and a Friends of the Pleistocene field trip
focusing on this region. They will also develop a new soils, CO2, and climate
module for the University of Michigan's Earth Camp program, which provides
promising high school students from underserved communities in Detroit with
week-long science camp experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.