* 2051854
* SBIR Phase I:  Antibody-Enzyme Fusion for the Treatment of Myotubular Myopathy
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Robert Shaffer, ENABLE THERAPEUTICS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 10/31/2022
* USD 251,034.00

The broader impact/ commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of a novel antibody-enzyme
fusion (AEF) for the treatment of a devastating rare disease called Myotubular
Myopathy (MTM) that affects about 1 in 50,000 male births in the US. The
proposed AEF addresses the underlying cause of the disease by increasing
activity of a protein that has been shown to do so in mice. The market for
approved MTM therapeutics is likely to exceed $1 billion over the next few years
once a safe and effective drug is approved. No current treatments exist for MTM,
but two experimental drugs are currently being studied in clinical trials. The
proposed AEF may play an important treatment role by overcoming immune reactions
to other drugs and may be essential for chronic treatment later in life after
other gene therapy effects have diminished. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to produce and deliver
an important protein, BIN1, the exogenous delivery of which has been shown to
rescue the molecular pathogenesis of the disease-causing MTM1 mutation in a
mouse model. The key technical objectives of this project will demonstrate that
Fab-BIN1 can be robustly produced using typical mammalian cell culture,
penetrates disease-relevant cells, and restores abundance and phosphorylation
levels of proteins known to be affected by disease-associated MTM1 mutations.
The latter two goals will be accomplished by orthogonal methods
immunofluorescence and Western blot, with a cell-penetrating antibody as an
active negative control, and disease-recapitulating MTM1 knockout myoblasts as
the in vitro test system. The anticipated outcome of this project will justify
advancement of Fab-BIN1 to later-stage preclinical
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.