* 2051148
* REU Site: A Community College Based REU in the Wyoming Region
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Brian Leonard, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 04/30/2024
* USD 351,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to the University
of Wyoming (UW), located in Laramie WY, will bring seven community college (CC)
students and two CC professors to UW each summer from 2021 to 2023. This
program, jointly supported by the Division of Chemistry and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), will allow students and
faculty to contribute to chemistry research on projects ranging from energy, to
materials, to bio-related topics. Each student will work closely with one of the
participating faculty mentors who have been carefully selected for their
research accomplishments and successful mentoring records with undergraduate
researchers. This hands-on research experience also includes a variety of
activities (seminars, mini-courses on ethics and writing, and energy-related
field trips) to educate and train students for their future careers as
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The higher education system in Wyoming is
comprised of a single 4-year/graduate level university along with seven
community colleges. This REU site emphasizes serving students and faculty from
regional CCs to positively impact students and science in WY and surrounding
states. This program will engage first and second-year undergraduates, who are
early in their college career, and expose them to graduate level chemistry
research. The wide range of projects offered includes the synthesis and
characterization of nanoparticule-based catalysts; site-selective photochemical
protein modification; and the chemistry of molecular hydrogen quantum crystals.
On this latter project, it is worthy of note that cryogenic solid molecular
hydrogen is a unique condensed phase environment due to a variety of quantum
mechanical effects such as large amplitude translational zero point motion of
the individual H molecules and the presence of ortho and para nuclear spin
manifolds. A variety of non-classical dynamics occur within such crystals at
liquid helium temperatures. These research experiences will provide a more in-
depth view of chemistry research and of perspective on potential job
opportunities in the chemical sciences. The students in this program will also
have opportunities for professional development including training in ethics,
scientific communication, and preparation of resumes and graduate school
application materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.