* 2051598
* Collaborative: BEE: C-EVO: Linking Carbon cycling to eco-EVOlutionary responses of a foundational plant to global change
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Michael Blum, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2026
* USD 497,581.00

There is a growing appreciation for how evolutionary responses to environmental
change can alter vital ecosystem attributes. This project aims to study how
evolutionary responses of an ecologically dominant plant to elevated atmospheric
carbon dioxide concentration and nitrogen enrichment influence the flow of
carbon into and out of coastal marsh ecosystems. The researchers plan to
leverage a long-term experiment to characterize how plant traits that impact
photosynthesis, the decomposition of organic matter in marsh sediments, and
sediment accretion shift in response to increased carbon dioxide and nitrogen
availability. They then plan to establish the underlying genetic basis for these
traits, so that changes in genetic variation can be used to confirm that
evolution has taken place. And finally, the researchers plan to quantify the
consequences of changes in traits, and their associated genetic variation, for
long-term carbon storage in, or loss from, highly productive marsh ecosystems.
This would enable the researchers to identify mechanistic and functional links
between plant evolution and carbon cycling in coastal marshes, which face an
uncertain future due to anticipated sea-level rise. Findings from this research
have the potential to improve our understanding of the global carbon budget, and
to foster more effective coastal restoration by advancing our understanding of
marsh persistence. Furthermore, the project can strengthen research
infrastructure, create new educational and outreach opportunities, including the
engagement of citizen scientists, and facilitate undergraduate research by
students from groups underrepresented in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project employs a complementary set of studies explicitly designed to bridge
evolutionary biology and ecosystem ecology. Using a combination of new
experiments and tissue archives from an ongoing, long-term global change
experiment, the researchers plan to simultaneously assay in situ genetic and
genomic variation using ddRAD-generated SNPs, to characterize functional trait
(e.g. maximum rates of photosynthesis, stomatal conductance, and water use
efficiency) variation in the field, and to quantify complete marsh carbon
budgets (e.g. quantifying NPP, gaseous C losses, litter decomposition rate, and
belowground biomass and C accumulation). These measurements are set in the
context of more than a decade of exposure to elevated CO2 and nitrogen
enrichment. To go beyond establishing associations between traits, genetic
variation, and carbon flux post hoc, the researchers plan to conduct a
complementary de novo quantitative genetics study of trait variation and
physiology, with the intent of linking both to carbon fluxes mediated by
individual plants. Establishing such mechanistic links can improve
parameterization of a mechanistic model of C cycling in coastal marshes,
enabling a more thorough characterization of ecosystem-level consequences of
organismal evolution. Findings from this project can illustrate whether
organismal evolution is an important determinant of how ecosystems function and
offer new insights about how global change can directly and indirectly alter
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.