* 2051264
* Shifting market and climate influences on social networks, labor allocations and wellbeing among rural farmers
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Karen Kramer, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 04/30/2024
* USD 289,358.00

Globalization and increasing environmental variability have transformative
effects on people living in small agricultural communities worldwide. Because
these forces present both opportunities and challenges, the path forward in how
to make a living is often uncertain. Is it better to give up farming, move to an
urban area, become a wage-laborer, leave family behind, and sever ties with
one’s birth community? How do these decisions affect the wellbeing of families?
This project examines how small-scale farmers navigate these decisions.
Specifically, the researchers collect new data to assess whether the reliance on
family versus formal institutions for social support is influenced by household
economic decisions, and what impact this has on the wellbeing of rural families
when faced with the dual challenge of increasing environmental variability and
globalization. The project provides scientific and STEM-field research
experience to undergraduate and graduate students and professional training to
postdoctoral researchers, as well as valuable information for non-governmental
organizations and policy makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research provides a
novel test of economic, sociological, and cultural anthropological theories to
address the extent to which opportunities associated with market transition
trade off as they interact with environmental variability to affect farmers’
livelihoods. Using a longitudinal design, ethnographic, and cutting-edge social
network methods, the researchers aim to characterize (1) how social
relationships and economic activities are affected by market transition over
time; and (2) how reliance on relationships versus labor market participation
are associated with health and well-being. The researchers investigate further
the extent to which climate variables affect people's social relationships,
economic activities, and daily lives, creating much-needed links between social
and climate science. Finally, the research provides validity tests and other
tools to meet the stated needs of Vulnerability Assessments required by policy
makers and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) involved in economic
development. Together, findings from the research will provide pertinent insight
into the scale at which climate and market variables together affect human
behavior and how farmers manage changes in their social, economic, and
ecological environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.