* 2051981
* SBIR Phase I:  Autonomous Living Assistant
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Mustafa Homsi, RIVIEH, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 12/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a wider adoption of autonomous technologies
among residential buildings. This research proposes evaluating the use of
advanced sensor technologies and machine learning algorithms to enable
inexpensive hardware infrastructures to control the conditions in indoor space
autonomously. This technology fits well within the capacity of residential
buildings. One main benefit of indoor automation is deep energy savings. The
Department of Energy estimates a 5% reduction of the country's total energy bill
if existing residential buildings save 25% of their energy consumption. The
autonomous controller evaluated in this project has the potential to reach this
goal, saving the nation up to $63 billion and the planet 284 million metric tons
of carbon dioxide emissions. Alongside energy efficiency, the associated
societal benefits of the proposed project can potentially save lives. The
technologies may spur a higher level of security protection among many
unprotected residential spaces. Additionally, tracking occupantsâ€™ habits may
enable alerts to caregivers or family members in critical emergency situations.
This can be beneficial for the aging population that wants to stay within the
comfort of their own home.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will advance the scientific knowledge required
to approach full autonomous control in indoor spaces. The use of advanced
perception sensors in buildings will be evaluated. Their rich data stream will
be utilized to develop advanced algorithms for autonomous control of indoor
spaces. Advances in sensing technologies and machine learning algorithms will be
used to instigate technological evolution in autonomous building systems. A
proof of concept will be developed to mitigate the unique risks associated
caused by applying autonomous control in indoor spaces, specifically: achieving
advanced perception, self-programmability, and
reliability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.