* 2051126
* REU Site: Summer Research Projects in Contemporary Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Sidney Nagel, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 02/29/2024
* USD 392,719.00

This award funds the Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site in the
Physics Department at the University of Chicago. The site will support twelve
students for ten weeks of summer research at the University of Chicago each
year. The program's core for each student is a well-defined 10- week summer
research project under the supervision of a University of Chicago faculty
member. The students will learn to communicate science by submitting a written
report and making an oral presentation on their work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
their applications, the students are asked about which areas of research they
are most interested in pursuing. They are then placed with faculty mentors who
work in those specialties. These areas include high-energy physics, cosmic-ray
physics, astrophysics, general relativity, condensed-matter physics, non-linear
dynamics, biophysics, fluid mechanics, and topological physics. The program
provides students with exposure to a broad set of topics across many areas of
physics. This task is accomplished by a bi-weekly series of talks presented by
faculty introducing some of the most important research topics currently pursued
in the Department.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.