* 2051225
* Imprecise Probability and Valid Statistical Inference
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Ryan Martin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 04/30/2024
* USD 249,999.00

This research project will advance the foundations of statistical, data-driven
uncertainty quantification based on imprecise probabilities. The complexity of
the problems faced by social, behavioral, and economic scientists makes direct
theoretical investigations virtually impossible, so progress relies heavily on
data analysis and statistical inference. However, the recent replication crisis
in science has created confusion about and distrust in statistics. Among the
statistical factors contributing to the replication crisis is the lack of a
solid foundation of statistics. The two dominant schools of thought, frequentist
and Bayesian, are very different, but both rely on precise probabilities. The
use of precise probabilities for drawing inference about unknowns based on data,
however, has been shown to be invalid in a specific sense that threatens
replicability. The shift from precise to imprecise probabilities for statistical
inference will have broad positive impacts and create new research opportunities
in fields beyond statistics and the social, behavioral, and economic sciences.
The project will use the online Researchers.One platform for dissemination of
results. Publicly available software will be created. The project also will
provide valuable training and experience to graduate students and an early-
career researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A high-level goal of this research
project is to create a single theory of statistical inference based on imprecise
probabilities. This research project will focus on a framework that uses
provably valid, data-dependent, imprecise (or non-additive) probabilities to
quantify uncertainty and draw inferences about unknowns. The investigator will
demonstrate that this entire framework can be cast in terms of one of the
simplest imprecise probability models, namely, possibility measures, and this
simplicity benefits practitioners in various ways. The investigator will prove
that, roughly, every exact or conservative frequentist procedure corresponds to
a valid imprecise probability, fully establishing the fundamental nature of
imprecise probabilities in statistical inference. The investigator also will
develop new and powerful imprecise probability-based methods for two general and
challenging statistical problems: structure learning in high dimensions and
inference without a statistical model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.