* 2051498
* Reaction Networks: Theory, Computation, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* David Anderson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2024
* USD 363,058.00

Biological systems are extraordinarily complex, with their emergent, or system,
behavior determined though a vast number of molecular interactions. To this day,
how the complex interactions found in biological systems produce their emergent
properties and behaviors remains elusive (and is considered one of the grand
challenges of biology). Theoretical mathematics offers a possible route forward,
and one that could, in time, have a profound influence on biology. This research
project aims to cut through the complexity of biological models and elucidate
the mechanisms that determine cellular behavior. Further, this project develops
a mathematical framework for the algorithmic construction of chemically
implemented neural networks, which are a popular means of performing machine
learning and "artificial intelligence." Finally, this project aims to develop
new computational methods that can address currently infeasible problems related
to the long-term behavior of biological processes. The project will not only
greatly enhance our understanding of biological systems but will also serve as a
fertile training ground for the next generation of scientists at the
intersection of mathematics and biology. A key focus is on building research
teams that involve faculty, graduate students, and undergraduates, with a
special emphasis towards the recruitment of women and underrepresented
minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Discrete-space, continuous-time Markov chain
models are commonly used to model biological interaction networks, including
gene regulatory networks, viral infections, signaling systems, neuronal
networks, etc. These models can be depicted via a reaction graph, which is a
graphical representation of the interactions between the constituent molecules
of the model. Interaction networks can be extraordinarily complex; for example,
there are over 20,000 genes in the human genome and the proteins they encode may
be modified in myriad ways. Further, cellular systems often have different sub-
systems that operate on multiple different scales (both temporally and in terms
of copy numbers), with the species operating at one scale greatly influencing
those at a different scale. Hidden within this complexity there are often
underlying structures that, if properly quantified, give great insight into the
dynamical or stationary behavior of the system. The first part of this project
aims to develop mathematical theory that relates the emergent properties of
these systems with easily checked properties of the associated reaction graphs,
and their sub-graphs. A second part focuses on the development of biochemical
reaction networks that implement neural networks and machine learning
algorithms. Here the goal is not solely rooted in the algorithmic construction
of such networks, but also in developing a proper mathematical framework for
this research area. A final part focuses on algorithm development (and analysis)
for the unbiased estimation of stationary distributions for the stochastic
models commonly utilized for biological interaction networks. The primary tools
and methods utilized by the investigator and his students are from probability
theory, stochastic analysis, dynamical systems theory, chemical reaction network
theory, and computational mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.