* 2051260
* ERASE-PFAS: Electrocatalytic Hydrodefluorination of PFAS Using Molecular, Metal-Free Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Jianbing Jiang, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 402,387.00

Per- and poly-fluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are a family of thousands of
compounds that have been widely used due to their extreme stability and ease of
production. The atmospheric lifetime of PFAS can exceed 2000 years, and they
have been widely detected in food, consumer products, drinking water, and living
organisms. The toxicity, persistence, and widespread distribution of PFAS has
created an urgent need for low cost and effective treatment technologies. The
objective of this research project is to address this need through the
development of metal-free catalysts that degrade PFAS to non-toxic compounds.
The catalysts will be modified to “fine tune” the physical and electrochemical
properties to achieve optimal PFAS destruction. An advantage of this approach is
that electricity drives the degradation reaction, removing the need for adding
reducing chemicals. Successful completion of this project will benefit society
through the development of PFAS treatment technology. This project will engage
students and the general public in research to promote understanding of
chemistry for sustainability. The outcomes of these highly integrated research
and education activities address long-standing environmental challenges. They
also will provide a rich platform for educating the next-generation STEM
workforce, while increasing the scientific literacy of the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Widespread contamination of water supplies with
PFAS has created an urgent national need for effective and low cost PFAS
treatment technology. The goal of this proposal is to address this need through
a multi-stage research project to design, synthesize, and evaluate the catalytic
mechanisms and performance of molecular, metal-free catalysts for
electrocatalytic hydrodefluorination of PFAS. This process uses outer functional
spheres of molecular C-, H-, O-, and N-based catalysts to enable and enhance
catalytic activity, selectivity, and stability. The knowledge generated from
this research will be used to develop design principles for optimizing PFAS
hydrodefluorination. Successful completion of this research holds great promise
for the development of energy‐efficient and environmentally benign PFAS
treatment technology. Outreach activities will focus on educating K-12 students
from underserved communities about how chemistry can promote sustainability and
encourage them to pursue careers in STEM. An annual sustainability-themed day at
the Cincinnati Museum Center will inform the public about how fundamental
research leads to science and technology that enhances their daily
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.