* 2051110
* REU Site: Inclusive Student Training in Rapidly Urbanizing Climate-sensitive Terrains (InSTRUCT)
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Jay Banner, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 10/31/2024
* USD 402,261.00

As projected by the Fourth National Climate Assessment in 2018 for the Texas
region, “As major metropolitan areas … continue their rapid population growth,
overall exposure to extreme rainfall events (and droughts) will increase." A key
challenge is to plan for the resilience of urban populations in the face of
these challenges, in a region already prone to such weather extremes. Meeting
this challenge requires an inclusive conversation that engages students from
diverse backgrounds with culturally relevant material, and also incorporates
multidisciplinary approaches that intertwine geosciences, hydrology, climate
science, ecology, and civil engineering with fields addressing human impacts
such as environmental policy, planning, and sustainability. Within our student
research training program, we will analyze the processes, feedbacks, and impacts
that affect our quality of life, ranging from human health, to ecosystem
services, to degradation of resources. We will place new emphases on: 1)
building an inclusive program by recruiting students from groups
underrepresented in STEM majors and the STEM workforce, 2) integrating a diverse
mentor team with respect to gender, race, culture, research, and career-stage,
and 3) embracing an interdisciplinary, synergistic set of research themes,
involving mentors from six different schools and disciplines within the
university: natural sciences, geosciences, engineering, architecture,
government, and public affairs. We thus propose to develop the REU Site on
InSTRUCT: Inclusive Student Training in Rapidly Urbanizing Climate-sensitive
Terrains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of the research projects will be focused on
the central Texas region, which is a climatological and demographic hotspot. We
will organize our research themes around the key connections between the
integrated natural, social, and engineered subsystems. Whereas an individual
student research project will emphasize one subsystem, students will gain an
appreciation of all three subsystems as guided by program elements such as
research roundtables, co-mentoring, and peer shadowing. Research will be
organized around three interdisciplinary themes. Research Theme A will focus on
engineered-natural subsystems. To understand the impacts of rapid growth of
urban populations and the associated built environment, we require models of
urban expansion that integrate changing urban form, climate, and ecosystems, and
the resulting demands for water and other resources. Research Theme B will focus
on social-engineered subsystems. By understanding individual and organizational
preferences, limitations, and behaviors—along with pressures placed on them by
environmental factors—we can better understand how individuals and organizations
within social-engineered systems alleviate or exacerbate key interactions
between the subsystems. Research Theme C will focus on past perspectives on
sustainability. Studies of past societies, ecosystems and climate and hydrologic
systems offer unique perspectives on present and future change that can inform
planning for sustainable urban systems. Students will apply a range of
methodologies to these research themes, including computational modeling of
climate, hydrology, and infrastructure projections, natural geochemical tracers
of water quality impacts, and survey research on equitable distribution of
environmental resources. Project design will consider that the short 10-week
length of the experience does not compromise the research tenets of project
design, hypothesis framing, method selection, assessment of data quality, data
interpretation and communication of results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.