* 2052310
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-cost clean one-step production of solar silicon from natural quartzite
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2023
* MOHAMMAD ASADIKIYA, SILARTEK LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 04/30/2023
* USD 271,730.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be the reduction of silicon in PV modules
from 4¢/W to 0.8-1¢/W. Besides considerable silicon price reduction, this novel
technology removes currently presented safety and environmental concerns of
silicon production. Decreasing the total PV module cost will improve access to
solar cells, through which the overall consumption of fossil fuels could be
reduced. Moreover, since this novel technology is zero direct GHG emission,
replacing the current manufacturing processes with our new technology can
positively affect the environment directly and immediately. This project will
also advance the state-of-the-art in silicon manufacturing and provide a
domestic source of PV quality silicon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
develop a new molten salt electrolysis process which can produce solar silicon
from natural 99.7-99.9% pure quartzite (SiO₂) in just two steps, replacing a
complex energy-intensive five-step process today. This process utilizes a state-
of-the-art molten salt composition with a new mechanism for suppressing dendrite
formation and salt trapping. This process can potentially produce silicon with
4-5N purity at $1.70/kg using &lt;30 kWh/kg, with pure oxygen by-product and
zero direct Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions. The 4-5N product purity would be
sufficient for directional solidification or direct boule/wafer production,
resulting in $2.20-2.70/kg solar-grade silicon cost, i.e., 75-80% lower than
today. This purity through the novel process is achievable via electrochemical
selection, an inert anode to avoid carbon anode contamination, and low impurity
solubility in the solid silicon product. The technical issues/risks to be
addressed in this proposal are salt trapping to practically produce dense and
pure product, removing more electronegative impurities (P, Fe) that cause
problems with carrier lifetimes, and utilizing magnetohydrodynamics (MHD)
stirring to overcome stagnant electrolyte bath.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.