* 2052913
* EAR-PF Paleoelevation reconstruction in hyper-arid settings – integrating triple oxygen and clumped isotope techniques in the Salar de Atacama Basin, Chile (22-25S)
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Kristina Butler, Butler, Kristina
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 04/30/2024
* USD 174,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Kristina L. Butler has been
awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry out research and education
activities related to climate and mountain building at the University of
Washington and Brown University. The construction of high elevations through
mountain building dramatically influences global and local climate, regional
river and groundwater systems, and species diversification. Documenting the
timing and rate at which regions of high elevation were built is key to
connecting important Earth system processes to one another. However, regions of
high elevation also tend to be some of the driest localities on Earth, which
creates challenges in reconstructing the history of surface uplift. Traditional
methods, used easily in temperate and tropical climates, can be less effective
in dry, desert-like regions due the effect of evaporation. This project uses
recently developed techniques to reconstruct surface elevation development from
lacustrine carbonates, which record the history of mountain building in the
Central Andes, South America. Focusing on one of the driest regions on Earth,
the Salar de Atacama Desert, this study has the potential to demonstrate how
new, emerging techniques can be applied to longstanding questions in Earth
Science. The project will support field- and laboratory-based training and
research opportunities for geoscience undergraduate students from traditionally
underserved communities in both the United States and South America.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate reconstruction of surface elevation histories
remains a key challenge for Earth scientists, especially in regions of hyper-
arid conditions where the effects of evaporation lead to inaccurate estimation
of paleotemperature and paleoelevation using conventional δ 18O-based methods.
Emerging triple oxygen isotope techniques show promise in constraining the
degree of evaporative enrichment of δ 18O values of carbonate parent water
inherent to lacustrine systems in hyper-arid endorheic settings. Principle
investigator Kristina Butler will apply this new stable isotope methodology for
paleoelevation reconstruction (Δ17O- δ 18O) complimented by temperature-based
paleoaltimetry (Δ47) in collaboration with scientific advisers at Brown
University and University of Washington. These complimentary methods will be
used to document the development of high topography in the Central Andes. The
objective of the project is to reconstruct the Miocene to recent surface
elevation history in the Salar de Atacama Desert by integrating sedimentology,
geochronology, and stable isotope techniques with the ultimate goal of defining
the driving mechanisms for high topography and resolving conflicting surface
elevation records in the Central Andes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.