* 2052290
* SBIR Phase I:  A novel class of molecular vehicles for the targeted and precise integration of specified genetic information into the genomes of host cells and organisms
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,11/30/2022
* Bernhard Suter, STELLATE DNA LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 11/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to advance artificial integration of genetic information (genetic
payloads) into the genomes of animal cells, microorganisms, and plants. A novel
class of molecular vehicles (DNA donors) allows an unprecedented efficiency in
delivering genetic payloads when combined with the established CRISPR (clustered
short interspaced palindromic repeats) system for gene editing and genome
engineering. The new payload delivery technology is expected to enable many
emergent and innovative applications. This technology provides a safer
alternative to the state-of-the-art method at lower cost. Non-therapeutic
applications will enable the efficient generation of cell lines and transgenic
animals. In plant biotechnology, the new DNA donors will allow complex genetic
engineering with only one round of genome modification, improving crop yields
and agricultural production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project provides
a key innovation to the DNA donors that are used for transferring genetic
payloads for targeted integration via CRISPR. Whereas CRISPR-mediated gene
disruption (knock-out) is very efficient, integration of transfected DNA donors
for targeted integration (knock-in) is generally limited. Existing commercial
solutions are focused on small gene-sized payloads, but an innovative solution
that enables the integration of larger payloads carrying several genes or entire
genetic circuits is critically needed. The work in this proposal will
demonstrate the broad applicability of the gene transfer and editing technology
in a subset of therapeutically relevant cell types, such as stem cells and
primary immune cells. The performance of the novel donor vehicles will be
assessed by comparing their integration efficiency and precision of integration
and cell toxicity to conventional DNA donor molecules and virus-based delivery
systems. In addition, the project will demonstrate the ability to produce large
quantities of the new DNA donors, thus greatly facilitating their application in
cell therapies and dramatically reducing their overall
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.