* 2052691
*  IUCRC Planning Grant Indiana University: Center for Population Health Analytics &amp; Technology [CPHAT]
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2022
* Joshua Vest, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 04/30/2022
* USD 20,000.00

The US healthcare system is one of the largest sectors of the American economy.
However, the industry is not designed to effectively address the social,
technological, and health problems facing the nation. For example, addiction is
among the leading cause of death and economic burden, but people with addiction
often receive poor healthcare. Healthcare is designed to deal with clinical
problems, but social determinants are the largest drivers of costs and poor
health. Healthcare organizations need analytic tools to help manage the needs
and risks of entire populations. New technologies and scientific advancements
are needed to improve national health and prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
partnership between Indiana University, The Ohio State University, and
University of Florida, The Center for Population Health Analytics &amp;
Technology (CPHAT) will advance technologies, knowledge, and methods that
improve health and wellbeing related to social determinants of health,
population health analytics, and addiction. CPHAT will produce tools that
support clinical and business decision making, models to identify and support
high-risk populations, analytics that address health inequities, and
interventions for addiction. The Indiana University Site will particularly focus
on developing novel measurement methods for social determinants for use in
predictive modeling and risk stratification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CPHAT will
have a positive impact on the well-being of individuals in society by improving
the effectiveness and the equity of US health care. The CPHAT will partner with
innovative industry members to develop the science and technology necessary to
deal with the social and behavioral drivers of poor health. Population health is
a dramatic departure from traditional approaches in that it specifically focuses
on improving health outcomes and health equity for all individuals. In addition,
the CPHAT will further the NSF’s goal of increased partnership between academia
and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CPHAT will maintain project repositories
for the duration of the project period. Each university partner site will
maintain individual and shared project repositories consistent with data sharing
and usage agreements. A centrally-hosted project repository will include all
CPHAT project results, publications, and related
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.