* 2052297
* SBIR Phase I: Space Object Tracking Unit
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Russell Case, SPACE DOMAIN AWARENESS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 11/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable sustainable growth of the space
ecosystem by making transparency, accountability, and predictability easy and
simple for space asset operators and owners. Over the next decade, mankind will
launch more objects into orbit than have launched in the entire history of space
exploration. Current systems are not adequately equipped to manage the increased
traffic and collision avoidance models need better data to scale. There are no
unambiguous, persistent, and low-cost means to identify, track, and troubleshoot
assets launched into orbit. The proposed system would fill this gap by making it
easy and simple for customers to be good stewards of the orbital domain and
enable fail-safe communications with a satellite. The proposed system would
significantly increase the quality of space data to help avoid collisions and
prevent unnecessary “space junk” due to an inability to identify newly-launched
assets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project aims to fill the capability gap of current systems to support
the explosive growth of the space economy by building a laser beacon that is a
space orbit tracking unit. Current beacon systems rely on radio frequency
communications, which are too bulky for small satellites, contribute to
interference problems, and require a license from governing agencies. The
proposed solution bypasses the limitations of the state-of-the-art by using a
low-power optical signal. This signal is sent from a tiny device compatible with
small satellites which makes adoption simple for the predominant form-factor on
orbit. Research goals include miniaturization of the electronic systems,
modeling the optical link between beacon and detector, and determining optimal
configuration for the power supply/generation so the beacon does not draw host
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.