* 2052834
* EAR-PF Salinity Influence on Methane Emissions from Tidal Wetlands Determined by Clumped Isotopes
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Mojhgan Haghnegahdar, Haghnegahdar            Mojhgan
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 05/31/2024
* USD 174,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methane (CH4) is the most
abundant organic gas in Earth’s atmosphere, and a greenhouse gas. The EPA
estimates indicate that methane accounts for 10% of national greenhouse gas
emissions (www.epa.gov/ghgemissions). Methane emissions to the atmosphere
include both anthropogenic and natural sources. Of these, wetlands not only play
a significant role in the global methane budget, but are also one of the sources
with the greatest associated uncertainties. This proposal focuses on wetland
methane emissions within the Chesapeake Bay region. This region consists of a
variety of environments that produce methane, most notably freshwater tidal
wetlands. The proposed research will help characterize the regional methane
budget and role of microbial processes that are driven by both natural and
anthropogenic forcing of estuarine salinity. This work will support a longer-
term project to construct a regional methane cycle model and to model
atmospheric methane in this part of the world. Understanding the evolution of
the atmospheric methane budget has important implications for local tidal
wetlands restoration projects and national climate change policy
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Estimates of methane emissions from tidal
wetlands are subject to high uncertainty and commonly suffer from the lack of
information, but essential for determining the atmospheric methane budget and
its change over time. The proposed research will evaluate the role of salinity
(seasonal and regional changes) on microbial methane production and consumption
in Maryland wetlands using new methane isotopologue fingerprinting approach.
This work will document signatures of carbon and hydrogen in clumped isotopes
that depend on varying environmental conditions and seek to develop an
isotopologue tracer to track rates of microbial methane production and
consumption influenced by environmental factors in different tidal wetlands
systems. Using doubly substituted methane isotopologues (clumped isotopes)
offers an additional way to resolve uncertainties about the biogenic methane
formation pathways under various environmental conditions including the salinity
and electron acceptors variability. This study will also address key questions
regarding the pathways in methane production and consumption by microbes under
the influence of various salinity regimes in tidal wetland systems. The work is
a combination of in-situ methane measurements and laboratory (under controlled
conditions) experiments. The results of this study will improve our
understanding of the role of tidal wetlands in methane budget in Maryland and
will be beneficial in environmental policy decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.