* 2052011
* SBIR Phase I:  Spatial Computing Learning System for Early Literacy Development
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Jason Charles, NOVELTY FILMS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of a new method for children
with language-based learning disabilities (dyslexia) to practice early literacy
skills via a spatial computing system (augmented reality). Approximately fifteen
percent of children and adults have dyslexia, a language-based learning
disability that makes it difficult to read, write, and spell. It is not related
to capability nor effort. Moreover, behavioral improvements occur among children
with developmental dyslexia after reading intervention. Conventional remediation
therapies include systematic phonics-based instruction or a highly trained
speech-language therapist. Computerized therapies offer more intensive
instruction at lower costs, but existing programs do not fully address the
social-emotional anxieties seen among children with language-based learning
disabilities. The proposed project develops personalized, automated interaction
in a context of compelling game play, utilizing advanced understanding of
learning methods and linguistic development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is based on the development
of a multi-sensory learning loop within a spatial computing system (augmented
reality) for end-users (children) to practice the structured literacy approach
on mobile devices. Informed by research suggesting that playing 3D-platform
video games promotes hippocampal health in young adults, the proposed project
uses three-dimensional game objects and touch inputs from the user to stimulate
motivation and learning within a spatial computing system. Linguistic
principles, such as English phonology-phonics, morphology, grammar rules, and
syntax are transformed into 3D game objects and embedded within a virtual
simulation model wherein a user interacts with them, providing a new method to
practice early literacy skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.