* 2052335
* SBIR Phase I:  Identifying and Countering Misinformation on Closed Messaging Platforms (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Edward Bice, Meedan Labs
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2022
* USD 255,997.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be to advance the state-of-the-art for detecting, prioritizing, and
responding to misinformation online. As more platforms are moving to end-to-end
encryption, it is critical that new tools and algorithms are developed to
respond to misinformation on these platforms. Encryption on platforms such as
WhatsApp, Viber, LINE, Telegram, and Signal protects the communications of
millions of Americans but also potentially allows rumors, misinformation,
disinformation, and other threats to spread. This project builds ‘misinformation
tiplines’: online accounts that allow users to check potential misinformation
with leading fact-checking organizations. The proposed algorithms will allow
Americans to check potential misinformation with fact-checking organizations
allowing them to identify dangerous—and for health misinformation sometimes
life-threatening—misinformation online. The project empowers users of online
communication platforms and improves their safety while maintaining the benefits
of end-to-end encryption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will overcome key challenges in order to allow
tiplines to scale efficiently to millions of users. Tiplines require a
thoughtful combination of artificial intelligence and human knowledge. The same
misleading claims are often repeated and restated in many different ways online.
In order for tiplines to scale, it is necessary to identify the claims being
made in messages submitted to tiplines and match them against the extensive
library of existing fact-checks. Claims can be in the form of text, image,
video, or audio messages and expressed in many different human languages. In
this project the company is building the algorithms needed to match these claims
across languages and across formats. The results break new ground in natural
language processing, computer vision, and machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.