* 2052839
* EAR-PF: Active Tectonics and Crustal Structure of Northern Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Bryant Chow, Chow, Bryant
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Bryant Chow has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
investigate the question of why earthquakes occur where they do. This work will
take place at the University of Alaska Fairbanks under the mentorship of Dr.
Carl Tape. The Earth’s crust is the outermost shell where all human activity
takes place. Fractured into many tectonic plates, the crust hosts disastrous
events, such as earthquakes, tsunamis, and volcanic eruptions, near its surface.
Earthquakes typically occur where two or more plates meet, but they can also
occur far from plate boundaries. The processes that cause these earthquakes are
not well understood. This project seeks to characterize Earth’s crustal
structure, linking deep-Earth processes with surface geological activity to
explore why earthquakes occur where they do. The work will investigate plate
tectonic processes and crustal structure in northern Alaska, an understudied
region far from plate boundaries that has hosted M&gt;4 earthquakes. The goal is
to characterize earthquakes and develop high-resolution models of the crust in
order to understand how tectonic forces are transferred far into the interior of
plates. Although population density in northern Alaska is low, earthquake hazard
remains important for infrastructure, environmental, and industrial purposes and
is critical for development in the region. Alaska’s North Slope is a major oil
producing region for the United States, and northeastern Alaska is home to the
largest national wildlife refuge in the country. This project involves outreach
to local communities in northern Alaska using novel teaching tools to convey
earthquake risks and hazards. Additionally, Dr. Chow will produce a
comprehensive catalog of models that can be used for characterizing earthquake
hazard. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes a detailed seismotectonic
investigation of northern Alaska to constrain mechanisms controlling tectonics
in and around the region. Northern Alaska features diffuse seismicity and large-
scale deformation far from the plate boundaries. However, the structures and
processes involved are not well understood. Due to its remoteness, difficulties
in mapping and monitoring of northern Alaska have resulted in historically
sparse coverage. This changed following the deployment of the EarthScope
Transportable Array in Alaska, with years of high-quality seismic data now
available for a comprehensive study. This project involves investigation of two
scientific questions: Are deformation and structure in northeastern Alaska
consistent with (1) far field deformation from plate convergence 1000 km away?
and (2) extrusional extension of western Alaska? This work will advance
understanding of how global geodynamic processes shape continental scale
tectonics and relate to regional deformation and local seismicity, using
waveform cross-correlation techniques and 3D numerical waveform simulations.
Detection and re-location of seismicity will be followed by inversion of seismic
moment tensors to constrain fault structure and deformation characteristics.
Waveform simulations will be used to validate existing tomography models of
northern Alaska and for subsequent full-waveform tomography, which will result
in high-resolution structural models of the crust and upper mantle. Ambient
noise adjoint tomography will provide a velocity model of northern Alaska with
resolution on the order of tens of km. A subsequent earthquake adjoint
tomography inversion will refine a northeastern subset of this model, resulting
in km scale resolutions. The success of these tasks will lead to refined
earthquake catalogs, high resolution velocity models, and detailed
interpretations of tectonic processes for northern
Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the EAR
Postdoctoral Fellowship program, the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the EAR Geophysics
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.