* 2052747
* IUCRC Phase III The Ohio State University: Manufacturing &amp; Materials Joining Innovation Center (Ma2JIC)
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Boian Alexandrov, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 05/31/2026
* USD 761,604.00

The Manufacturing and Materials Joining Innovation Center (Ma2JIC) is a multi-
university consortium leading materials joining and metal additive manufacturing
research by fostering and translating scientific discovery to application. The
Center also educates the next generation of scientists and engineers that will
develop new advanced manufacturing technologies and process innovations to
rebuild the competitiveness of U.S. domestic manufacturing. Given the importance
of materials joining for the manufacturing of products that are critical to
health, safety, national security, and the continuity of multiple industries,
Ma2JIC serves multiple sectors of national interest for the U.S. economy and
defense. The center provides a highly collaborative research environment among
government partners, industry, and university faculty and students to promote
the development and application of fundamental knowledge in materials joining
and additive manufacturing. The Center also serves as a platform for the
education of a well-trained and diverse scientific and engineering workforce.
Ma2JICâ€™s primary focus on research and development translates into industry
members' and consumers' benefit. The coordinated effort across all sites
increases public awareness, scientific literacy and a diverse STEM pipeline.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on the needs of its large and diverse industrial
membership, Ma2JIC supports research in the following three thrust areas: (1)
Materials &amp; Joints Performance, (2) Additive Manufacturing, Process
Development &amp; Control, and (3) Materials, Microstructure &amp; Weldability
&amp; Printability. The Materials &amp; Joints Performance thrust focuses on the
effect of materials and manufacturing processes on the mechanical, functional
and environmental performance of manufactured or printed components, especially
with regard to improved reliability, cost reduction and extension of service
life of critical infrastructure. The Additive Manufacturing, Process Development
&amp; Control thrust area addresses fundamental challenges in joining and
additive manufacturing (AM) processes, robotics, and control, as well as
integrated computational materials engineering (ICME) frameworks for joining and
AM. Finally, the Materials, Microstructure &amp; Weldability &amp; Printability
thrust area seeks to develop fundamental understanding and testing capabilities
to enable evaluation and development of materials more amenable to advanced
joining and manufacturing processes. The Ohio State University (OSU) site
complements collaborative research within the center with its research
capabilities and infrastructure resources for weldability and printability test
development; accelerated alloy development and design, process and materials
evolution modeling; non-destructive evaluation; and additive manufacturing using
powder-bed and large scale direct energy deposition techniques using electron
and laser beams as well as wire-based arc welding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.