* 2052459
* Investigating cardiac repair in a new adult mammalian model for regeneration, the spiny mouse, Acomys cahirinus
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2024
* Malcolm Maden, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

Nearly 800,000 Americans have a heart attack each year which results in the
death of many cells and the production of scar tissue in the surviving
ventricular tissue. The contractile force of the heart is never recovered and
typically declines to a point where survival is threatened. The reason for this
is because there is no regenerative or repair capacity in the adult mammalian
heart. However, we have discovered an adult mammal, the spiny mouse of the genus
Acomys, that does not respond to organ damage in the typical mammalian fashion
by scarring, but instead can completely regenerate tissues such as the skin,
skeletal muscle and the ear. In the heart we have shown that the contractile
force of the spiny mouse heart shows a remarkable recovery over a 4-week period
following an induced heart attack and that there is very little fibrotic tissue
laid down. In this project we will investigate whether the cells of the spiny
mouse heart can proliferate after a heart attack, which tissues of the heart
respond to damage and what gene pathways are induced to stimulate this recovery.
Discovering the mechanisms of how the adult spiny mouse recovers from a heart
attack and translating this to humans will have a dramatic effect on the health
of our society. This project includes new undergraduate courses that will engage
students in meaningful research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several tissues
of the adult spiny mouse, Acomys, can completely regenerate after wounding
including skin, muscle and the ear in contrast to the lab mouse which responds
by fibrosis and scarring. We have shown that after a myocardial infarction the
ventricle tissue of the spiny mouse heart shows very little fibrosis and can
recover its contractile force over a 4-week period whereas the lab mouse does
not and the ventricle shows widespread damage and a spreading of fibrosis
throughout the tissue. This project is intended to, firstly, answer the question
of whether this is true cardiac regeneration by cardiomyocyte proliferation in
histological studies using fibrosis markers, proliferation markers and cell
death markers in comparison to the response of the lab mouse. We will be
particularly concerned with whether Acomys forms a scar which then resolves or
never forms a scar at all which we will further explore using a cryoinjury
model. Secondly, we will perform RNA-seq to look at the global gene expression
profile of the damaged Acomys heart compared to Mus with a focus on known
epicardial and cardiomyocyte signaling pathways and perform functional tests of
these pathways using pharmacological inhibition. We will also identify the miRNA
profiles which are present in the damaged Acomys heart and begin a functional
analysis of selected candidates. Thirdly, we will perform a single cell RNA-seq
analysis of the damaged hearts to identify potentially new cellular gene
networks which may be responsible for the improved response in
Acomys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.