* 2052395
* STTR Phase I:  Physics (PHY) Rateless Codec Technology for Proximity Space Links
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Amogh Rajanna, TFWIRELESS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 04/30/2023
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project stems from developing a wireless communications
technology based on physical (PHY) layer rateless codes. If successfully
demonstrated, these codes could provide high data rates with low computational
costs, minimum latency, and enhanced energy efficiency, i.e., long battery life.
The initial target of the technological innovation is the space communications
market - both commercial and government space programs. Space communication
systems are a critical and integral part of every space mission. This Phase I
project focuses on an enabling technology addressing capability gaps that could
provide cheaper and faster solutions for the data communication systems.
Commercialization of the proposed technology is beneficial to the US economy and
government since the development of innovative technologies for the space sector
contributes to economic growth in the emerging space economy. The proposed next-
generation wireless communications technology may also support a wide variety of
applications and use cases in the terrestrial wireless market. These application
areas include 5G Ultra Reliable Low Latency Communications (URLLC), Industrial
Internet of Things (IoT) use cases, and unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)
communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
(STTR) Phase I project is focused on developing a PHY rateless codes-based novel
adaptive transmission technology for the reliable transmission of information
bits between a wireless transmitter and receiver. PHY rateless codes have the
innate ability to adapt both the code construction and the number of code bits
for an as-needed transmission of code bits. The adaptive transmission technology
in the PHY layer interacts with the automatic repeat request (ARQ) protocols in
the data link layer (DLL) affecting its sequence of operations. The DLL designed
for the traditional fixed-rate coding is a poor match for the PHY rateless
system. A key goal of the proposed Phase I project is to design a simple and yet
effective DLL for a proximity space link using PHY rateless codes which
optimizes the throughput, establishing the technical feasibility. The Phase I
project aims to add new design features to the PHY rateless encoder and decoder
based on deep learning/auto encoder enhancements, structured permutations, and
efficient algorithms/techniques for solving sparse linear
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.