* 2052407
* SBIR Phase I:  Electric Vehicle Useful Life Prediction
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2022
* Scott Case, RECURRENT MOTORS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 04/30/2022
* USD 251,958.00

The broader impact of this SBIR Phase I project is enabling middle and low
income car buyers to fully participate in the electrification of transportation,
ensuring that all Americans can benefit from lower fuel bills, maintenance
costs, and healthier community environments. It is not well understood how
electric vehicle (EV) battery packs in cars on the road today degrade over time
and how they should be valued. This uncertainty in future battery performance
directly impacts confidence in buying a used EV. The project proposes the
development of a battery report that is able to remotely and rapidly diagnose
and predict the state of health of EV battery packs through machine learning
models validated by physical inspection and evaluation of a sample of EVs. The
project’s scale, scope, and commercial result would accelerate the adoption and
accessibility of EVs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project addresses the need for scalable, accessible and non-
invasive state of health prediction on a wide variety of plug-in electric
vehicles (PEVs) by using a set of machine learning models. This will be
accomplished by collecting daily observation data from an unprecedented number
of PEVs on the road from a diverse set of makes, models, years, and climates.
This dataset will be used to train machine learning algorithms on a key set of
remotely accessible features to predict range and battery health metrics. The
machine learning approach builds on a combination of tree-based ensemble models
and linear models informed by physics-based experiments, and will eventually
expand to other more advanced algorithms as appropriate. The goals of this Phase
I project are to (1) recruit 25,000+ more PEV drivers over 6 months, (2)
demonstrate a set of tools that are accurate enough to meet consumer demand for
near-term degradation models for the used PEVs on the road, (3) validate machine
learning determined state of health estimates with hands-on experimentation with
a subset of vehicles, and (4) use these hands-on experiments to better
understand the relationships between remotely accessible proxy data and state of
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.