* 2052706
* IUCRC Planning Grant University of Notre Dame: Center for Quantum Technologies (CQT)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2022
* Peter Kogge, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 04/30/2022
* USD 20,000.00

The Center for Quantum Technologies (CQT) is a partnership between Purdue
University, Indiana University, the University of Notre Dame, and Indiana
University Purdue University - Indianapolis (IUPUI). The mission of the CQT is
to collaborate with industry and government stakeholders to identify compelling
needs and challenges in quantum technologies, and then develop novel solutions
to address these opportunities. Quantum technologies are governed by the physics
of sub-atomic particles and have relevance to computing, sensing, imaging,
metrology, communications, and cryptography. Because of their wide-ranging
applicability, quantum technologies have the potential to be transformative,
with uses in intelligence, financial security, computing, medicine, and
navigation. Society has entered the second quantum revolution, but it is still
in its infancy, and the nascent quantum industry requires significant
fundamental research to mature novel technologies. In partnership with
industrial members, the CQT researchers will use their expertise in quantum
science and engineering to develop and transfer foundational knowledge into
industry-friendly quantum devices, systems, and algorithms with enhanced
functionality and performance. Additionally, the CQT will help train the next
generation of quantum scientists and engineers to support the development of a
critically needed quantum workforce. Students will not only conduct Center
research, but also help writing project reports, present at biannual meetings,
and interact with industry and government members. Finally, the CQT will
leverage established programs at each of the four universities to engage and
support students traditionally underrepresented in STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As one of the four Center sites, the University of Notre
Dame will leverage its existing Centers and industrial relationships to drive
quantum research in the areas of advanced materials and devices, quantum
simulations of physical phenomena such as spin chemistry, quantum algorithms for
data sciences and machine learning, and high-performance computing systems
architectures. For example, Notre Dame leads the ASCENT Center, a consortium of
14 universities, on the research and development of devices that use quantum
effects. Also, Notre Dame’s Quantum Computing Lab (QCLab) has a long-running
relationship with industry into quantum simulations of spin-chemical phenomena.
As a member of IBM’s Q Network, university researchers and their students have
access to IBM’s quantum computers. Notre Dame faculty study the architecture and
limits of classical supercomputers and foundational studies into the emerging
“exascale” computers. In addition, Notre Dame’s CQT activities will mesh with
other campus Centers, including the Center for STEM Education, the Center for
Civic Innovation, and iNDustry Labs, to expand both workforce development and
STEM education of underrepresented groups into the quantum
realm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.