* 2052341
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a smart container for mobile blood banking system used in cold blood storage and transport in extreme environments
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,02/28/2022
* Jeffry Skiba, DESERT VALLEY TECH INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/28/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to increase the availability of cold stored
medical therapies for point of injury care in a prehospital setting, as well as
to increase cold chain payload transparency with real time data tracking for a
wide variety of biological materials. Increased cold chain transparency via
internet of things (IoT) connected devices will allow clinicians and inventory
managers to confidently push therapies outside of a hospital with full
confidence in their efficacy upon administration to severely wounded patients
where care is needed prior to or during transport to a medical facility. Real
time data on payload conditions may enable clinicians know exactly what the
payload temperatures are without having to manually open a container, exposing
payloads to heat, dust, sun and other undesirable conditions to determine the
status of their cold-stored biomaterials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project specifically targets the
high mortality rates associated with trauma wounds in the field or at the
accident site. By providing a modular cooling, storage, and transportation
system, the use of preferred whole blood and blood component therapies will be
more readily available for life saving interventions. The goal of this project
is to identify lightweight, mobile, and modular cooler and storage devices to
validate small unit, interchangeable blood banking solutions to support
clinicians in a prehospital setting. Additional research goals focus on sensor
integration both inside and outside of device to use data driven learning and in
a future state artificial intelligence to maximize use of temperature sensitive
therapies from an inventory management perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.