* 2052404
* SBIR Phase I:  Instructor-friendly intelligent VR platform for secondary and post-secondary distance learning and STEAM education
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,09/30/2022
* Alex Stolyarik, ECOSYSTEMONE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 09/30/2022
* USD 255,550.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to use virtual reality (VR) to create
immersive, highly engaging environments for collaborative remote learning. As
more students take at least some of their classes online, there is a need to
develop virtual learning environments that support diverse learners with
different strengths, interests, and learning preferences. The project will
support diverse learning environments by leveraging the rich data available from
VR to detect and classify learner engagement in an immersive, collaborative
learning experience. As a major scientific contribution, the new system will
provide feedback on levels of learner engagement and ultimately make
recommendations for personalized learning activities. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks
to create a novel real-time recommendation system for maintaining learner
engagement in a collaborative, immersive, VR learning environment. The research
will collect behavioral data that can identify different engagement types during
collaborative learning to support learners with different strengths, various
interests, and learning preferences. Subsequently, the metadata will allow for
the development of algorithms for automating real-time, system-generated
recommendations for personalizing curriculum options. The knowledge gained will
aid diversity and increase engagement in remote VR learning as well as other
collaborative, digital environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.