* 2052263
* SBIR Phase I:  Energy Harvesting Using Protein Nanostructures
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2022
* Alexander Smith, POWER FOR HUMANITY, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 04/30/2022
* USD 255,703.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to demonstrate proof-of-concept for a new
clean energy technology that uses protein nanostructures to serve as a safe
alternative, or supplement, to traditional batteries. The goal is to create
power units that are 100% recyclable, preventing toxic electronic waste from
accumulating in landfills, and that generate continuous power, reducing the
direct and labor costs associated with replacing traditional batteries. These
costs are a significant hurdle that slows the widespread adoption and use of
low-power, high-value electronics such as networks of industrial Internet of
Things (IoT) sensors. The project may also address applications, such a
flammable gas sensors, where traditional batteries are not typically used to due
to safety concerns. This Phase 1 project is focused on the initial development
of a safe and sustainable replacement for batteries using a technology that
provides continuous renewable energy and is made with non-toxic recyclable
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of this Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on developing a prototype
device that uses protein nanostructures to generate clean power by means of a
new method of energy harvesting that leverages environmental humidity. The
research objectives are to (i) fabricate standardized, reliable and reproducible
testbed devices; (ii) demonstrate the feasibility of commercial-scale production
of a range of protein nanostructures; and (iii) to evaluate these protein
nanostructures using our testbed devices. The testbed prototype devices will be
made using commercially scalable processes. Devices made using the protein
nanostructures will be evaluated using electrochemical and electronic
characterization techniques. The goals of the project are to successfully
fabricate thin-film power generation devices, prove commercial-scale production
of protein nanostructures, evaluate the power output, and demonstrate a novel
mechanism of action of power generation from the
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.