* 2052390
* STTR Phase I:  Carbon Sequestration &amp; Waste Management for College Campuses &amp; Larger Facilities
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,03/31/2022
* Kieran Mitchell, CARIBOU BIOFUELS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2022
* USD 255,879.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Research Phase I project is to use waste to produce clean, green
energy. The proposed technology diverts waste material from landfills while
sequestering carbon and can be used in many other industries such as food waste,
forestry biomass and disaster relief. For example, wildfires are becoming an
annual threat that destroys large portions of states and thousands of homes. The
proposed technology can reduce wildfire risk by cleaning up the forest
undergrowth. Landfills in many states will be reaching maximum capacity in
coming years and are under threat of being shut down: diverting landfill waste
to the production of valuable products is much desired. Besides municipal waste,
it is also possible to reduce the burning of agricultural waste by converting
these waste streams into valuable outputs, such as biofuels and biochar for use
in applications including concrete and water filtration. A significant amount of
carbon is sequestered in this process which can earn additional carbon credits
to the operator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop a low-
pressure hydrothermal liquefaction Inclined Rotary Gasifier (IRG). The project
will optimize its outputs to further clean up the liquid &amp; gas product
streams from heavy metal contaminants such as Cu, Pb, Hg, Ni, Zn, and Cd, and
high concentrations of other contaminants. Phase I research will focus on
developing the process to remove up to 90% of the original concentration of
these contaminants without compromising the syngas energy content. This will
require maximizing the biochar production rate. These rates are typically lower
than those when biomass is used as a feedstock. Hence a detailed investigation
into the system's thermal efficiency will be undertaken with an aim to increase
it. This may require increasing the heat transfer rates through design
modifications and the choice of operating conditions. The bio-oil and water
(from the high-pressure dewatering system) will also be cleaned by the biochar
produced by the same municipal solid waste feedstock.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.