* 2052242
* STTR Phase I:  Novel size-changing, gadolinium-free contrast agent for magnetic resonance angiography
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2023
* Allan David, NANOXORT LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 02/28/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is improved diagnosis of cardiovascular disease,
the top cause of death globally, taking about 18 million lives each year. The
proposed work will develop a contrast agent that improves the diagnostic value
of magnetic resonance angiograms (MRA), by enhancing images of the vascular
system, and which also shows an improved safety profile compared to currently
utilized contrast agents. It thus has the potential to vastly improve the
detection of abnormalities (e.g. aneurysms) in the aorta, peripheral, renal, and
carotid arteries, among others. This product will bring significant value to
radiologists and medical institutions that perform MRAs for diagnosis of deep
venous thrombosis, vascular malformations, peripheral arterial disease, and in
pediatric imaging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
(STTR) Phase I will develop a novel iron-based, blood-pool contrast agent (BPCA)
for use in magnetic resonance angiograms (MRA) with enhanced imaging
capabilities and reduced risk of long-term side effects. Contrast-enhanced MRA
is a staple diagnostic procedure for imaging blood vessels, and the market is
currently dominated by gadolinium-based contrast agents (GBCAs) due to their
excellent longitudinal (T1)-shortening effects. However, GBCAs are associated
with numerous side effects and long-term gadolinium deposition in the brain. Due
to their potential toxicity, GBCAs are designed to be rapidly cleared through
kidney filtration – leaving only a short window for MRA image acquisition and
resulting in poor image quality. To address the need for a safer contrast agent
that provides enhanced vascular imaging, this project will develop an iron-based
BPCA (i.e. one that remains in blood vessels), enabling an extended imaging
window for improved vascular imaging in MRA, but which is then cleared by kidney
filtration (minimizing tissue accumulation). Successful accomplishment of Phase
I goals will demonstrate that the proposed agent achieves the desired BPCA that
is cleared through kidney filtration, control pharmacokinetics and
biodistribution, and demonstrates enhanced MRA performance versus
GBCAs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.