* 2052814
* IUCRC Phase III - The University of Texas at Austin: Center for a Solar Powered Future (SPF2050)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Brian Korgel, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2026
* USD 205,000.00

The Center for a Solar Powered Future (SPF2050) is an Industry/University
Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) that performs research relevant to the solar
power industry. Sunlight provides a widely available energy source that can be
converted directly to electricity by photovoltaic (PV) devices, or solar cells,
without generating pollution, emissions or greenhouse gases during operation.
The vision of SPF2050 is to enable the US and the world to achieve a zero-carbon
footprint by 2050 using solar energy as a resource. SPF2050 promotes close and
sustained engagement between industry innovators, world-class academic teams,
and government agencies to develop higher performance and lower cost solar
cells, improve PV component and system reliability, and enable widespread
adoption and use of solar power systems by addressing the extensive range of
diverse, complex, multi-faceted, interdisciplinary and multi-industry technology
challenges associated with the use of solar power. SPF2050 research catalyzes
economic growth and development, while providing educational opportunities to
students, young scholars and faculty researchers to create a diverse and highly
trained workforce as well as next generation of industry leaders. SPF2050 is
also active in public education and societal outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global energy sustainability represents one of the most
important challenges facing modern society. Even with todayâ€™s significant growth
rate for PV deployment, it will take several decades to achieve a majority of
carbon-free energy for the world. Increased use of PV electricity requires step-
change improvements in PV technology, cost, and societal perspective. Research
performed at the University of Texas - Austin site in SPF2050 ranges from the
development of multijunction and bifacial thin film PV with ultrahigh efficiency
and performance to user-deployable, light-weight and inexpensive PVs to power
internet-of-things devices. Research efforts also include increased
understanding of semiconductor materials and interface properties, improved PV
device design and manufacturing, improved performance and reliability of PV
components and systems, development of new, more effective ways to recycle at
end-of-life, and the creation of a circular solar power economy. The Center also
explores creative, new approaches to land use in both rural and urban
environments, integration of emerging storage technologies with solar power
generation to alleviate problems of intermittency and variability, techno-
economic and socio-economic challenges associated with widespread solar power
use, and identification of new approaches to solar-powered electrification in
transportation, heating and cooling sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.