* 2052039
* SBIR Phase I:  Using enzymes secreted by soil amoebae to fight bacterial biofilms in agriculture
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Noah Stern, AGRAFILMS INC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 08/31/2022
* USD 254,030.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is development of a novel technology platform
for the treatment of bacterial pathogens that pose a persistent threat to plant
health both in the field and during storage of the harvest. Many bacteria kill
their host by forming biofilms on the plant surface. Central to this proposal
are findings that biofilms confer tolerance of bacteria to antimicrobial agents,
whether these antimicrobial agents are antibiotics, disinfectants, or
germicides. Dispersing these biofilms is necessary to remove contaminating
bacteria from the plant surface. This proposal is addressing these challenges by
developing safe and natural biofilm degrading enzymes from the collection of
over 3,000 unique microorganisms called Dictyostelids isolated from five
continents and several island nations. The focus of this proof-of-principle
project is discovery of enzymes for treatment of bacterial potato soft rot. This
disease is socially and commercially impacting our nation as potatoes are the
most consumed vegetable in the U.S. with a total market value exceeding $3.5 B.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project advances the use of Dictyostelid
strains capable of dispersing biofilms formed by Dickeya and Pectobacterium and
feeding on planktonic bacteria liberated from the corresponding bacterial
biofilms. To be able to destroy those biofilms they must be able to break down
biofilm integrity. This project uses proprietary technology licensed to the firm
for a world-wide use in the agricultural markets. Suspected members of Glycoside
Hydrolase Family of enzymes (GHF) have been already identified by bioinformatics
and in crude secreted products. This project has two objectives: (1) Using
polynucleotide chain reaction it will amplify Dictyostelids DNA encoding GHF and
clone it into an Escherichia coli compatible vector with an in-frame Histidine-
Tag sequence for purification using a specialized affinity column, and (2)
Affinity purified enzymes will be used to disperse Dickeya and Pectobacterium
biofilms established on 96-well polystyrene plates. The best performing enzymes
will be further examined for their ability to disperse biofilms on a potato
surface and prevent soft rot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.