* 2052574
* I-Corps:  Ultra-Fast COVID-19 Sensor
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Gerardine Botte, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project include the
deployment of a diagnostic sensor at the COVID-19 pandemic frontlines such as
hospitals, clinical laboratories, authorized drive-in labs, airports, and public
spaces like supermarkets, schools, and universities, work spaces. The sensor
will be used for ultra-fast (less than 1 minute) non-invasive screening of
samples to ensure safety. The ultimate goal is a home-based test that minimizes
the exposure and transmission of virus to clinical technicians and others at
testing locations. This testing ability will identify and isolate carriers of
the virus and thereby control the spread of virus. This technology is timely to
counter COVID-19; However, it can be extended towards detecting other bacteria
and viruses and has shown promise for detecting HIV as well. The versatility of
the sensor will be investigated. In general, the innovation may lead to ensuring
the healthcare of the population by monitoring the condition of individuals
rapidly without causing discomfort. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
focuses on a new technology for COVID-19 diagnosis. The ultra-fast COVID-19
(UFC-19) detection sensor is a fast, portable, small size instrument that
operates directly with saliva (it does not require special swabs or collection
devices) for COVID-19 diagnosis with the ability to sense the presence/absence
of the virus SARS-CoV-2 in a sample in less than 1 second. The portability and
the speed of results makes this sensor a potentially important diagnostic tool
for fast initial screening of samples and continuous monitoring of an
individual. The UFC-19 technology is based on the electron transfer reaction
between the proteins present in the SARS-CoV-2 virus at the
electrode/electrolyte interface. This innovation advances the current
understanding of electrochemical sensors for point-of-care applications by
utilizing multidisciplinary contributions from electrochemical engineering,
virology, and physiology, among others. Through this I-Corps program, the team
intends to learn about the proposed market to pave the path for commercializing
the sensor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.