* 2052127
* SBIR Phase I:  Mobile Produced Water Recycling for Reducing Costs in Natural Gas Production
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Brendan Smith, SITRATION, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 04/30/2023
* USD 255,996.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to realize significant cost savings for
domestic natural gas producers, enabled by recycling wastewater that would
otherwise be disposed of via expensive transportation and permanent injection
into the ground. While the domestic production of natural gas is a central
pillar in the transition to a cleaner energy economy, a detrimental by-product
is contaminated wastewater, known as produced water, which comes to the surface
in large volumes mixed with the gas. In regions such as the Marcellus Basin, the
largest natural gas reserve in the United States, the only viable option is to
truck this water long distances to disposal wells, where it is re-injected, for
a cost that comprises large portions of the operational budget. By developing a
new technology for the treatment and re-use of this water at the well-site, this
project aims to provide a low-cost, environmentally sustainable solution. Doing
so would reduce water management costs as much as 50%, lowering gas production
costs, and conserving billions gallons of water through re-use that would
otherwise be lost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I Project aims to develop a new type of filtration membrane
technology capable of removing critical contaminants from produced water, while
providing the required durability, minimal footprint, mobility, and feasible
cost to enable commercial water recycling for natural gas producers. Currently,
no suitable technical solution exists for the economical recycling of produced
water. This project focuses on a new type of ultra-durable silicon membrane that
combines the filtration ability and low-cost of polymeric membranes with the
resilience of ceramic. Through the strategic manipulation of the membrane
fabrication approach, including catalyst deposition and chemical etching process
parameters, efforts will focus on reducing pore size and increasing pore density
in the membrane. The primary objective of the work is to enable the removal of
critical contaminants from produced water, and to maximize filtration throughput
in order to ensure a small footprint. Successful completion of the project will
result in the advancement of the technology to the field-testing
stage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.