* 2052989
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Scientific Practice, Social Identity, and the Production of Social Knowledge: An Ethnographic Investigation of Experimental Social Psychology
* SBE,SMA
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2023
* Michelle Fine, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 01/31/2023
* USD 29,107.00

Many researchers consider social identities such as race and gender to be
socially constructed categories. This allows researchers to understand these
identities in light of their history, complexity, and relationships to each
other. However, the practical application and use of social identities as
socially constructed “objects of study” is uncommon in some fields of social
science research. This project examines the research practices of experimental
social psychologists. These researchers typically study the impact of the social
environment on human behavior in a controlled laboratory setting. Despite some
criticism, many social psychologists treat social identity categories as fixed,
discrete objects to study them experimentally. These same types of studies are
also criticized for other reasons, including lack of replicability and ease of
fabrication. This project will investigate how social psychologists characterize
and use social identity categories in their work, which may provide useful
insights to address these critiques. Further, this research is important because
the results of social psychology studies exert influence over decision-making in
education, social and public policy, and the law. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary objectives are to: 1) investigate the theories informing how social
identity groups are understood and utilized in experiments, 2) analyze the
methods research teams in social psychology use to select their focus of study;
3) offer first-hand accounts of how researchers’ identities affect their
research products; and 4) analyze the impact and reach of social psychological
experimental data. To meet these objectives, I will conduct ethnographic
observations, interviews, and content analyses. Observations will allow
documentation and analysis of social psychology researchers’ processes and
practices in the laboratory. It will also illuminate how disciplinary culture
and training affect the use of social identity. Interviews will lead to deeper
understanding of the connection between researchers and their objects of study,
and of how researchers view theories of social identity. Tracking and analysis
of highly cited studies and the public presence of research findings (e.g., a
lab’s social media postings) will form proxies of the societal impact of the
research being studied. Ultimately, this project aims to improve the science of
social identity and illuminate the ways information about certain social groups,
which gets produced through scientific practice, shapes how those groups are
characterized in public domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.