* 2052835
* EAR-PF: A Deep Critical Zone Observatory: Towards understanding the relationships of denudation and weathering through time and space
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Brendon Quirk, Quirk, Brendon James
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 05/31/2022
* USD 76,667.00

Dr. Brendon Quirk has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to study
the relationship of global climate conditions and the breakdown of rocks using
lake sediments. The work will be conducted at Purdue University under the
mentorship of Dr. Darryl Granger. Understanding how rocks break down (weather)
and how the resulting material is transported (erosion) throughout geologic
history is critical for understanding how Earth’s climate has evolved.
Specifically, the breakdown of rock through chemical reactions may help to
stabilize global climate and produce a habitable Earth. This work will use lake
sediments to understand how different climate conditions affect rates of
weathering and erosion of rock and soil across Earth’s surface. The anticipated
results will be useful for evaluating specific models of weathering and erosion
in geologic history and may shed light on potential natural feedbacks between
erosion, weathering, and climate. The project includes outreach and mentoring
programs for first-generation college students to conduct research. The
development of accessible laboratory techniques designed to reduce barriers to
conducting research into global climate is another activity supported by this
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding variations in denudation (the sum
of physical and chemical weathering fluxes) of Earth’s surface through time and
space remains one of most pressing problems in the earth sciences. Chemical
weathering of silicate minerals is thought to be one of the main processes which
regulate the global carbon cycle. Thus, denudation may act to stabilize global
climate over geologic timescales and may be an important factor in earth’s
habitability. However, high-resolution records of terrestrial denudation and
weathering for the Quaternary period are rare and questions remain if and how
erosion and weathering might interact to regulate and stabilize the chemical
weathering flux across interglacial-glacial timescales. The work proposed here
seeks to address these outstanding questions by quantifying paleo-denudation and
weathering rates spanning several glacial-interglacial cycles. This project will
use well established methods to quantify paleo-denudation (in situ cosmogenic
Be-10) and weathering intensities (chemical depletion fractions) in lacustrine
sediment archives as well as calibrate promising new methods
(Be-10(meteoric)/Be-9) to quantify each from fine grained, quartz-poor, lake
sediments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.