* 2052049
* SBIR Phase I:  A novel 3D printed biodegradable mesh delivering active pharmaceutical ingredients in a sustained and localized manner
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Khatija Ali, BIOSAPIEN INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to establish a proof-of-concept for an oncological medical device
that will be used as an adjunct treatment for pancreatic cancer (PC). PC is one
of the lethal forms of cancer and is the second leading cause of cancer-related
death in the US. Chemotherapy is the first-line standard treatment for cancer
therapy. The medications used during chemotherapy are administered through an
intravenous infusion (IV), pill, or injection. Once these medications enter the
bloodstream, they destroy the cancerous cells and the healthy cells. The most
common side effects for patients are nausea, vomiting, hair loss, and decreased
immunity leading to a low quality of life. Our prototype aims to reduce
chemotherapy side effects and the need for in-hospital chemotherapy
administration, significantly reducing healthcare costs. The proposed innovative
technology offers an alternative to direct surgical resection in the sensitive
areas surrounding the pancreas. This treatment will extend the number of
patients who can benefit from surgery and increase the overall success of
surgeries primarily by preventing local relapse. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will lay the essential
foundation for understanding the medical device product's physical and chemical
characteristics. Pancreatic cancer (PC) is a "silent" disease because it is
diagnosed at a much later stage when cancer has already metastasized. One of the
significant challenges associated with PC treatment is the standard
administration techniques (e.g., intravenous injection, oral administration)
cannot efficiently deliver a therapeutic concentration of the drug to the tumor
site because of the pancreas' anatomy. The innovative technology used in this
prototype device will render it as an implantable, biodegradable, drug-eluting
product allowing for spatio-temporal control and delivery of various active
pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) directly to the tumor site. Further,
reductions in global toxicity and access to traditionally unresectable areas may
enable higher concentrations of chemotherapeutic agents than could be tolerated
by systemic administration, significantly altering the treatment landscape. This
project will address the following four technical challenges related to the
formulation and physical characteristics of the prototype, which will determine
its release profile and the 3D printing mechanism, and its impact on the
device's quality. The research and development routes that are being pursued
include (1) assessment of prototype mechanical profile, starting with one API of
interest (2) assessment of different polymer compositions and how they impact
the flow of the printing material and resolution; (3) testing the use of
fluorophores during the formulation of the prototype (4) assessment of different
properties of the print material (e.g., pressure, print-head type, temperature,
and viscosity) on the quality of the prototype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.