* 2052592
* RUI: Applications of a Generalized Differential Equation Compartmental Model of Infectious Disease Transmission
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Scott Greenhalgh, Siena College
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2024
* USD 225,298.00

This project concerns a novel class of mathematical models that quantify disease
outbreaks by the total number of days people are infected with a disease. The
goal of the project is to apply these models to answer open questions in public
health and evolutionary biology. The models can provide a simple means to study
how the differences in peoples’ recovery time from infection affects the
evaluation of public health policies, disease interventions, and disease
evolution. As proof of concept, the project will model historical disease
outbreaks, such as measles, whooping cough, and influenza, and compare
predictions to classical modeling approaches that are based on tracking the
number of infected people. The results of the research are expected to
contribute to both the information needed by public health officials to make
informed decisions and the state of knowledge on disease
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and apply a new class
of differential equation compartmental models. This class of models is the first
to consider an alternative assumption as to what quantifies the amount of
disease in a population. By considering the quantity "person-days of infection"
over "disease incidence," the new class of models enables the incorporation of
higher statistical moments from latent and infectious period distributions into
the rates that govern the dynamics of the model. The work aims to illustrate the
straightforward, accurate, and readily interpretable properties of this new
class of compartmental model and its application. The project will analyze
questions such as 1) the interplay between health disparities and virulence
evolution, 2) the impact of infectious period outliers on the cost-effectiveness
of disease interventions, and 3) how host variation affects the evolutionary and
epidemiology dynamics of infectious disease transmission. Essential in tackling
these issues will be the use of mean-residual life theory and analysis
techniques that include stability, cost-effectiveness, and evolutionary invasion
analyses. The research will illustrate the utility of this new class of models,
contribute to the information needed by public health officials to mitigate
disease outbreaks, and contribute to the state of knowledge on disease
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.