* 2052296
* SBIR Phase I:  Universally Adjustable Modular Prosthesis Socket
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Jeffrey Gair, MODULAR MATTER, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2022
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a novel prosthesis, where
discrete, mass-producible modular components can be assembled to fabricate
sockets that would otherwise require expensive materials and equipment and hours
of custom fitting. The modules can be assembled in virtually limitless
configurations and provide a mechanism for conforming to the shape of the
individual’s residual limb. This project will also extend a process innovation
in the system’s capacity to inexpensively and quickly replace broken components
and modify the socket to long-term changes in limb shape, including keeping up
with a child's growth or executing complete rebuilds using the same components.
The modular design also allows for mass manufacturability of the constituent
components rather than specialized one-off manufacturing. The system is suitable
for patients of all ages, limb shapes, and for both upper and lower limb
sockets, so a broad set of needs can be addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to create a
universally adjustable, semi-flexible modular socket system that adapts to
fluctuations in limb volume and shape changes while still providing a secure and
comfortable fit. The modular design enables the product to be assembled,
configured, and reconfigured to suit the specific limb shape of the patient. In
this project, the implications and limitations of mechanically coupling a
distributed, modular, semi-flexible socket system to soft tissues will be
explored. This includes maximum and minimum pressure and hotspot mapping under
physiologically-relevant loading and torque.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.