* 2052738
* IUCRC Phase I: University of Tennessee: Center for Composite and Hybrid Materials Interfacing (CHMI)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Uday Vaidya, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2026
* USD 280,000.00

The Center for Composite and Hybrid Materials Interfacing (CHMI) seeks to
generate knowledge and capabilities in joining, bonding, and maintenance of
composite and hybrid material structures by applying reliable, data-driven,
automated processes using advanced analytical, computational, experimental, and
digital techniques and tools. It is a partnership between Oakland University
(OU), Georgia Institute of Technology (GT) and University of Tennessee,
Knoxville (UTK). The significant advantages of lightweight composite and hybrid
materials for aerospace, automotive, infrastructure, and biomedical applications
come with scientific, technical, and economic challenges that must be addressed
for the U.S. to be a global manufacturing leader. The interfaces in these
materials systems are identified as a critical barrier due to fabrication costs
and inconsistent performance (especially in aggressive environments). The goal
of CHMI is to significantly reduce cost (≥50%), cycle time, and variation of
such engineering operations in ten years. The University of Tennessee, Knoxville
(UTK) Site has diverse expertise that spans advanced composite materials, high-
fidelity characterization of single to multi-scale fibers, recycled and textile
grade carbon fiber, innovative manufacturing with thermoset and thermoplastic
polymers and joining. The strong partnerships with the infrastructure,
automotive and biomedical industries are enabled by the Tennessee ecosystem
comprising the Fibers and Composites Manufacturing Facility, IACMI-The
Composites Institute, Carbon Fiber Technology Facility &amp; Manufacturing
Demonstration Facility at Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three partnering universities have well-established,
complementary expertise in lightweight composite and hybrid materials. They will
work together on four industry-inspired research thrust areas: (1) Design,
Modeling and Analysis, (2) Materials and Process Engineering, (3) Testing and
NDE, and (4) Secure Data and Digital Technologies. Each university has
emphasized different industry sectors (GT-Aerospace, OU-Automotive/Ground
Vehicle, UTK-Infrastructure and Biomedical), which ensures the inclusion of
university and industry perspectives across a wide range of U.S. manufacturing.
The CHMI IUCRC will develop a Convergent Research Development Environment that
will identify and conduct industry-inspired pre-competitive, innovative research
in the area of interfacing composites and hybrid materials. The UTK Site will
focus on the infrastructure, automotive, and biomedical needs for accurate
computational prediction methods for the composite structures through its
research on computation and design, processing/fabrication, characterization and
testing, non-destructive evaluation (NDE), and data analytics. Specifically,
research efforts will include multi-material joining of recycled composites to
dissimilar materials, energetic initiators for joining hybrid materials, smart
processing and sensing of fiber reinforced hybrid materials joints in extreme
environments, dissimilar composite-metal joining and overmolding, joining of
high performing multi-material soft materials, and the development of other
breakthrough technologies that drive industry to mitigate risk and improve
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.