* 2052938
* EAR-PF: Evolution of landscapes buried by Quaternary sediments
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Jeffrey Kwang, Kwang, Jeffrey S
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 01/31/2024
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Jeffrey Kwang has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry
out research under the mentorship of Dr. Andrew Wickert at the University of
Minnesota (UMN) and Dr. Isaac Larsen at the University of Massachusetts-Amherst
(UMass). This project aims to understand how landscapes buried by recent
sediments evolve over time. Rivers and their networks drive change in landscape
evolution; they reorganize in response to changing climate, tectonics, and rock
type, drastically restructuring the Earth’s surface. Field observations have
shown that a rock’s susceptibility to erosion exerts control in determining how
rivers erode into landscapes, an assumption based in the idea that landscapes
are made of a single material. Because natural rivers cut through multiple
materials, it is important to study landscapes with contrasting erodibilities.
This project focuses on regions that were previously glaciated where ancient
river networks are buried under tens to hundreds of meters of sediments
deposited by glaciers. After burial, a new river network is established on the
surface that may have a geometry that is quite different from the ancient river
network. As rivers erode into the glacial sediments, they re-expose the old
landscape, triggering a competition between the ancient and new river networks.
Using numerical models and field techniques, the PI will (1) determine important
metrics that control the outcome of these competing networks and (2) predict
timescales required for glacial sediments to be fully removed. Because contrasts
in erodibility are common in other landforms, this research will provide
important insight into how the structure of the rock below our feet determines
rivers formation and landscape evolution in a broad spectrum of geologic
settings. The PI also aims to promote Earth science education and diversity by
designing interactive numerical models/games about river evolution. At UMN and
UMass, Dr. Kwang will collaborate with local Girls Inc. organizations to develop
summer workshops for Eureka!, a program that aims to close the gender-gap in
STEM. In addition, the PI will co-mentor an undergraduate research student with
Dr. Phillip Larson at the Minnesota State University.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Landscapes dissected by dendritic networks are ubiquitous across the
continental surfaces of Earth. Understanding how these geopatterns emerge and
reorganize reveals how geomorphic processes create landforms. Drainage networks
seldom change in landscapes that are in dynamic equilibrium, but drainage
networks are actively forming and reorganizing in landscapes in disequilibrium.
Regions in the American Midwest that were previously glaciated are classic
examples of disequilibrium landscapes. Before Pleistocene glaciation, these
regions generally contained sedimentary rock dissected by dendritic river
networks. After glaciation, the sedimentary rock was buried by Quaternary
sediments, i.e. till, and essentially, the landscape was reset. Such landscapes
are ideal locations to study drainage networks because (1) new drainage networks
are actively forming on the till-covered surfaces, and (2) old drainage networks
from the buried topography are being exhumed. In this region, the PI will use
numerical landscape evolution models to test how drainage network reorganization
is affected by (1) rock erodibility contrasts between the glacial till and
buried sedimentary rock and (2) the orientation of the surface drainage network
with respect to the buried drainage network. The results will also detail a new
mechanism for the formation of barbed tributaries, offering a new geologic
interpretation for these river network features. Using field work and remote
sensing, the PI will also calibrate a numerical model to predict timescales that
are required for the full evacuation of glacial till from these landscapes. More
broadly, the PI anticipates that this research will benefit our understanding of
other geologic settings with contrasts in substrate erodibility. Field studies
have found that variability in erodibility has a first-order control on
landscape evolution and morphology, and moreover, it has been determined that
substrates with contrasting erodibilities are the norm in terrestrial landforms,
not the exception. Therefore, this research can provide a transformative insight
into how lithologic variation and stratigraphy affect surface processes, drive
drainage reorganization, and create geopatterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.