* 2052611
* IUCRC Phase I: Syracuse University: Center for Solid-State Electric Power Storage (CEPS)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Weiwei Zheng, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 06/30/2026
* USD 303,600.00

The NSF Industry-University Cooperative Research Center for Solid-State Electric
Power Storage (CEPS) is comprised of three university sites: South Dakota School
of Mines and Technology (SD Mines) as the lead university and partner
universities: Northeastern University (NU) and Syracuse University (SU). CEPS is
established to provide integration between academia and industry in the pursuit
of research focused energy storage innovations. The Center enables industries,
government, and national laboratories to meet the challenges of safe, efficient,
and environmentally-friendly energy storage by adopting critical solid-state
energy systems and enabling translation into industrial use driven by upstream
basic research. As a multi-disciplinary collaborative consortium, CEPS will
acquire long-term sustainability through strong support from stakeholders and
leveraging partnerships at the state and national level. CEPS's intellectual
merit is in addressing significant challenges in energy storage. The Center
seeks to create and provide U.S. leadership in energy storage research closely
linked to green technologies and environmental sustainability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CEPS combines knowledge, intellectual property, and
research capabilities in two challenging platforms: materials and materials
manufacturing. Both fundamental platforms synergistically embrace studies using
atomic layer deposition, engineering at the areas through industry-driven
research projects leading to safe and sustainable next-generation energy storage
for various applications. The Center incorporates a national team of research
scientists from three U.S. states: South Dakota, Massachusetts, and New York, to
address both the immediate and longer-term industrial needs of the energy
sector. CEPS seeks to cultivate an inclusive learning environment where faculty,
staff, and students, regardless of race, ethnicity, and gender, can grow and
succeed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.