* 2052749
* IUCRC Planning Grant University of Illinois: Center for Aggressive Scaling by Advanced Processes for Electronics and Photonics (ASAP)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2022
* Qing Cao, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 04/30/2022
* USD 20,000.00

The Center for Aggressive Scaling by Advanced Processes for Electronics and
Photonics (ASAP) will develop new materials and process paradigms for efficient
electrical interconnects, which are the foundations for next-generation
computing systems at advanced technology nodes. Semiconductor companies and
integrated circuits vendors are seeking new materials to improve computer speeds
and processing abilities. Additionally, in big data applications, it is the data
transport via interconnects between memory and compute nodes that limits the
overall system performance. To tackle these urgent needs of the microelectronics
industry, ASAP will establish a materials-to-system codesign research framework
guided by industry leaders and experts from materials science, nanofabrication,
electronic and photonic device physics, and circuit design. The Center's
research will help enable the US semiconductor industry to maintain their
technological leadership in advanced manufacturing. ASAP will strive to have a
sustained and meaningful impact on the next-generation computing infrastructure
by partnering with industry leaders. The Center will add strength to areas of
national security, healthcare, food security, and transportation where
electronics are a key aspect of the supply chain. By engaging with companies of
all sizes, the Center fosters opportunities for future workforce training not
only in technical competence, but also in leadership and entrepreneurship. The
Center will also engage its own institutional infrastructure and industry
foundations to support ASAP's diversity and inclusivity goals. These include: a
Women in Microelectronics mentoring program for undergraduate and graduate
students to reimagine the future workforce in microelectronics, a Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program, and a Saturday Engineering for
Everyone forum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, the semiconductor industry is
faced with new challenges: (i) Finding novel conducting and dielectric materials
for ultra-thin interconnects that have high thermal, electrical, and mechanical
reliability and possess higher current carrying capability along with a higher
barrier to electromigration at the nanoscale; (ii) Finding new non-volatile
complementary metal–oxide–semiconductor (CMOS)-compatible memory technologies to
bring memory closer to the compute nodes; and (iii) Identifying new connectivity
technology at the macroscale to overcome the spectrum scarcity and bandwidth
limitations of the radiofrequency (RF) band as more than 80 billion devices are
envisaged to be connected to the internet by 2024. The overall objective of the
ASAP Center is to create the knowledge to drive fundamental technology
solutions, from materials to devices and architectures, toward addressing the
needs of semiconductor industry related to interconnect and memory bottlenecks
of next-generation computing platforms. The scope of ASAP research comprises:
(i) multiphysics modeling of inverse material design and reliability-aware
materials process development for improved interconnect conductors and inter-
wire dielectrics; (ii) scalable integration of III-V and III-N devices on
silicon for optical and terahertz interconnects; (iii) development of non-
volatile spintronics memory for in-memory computing. The tightly coupled
experimental-theoretical approach to materials design, the cross-disciplinary
expertise of team members, and experimental capabilities are required to tackle
challenging scientific and industry-relevant problems. ASAP will strive to
advance the new frontier of low temperature, ultra-high aspect ratio, in situ
and 3D monitoring, and self-assembled monolithic approaches. The risk and
reliability assessment will be carried out to evaluate and predict material and
structure degradation, along with circuit- and system-level performance
benchmarking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.