* 2052122
* Enhancing the STEM Infrastructure Capabilities of Little Priest Tribal College
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Manoj Patil, Little Priest Tribal College
* Continuing Grant
* Jody Chase
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,230,312.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings at these
institutions expands the opportunities of their students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and generational
appreciation for science and mathematics education. This project aligns directly
with that goal, and moreover may inform the body of knowledge about the
importance of targeted methods of instructional and financial support in
recruiting and retaining underrepresented individuals into STEM studies, and
preparing the next generation of STEM professionals. The connection of faculty
to the development of novel opportunities for programs of study that ensure
successful transfer to upper-division courses at nearby universities will
demonstrate to essentiality of engaging full-time, credentialed STEM faculty
devoted to a specific strand of study and preparation. For those students
entering the workforce directly from a tribal college it is equally important
that they have a well-defined skill set in mathematics, science, and technology
for entry into the STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intent of this
project is to provide an accredited STEM academic associate degree option at
Little Priest Tribal College (LPTC) for students who may then transfer to a
local four-year program or be prepared for employment at local tribal
industries. The increase in STEM faculty will ensure program development,
student tutoring and mentoring, academic articulation agreements, support for
matriculation, and guidance on the design of a new science instructional
facility on the LPTC campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.