* 2052780
* IUCRC Phase I: University of Tennessee, Knoxville (UTK) Site: Center for High-Frequency Electronics and Circuits for Communication Systems (CHECCS)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Aly Fathy, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2026
* USD 199,998.00

The University of Arkansas, University of Tennessee, and Florida International
University have established the Center for High-Frequency Electronics and
Circuits for Communication Systems (CHECCS), an Industry-University Cooperative
Research Center (IUCRC). The efforts at the three universities will provide
cooperative opportunities to develop new research knowledge to support U.S.
competitiveness in wireless communications technologies, including 5G/6G and
beyond. CHECCS addresses the potential to increase accessibility to high-
frequency circuits and communication-system services. The center’s research will
be seamlessly integrated with educational activities, and findings will be
incorporated into courses for training undergraduate and graduate students. The
center is also committed to broadening participation of underrepresented groups.
Underrepresented faculty, graduate and undergraduate students will be actively
recruited by each site to work on and participate in the center’s research and
educational activities including outreach events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical area of high-frequency devices, circuits and communication systems is
critically important to U.S. industry, its economy, and national security.
CHECCS’ mission is in developing different levels of integrated components for
future multi-scale systems on a single chip. CHECCS brings strength and
expertise from a wide range of disciplines to significantly advance knowledge
and bridge the gap between universities and industry. The research areas cover a
broad range of disciplines from electrical engineering, to computer engineering,
materials science, transportation, and physics. The center will work closely
with industry and government agencies in addressing multidisciplinary research
challenges by combining knowledge from participating research groups and
creating a culture that links engineering research to technological innovation.
This linkage will be achieved through sustained partnerships with
industry/practitioner organizations and technology transfer offices. Core
strengths of CHECCS include a dynamic team that has both academic and industry
research experience, with emphasis on comprehensive electromagnetic modeling,
monolithic microwave and millimeter-wave integrated circuits, radiofrequency
high-power components and systems, antenna design, and digital and analog
circuit design up to terahertz frequency. The team has access to advanced
fabrication, testing, and high-performance computational resources, as well as
strong ties to industry that will enable refinement of the research
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.