* 2052528
* IUCRC Phase I UArizona: Center to Stream Healthcare In Place (C2SHIP)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Kathleen Melde, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 04/30/2026
* USD 899,706.00

Chronic health conditions are financially and emotionally costly. Immediate,
creative action is needed to provide solutions for managing physical, social and
psychological needs that maintain autonomy and quality of life. Research on
long-term functioning of those with chronic illnesses is lacking. The Center to
Stream Healthcare In Place (C2SHIP) unites the best minds in academic medicine
with leaders in biomedical industry to research, develop and promote in-place
care technologies for managing chronic diseases in the home. The University of
Arizona serves as the C2SHIP Lead Site with Partner Sites being University of
Southern California, Baylor College of Medicine, and California Institute of
Technology. The Center will accelerate innovation through partnerships, multi-
specialty collaborations, and resource sharing. C2SHIP will prepare an educated
workforce to promote wellness through self-care
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center’s trans-disciplinary team will
pursue research and development in new material-based sensors, reconfigurable
designs, and system integration with data mining, machine learning, and
Artificial Intelligence. Through “Internet of Things”, patient data can be
streamed to medical professionals at remote locations in real-time, establishing
a mobile hub for vulnerable patients in their own home. C2SHIP will focus on
mitigating physiological, environmental, and psychological changes for real-time
management and intervention. The University of Arizona site will focus on the
design and develop of new sensors and systems that can perform effective and
accurate data analysis using machine learning and Artificial Intelligence
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center will accelerate knowledge and
intellectual property transfer between academia and industry through
collaborative partnerships. This will promote rapid development of new
technologies , and transform health care delivery by enhancing the quality of
life of chronically-ill patients while reducing health care costs and preventing
hospitalizations. Student engagement in the proposed research projects will
create opportunities with Center companies and organizations, and provide
multidisciplinary participation at C2SHIP conferences and workshops. The
University of Arizona site will recruit students from diverse backgrounds by
engaging them in the proposed research. The University of Arizona site will work
with The Center to engage underrepresented undergraduates through cross site
workforce development plans and activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data produced
from this project will be deposited in servers at the C2SHIP Center using
password protected Box data sharing folder and will keep for duration of five
years. Box is a cloud computing business which provides file-sharing,
collaborating, and other tools for working with files that are uploaded to its
servers. The PIs and Co-PIs at the C2SHIP Center will have password-protected
accounts and servers to conduct their research. The proposed study will only
collect non-sensitive data. No personal identifiers will be recorded or retained
by the researchers in any form. The University of Arizona projects that collect
patient data will be approved by The University of Arizona IRB prior to project
onset. All data will be deidentified, with no personal identifiers recorded or
retained in any form.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.