* 2052208
* SBIR Phase I:  Nursing Workforce Optimization Algorithm and Software
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2022
* Colin Plover, 1442 S. FALLON STREET, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 04/30/2022
* USD 275,997.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project improves nursing operations in hospitals for
better patient outcomes. This will be achieved through the analysis of a health
systemâ€™s data regarding nurse staffing, scheduling, and nurse-patient matching.
This research will analyze data on nurses, patients, and inpatient clinical
environments and their relationship to outcomes to develop unique algorithms,
software, and datasets in care facilities. This is significant because the
approach to nursing workforce management decisions influences care outcomes and
the cost of delivery of quality care. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project involves advanced research techniques
that aim to optimize nurse staffing, scheduling, and nurse-patient matching.
Relationships will be examined between 1. independent variables associated with
nursing operations and 2. dependent variables that include patient safety
indicator variables developed by the Agency for Healthcare Quality and Research.
The exploration of these relationships will help answer questions including 1)
how many nurses to employ and deploy day-to-day (i.e. staffing), 2) how many and
in what complement to deploy nurses on shifts (i.e. scheduling), and 3) how to
match nurses to patients on each unit each shift (i.e. nurse-patient
assignments) to optimize outcomes. The proposed optimization process enables a
data- driven approach to address staffing, scheduling, and nurse-patient
matching challenges. The methods involve multivariate regression analyses and
machine learning techniques including autoregressive integrated moving average
(ARIMA). The goals of this research involve the development of algorithms and
software that empower hospital administrators with the insight and technology to
improve nursing care and patient outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.