* 2052819
* IUCRC Phase III Colorado School of Mines: Manufacturing and Materials Joining Innovation Center (Ma2JIC)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Zhenzhen Yu, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2026
* USD 76,032.00

The Manufacturing and Materials Joining Innovation Center (Ma2JIC) is a multi-
university consortium leading materials joining and metal additive manufacturing
research by fostering and translating scientific discovery to application. The
Center also educates the next generation of scientists and engineers that will
develop new advanced manufacturing technologies and process innovations to
rebuild the competitiveness of U.S. domestic manufacturing. Given the importance
of materials joining for the manufacturing of products that are critical to
health, safety, national security, and the continuity of multiple industries,
Ma2JIC serves multiple sectors of national interest for the U.S. economy and
defense. The center provides a highly collaborative research environment among
government partners, industry, and university faculty and students to promote
the development and application of fundamental knowledge in materials joining
and additive manufacturing. The Center also serves as a platform for the
education of a well-trained and diverse scientific and engineering workforce.
Ma2JICâ€™s primary focus on research and development translates into industry
members' and consumers' benefit. The coordinated effort across all sites
increases public awareness, scientific literacy and a diverse STEM pipeline.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on the needs of its large and diverse industrial
membership, Ma2JIC supports research in the following three thrust areas: (1)
Materials &amp; Joints Performance, (2) Additive Manufacturing, Process
Development &amp; Control, and (3) Materials, Microstructure &amp; Weldability
&amp; Printability. The Materials &amp; Joints Performance thrust focuses on the
effect of materials and manufacturing processes on the mechanical, functional
and environmental performance of manufactured or printed components, especially
with regard to improved reliability, cost reduction and extension of service
life of critical infrastructure. The Additive Manufacturing, Process Development
&amp; Control thrust area addresses fundamental challenges in joining and
additive manufacturing (AM) processes, robotics, and control, as well as
integrated computational materials engineering (ICME) frameworks for joining and
AM. Finally, the Materials, Microstructure &amp; Weldability &amp; Printability
thrust area seeks to develop fundamental understanding and testing capabilities
to enable evaluation and development of materials more amenable to advanced
joining and manufacturing processes. The Colorado School of Mines (CSM) site has
expertise and facilities that directly complement the welding metallurgy and
processing specialties of partner sites, especially in the design of filler
metals/feedstocks using multi-scale physics-based models, pilot-scale
manufacturing of fillers, computing-intensive artificial intelligence and
robotics, and state-of-the-art AM equipment with in-process sensing
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.