* 2052912
* EAR-PF: A channel-belt scale source of autogenic topography controlling fluvial sedimentation and preservation: Investigation using 3D seismic volumes
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Benjamin Cardenas, Cardenas, Benjamin
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 06/30/2022
* USD 104,300.00

Rivers are important resources and are major shapers of the Earth’s surface.
Understanding their evolution over time is important with changing climate, yet
to understand how rivers evolve over longer than human timescales, we need to
examine the sedimentary deposits created by ancient rivers. These deposits
record the evolution and migration of rivers over long timescales before being
buried. However, while external forces such as changing climate and tectonics
can influence the evolution of rivers, there are also internally controlled
factors related to spatially variable flow and sediment deposition that may
shape river deposits. By repurposing 3D acoustic images collected by the energy
industry showing river deposits in Earth’s subsurface, we will examine the
deposits of ancient coastal rivers to better understand how these important
deposits vary over space and time, and why. The results of this work will help
us better understand how and why ancient rivers have modified Earth’s surface,
and will help us predict future changes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has long been
recognized that the sedimentary record is often complicated and obscured by
time-variable sedimentation, hiatus, and erosion. Exceptions have been
recognized primarily at the bedform scale, where local, naturally occurring
(autogenic) relief drives rapid sedimentation and preservation. River-channel
belts, the sedimentary deposits created by river migration and aggradation over
time, are also commonly well preserved at the scale of tens of kilometers. This
exceptional preservation is often attributed to external forcings (e.g.,
subsidence), but autogenic sources of topography at the channel-belt scale have
also been recognized and hypothesized to be an important source of autogenic
relief. Inter-alluvial-ridge basins may perform this function. To quantify the
relative importance of autogenic and allogenic processes in preserving fluvial
channel belts, we will use 3D seismic volumes imaging the subsurface of the Gulf
of Mexico. Using volumes across the continental shelf, we will map channel
belts, build a database of channel-belt geometries, and identify the drivers of
their preservation, ultimately tracking the relative importance of autogenic and
allogenic processes in preserving channel belts across the Gulf Coast over time.
Part of our workflow involves converting analyzed 3D seismic volumes to 3D Numpy
arrays, a free, open-source, and easily manipulated dataset, which we will make
freely available to make 3D seismic volumes more
accessible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.