* 2052030
* STTR Phase I:  Body fluid identification for forensic purposes using Raman spectroscopy
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Igor Lednev, SUPREMETRIC LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 04/30/2023
* USD 256,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project proposes to
develop the first universal method for non-destructive, confirmatory
identification of all main bodily fluids in biological stains revealed at a
crime, overcoming the limitations of standard biochemical tests when identifying
biological stains. The proposed technology will allow for rapid, accurate and
nondestructive identification of, and distinction between, biological stains
that supports the possibility of linking DNA to a bodily fluid type, thus
increasing the efficiency of crime labs and assisting law enforcement personnel
in the identification of suspected criminals. Commercially, this technology will
be of use to the 600+ Crime Investigation Labs and 19,000+ crime scene
investigators within the U.S. Department of Justice. The new approach has the
potential to reduce the backlog of unprocessed DNA samples in crime labs across
the U.S., while providing data that can improve the efficiency of evidence
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This analysis platform has the potential to
significantly advance the field of crime scene analysis by replacing single body
fluid-specific chemical tests, that are inaccurate and destructive in nature,
with software that offers the novel ability to positively identify all bodily
fluids in order to generate real-time decisions regarding sample content and
further analyses. The project will establish proof-of-principle through the
optimization of a Raman spectroscopy method for a desktop instrument while
further developing software for realistic body fluid sampling. This will allow
for the development of a working prototype for crime laboratory
usage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.