* 2052745
* IUCRC Phase III University of North Carolina at Charlotte: Center for Metamaterials (CfM)
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Tino Hofmann, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 05/31/2026
* USD 1,020,996.00

The Center for Metamaterials (CfM) at University of North Carolina in Charlotte
(UNCC) focuses on the research and development of metamaterials. Metamaterials
are man-made materials that and offer new ways to control the flow of light and
enable sophisticated filtering and detection. Metamaterials are making an impact
on sensing, imaging, antennas, and energy harvesting. The Center's primary focus
is on optical, infrared and radar applications of metamaterials. The projects
conducted within the CfM are developed collaboratively. The research is
conducted by graduate and undergraduate students under the guidance of CfM
professors and Center members. Students, many of whom come from under-
represented groups in science and engineering, obtain mentorship from the
industry members; this mentorship prepares them for professional careers after
graduation. The CfM contributes to the workforce development of trained and
highly skilled scientists and engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The faculty and
students at CfM work in close collaboration with members (industry and
government) to develop new knowledge, new materials' capabilities, and software
tools for the fundamental understanding and practical design of metamaterials.
The technology roadmap provides a framework for the clustering of project
objectives into more specific goals. To ensure the long-term success and
viability of the Center, efforts focus on metamaterials research for a broad
range of commercially relevant applications. CfM goals are to better understand
and exploit the new properties associated with these structured materials.
Within the CfM there are many foundational scientific questions to be addressed,
concerning understanding and modeling the physical processes that occur when
electromagnetic or mechanical waves interact with subwavelength sized
structures. Resonant behavior combined with effective medium descriptions can be
used to predict unusual material properties such as negative or zero refractive
index. Exploiting resonant behavior in subwavelength elements, surface patterns,
and composites, all demand more complete descriptions and a deeper understanding
of field-matter interactions. The emerging long-term challenge is to engineer
material properties that are low loss, broadband, tunable, low-cost, and
manufacturable at scales relevant for technological
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.