* 2052170
* SBIR Phase I:  Infrastructure-to-Everything (I2X) Communication Technology for Autonomous and Connected Vehicle Support
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Kenji Aono, INFRASTRUCTURE ANALYTICS COMPANY
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 10/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enhance the robustness and security of
infrastructure-to-everything (I2X) communications through the use of a hybrid
wireless technology that can be embedded inside civil infrastructure. The
technology could augment the sensing modality of existing autonomous and semi-
autonomous vehicles by improving the overall system efficiency, security, and
robustness under uncertain driving conditions. The technology could be used to
mitigate adversarial manipulation and tampering of infrastructural landmarks
like traffic signs and could also be used as a fallback mechanism when geo-
navigation signals are unavailable. The technology will also provide a flexible
integration platform for state and federal stakeholders to enforce new
guidelines and checkpointing standards. The technology will be flexible enough
to implement new communication protocols that can lower the barrier for other
mobility-based businesses to enter the autonomous driving market. In addition to
mobility applications, infrastructure owners and state/federal departments of
transportation (DoTs) could use this technology for large-scale interrogation of
structural health monitoring sensors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop an embedded hybrid
radio-frequency identification (RFID)-based system for infrastructure-to-
everything (I2X) communications. A major challenge to implementing embedded I2X
devices is the limited availability of power. It is not feasible to replace
batteries when the devices are deployed in asphalt or concrete structures or
underneath a bridge-deck. This problem is solved by the proposed technology
using a hybrid system that combines the long lifetime of passive RFID tags with
low-latency of their active counterparts. This project will: (1) characterize
the radio-frequency energy required to enable I2X communications;(2) evaluate
the energy available for embedded wireless devices that adhere to Federal
Communications Commission regulations; (3) build commercial-ready devices that
can survive the embedding and the compaction process; (4) develop basic software
to support meaningful information exchange with the embedded I2X prototypes; and
(5) verify prototypes in small scale field deployment studies. The end goal of
the project will be to develop the I2X prototype using commodity electronics
while still achieving an at-scale price point that is cheaper than the cost of
the construction material used in road surfaces and in other civil
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.