* 2052393
* SBIR Phase II:  AI-based automated, portable, and high-throughput platform for early identification and characterization of potentially harmful microorganisms in aquaculture
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Maxim Batalin, LUCENDI, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Erik Pierstorff
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the development of a cost-effective, high-
performance platform to monitor and characterize plankton and other
microorganisms in water. Some of these aquatic microorganisms may be harmful or
even fatal resulting in significant public health concerns and economic
consequences, such as billions lost annually in the aquaculture industry due to
harmful algal blooms and sea lice. The current state of the art in monitoring
technology includes laborious and expensive manual sample collections and
evaluation. In contrast, the proposed platform may enable low-cost, portable and
fast monitoring, as well as automated characterization of harmful aquatic
microorganisms. Furthermore, this platform will enable a much wider application
of the technology to other markets such as marine biology science and STEM
education, general monitoring of particles and pathogens at the water treatment
facilities, and production algae monitoring. The proposed technology is
envisioned to have a significant societal impact and commercial
potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project may result in a versatile, cost-
effective, and high-throughput aquatic microobjects monitoring instrument. The
instrument will have a wide spectrum of applications and initial focus on
aquaculture market. The technology will initially focus on early identification
of specific microorganisms, such as sea lice and harmful algae as they are
detrimental to the wellbeing of aquaculture animals. This demonstration will
provide high quality data at an affordable price to ensure confidence and
credibility to aquaculture farmers, marine scientists, and other users
interested in aquatic microobjects characterization. To accomplish this plan,
several operating regimes will be implemented enabling the device to switch from
high-resolution (monitoring harmful algae) to high-throughput (identifying sea
lice). An autofluorescent camera module will be developed to further assist with
differentiating microorganisms. Next, an innovative neural network framework
will be developed and tested for identification of different types of sea lice
and harmful algae. Finally, the system will be integrated into an
environmentally protected enclosure and rigorously tested in laboratory, as well
as in-field in realistic conditions. At the end of the Phase II program a
prototype will be completed that will be designed in coordination with
aquaculture partners and prospective users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.