* 2052581
* RAPID: Collecting critical data for advancing our understanding of wildfire impacts on soil characteristics and research on post-wildfire compound hazards
* GEO,EAR
* 11/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Amir AghaKouchak, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 04/30/2022
* USD 49,997.00

This project offers a unique opportunity to advance our fundamental
understanding of hydrologic and geomorphic processes following wildfire events.
The project will provide public access to perishable data with a wide range of
potential applications for stakeholders in many fields, including hydrology,
geomorphology, ecology, geotechnical engineering, and natural hazards
management. The team will collect a variety of data including: post-fire near-
surface soil moisture, electric conductivity, soil temperature and CO2 flux
after wildfire events in nearby burned and unburned areas; soil samples using
in-situ geotechnical sampling and tests to understand geotechnical
characteristics of burned and unburned soils (e.g., soil texture, hydraulic
properties, shear strength and compressibility); soil texture, land cover change
and vegetation change information from drone images and aerial photos. The
project will provide training to a graduate student in data collection. The lead
university is a minority serving institution. The principal investigators
frequently recruit minority undergraduate students. The data collected in this
project will be used for future undergraduate research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wildfires greatly change the land cover of
hydrologic basins, increasing the overland flow and debris movement, and
oftentimes decreasing the basinâ€™s time of concentration. Wildfires can also
adversely impact geotechnical characteristics (e.g., index, mechanical,
hydraulic properties) of the near-surface soil in burned areas, which may result
in reduced soil stability and increased likelihood of post-wildfire landslides,
mud and debris flows, erosion, and excessive runoff. Floods and debris flows
pose a significant threat, especially when extreme precipitation falls over
burned areas (e.g., the 2018 debris flow in Montecito, California). This is an
example of a compound event in which two consecutive events lead to extreme
societal impacts. In this project, the investigators will collect perishable
post-fire data with a focus on changes in soil characteristics in burned areas.
This data could be useful for analyses on compound geohazards associated with
wildfires, including landslide and debris flow analysis and land-surface
dynamics. This award is co-funded by the Hydrologic Sciences and the
Geomorphology and Land-use Dynamics programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.