* 2052955
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Dynamic Tensors: Statistical Methods, Theory, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ming Yuan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Dynamic tensor data, represented by multidimensional arrays that vary in time,
has become increasingly important to society at large. It is collected in a wide
range of applications, from biology and medical research, natural sciences, and
engineering to social sciences, economics, and finance. This research aims to
develop novel statistical theory, methods, and algorithms for analyzing large
dynamic tensor data. The work also includes analysis of the computational
efficiency and utility of the methods under development. The results will
provide state-of-art statistical tools for effectively extracting useful
information from such data and aiding practical decision making in a wide
spectrum of applications. The project will apply the new methods to important
examples, including motion behavior modeling and crime data analysis. The
project will foster collaborations among students and young researchers through
involvement in cutting-edge research. Software and other tools will be made
publicly available, enhancing scientific progress and data driven decision-
making processes in practical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives
of the research are to develop statistical theory, methods, and algorithms for
analyzing large dynamic tensor data and to demonstrate their feasibility,
effectiveness, and utility in interesting applications. Dynamic tensor data, an
area with opportunities for systematic methodological and theoretical treatment
from a statistical point of view, is creating new challenges and opportunities
for researchers. The project will develop autoregressive and dynamic factor
models for continuous tensor time series data, and generalized dynamic tensor
models for binary, count, and other non-Gaussian data; produce new tools for
forecasting, parameter estimation, and statistical inferences for such models;
and study the theoretical and empirical properties of the new methods. The
project findings are expected to have impact in other fields of statistics,
including discrete tensor analysis, video analysis, inference of high-
dimensional tensors, and analysis of high dimensional dynamic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.