* 2052019
* SBIR Phase II:  Grid-scale electricity storage from waste heat
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Levon Atoyan, Active Energy Systems, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2023
* USD 999,444.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to unleash the potential of water as a thermal energy
storage medium for building air conditioning. Today’s commercial ice storage
systems, based on Ice-on-Coil (IOC) technology, fails to capture this potential
because efficiently moving thermal energy into and out of water as it freezes
and melts is challenging. The proposed Icephobic Heat Exchange (IHEX) technology
eliminates the adhesion of freezing water to cold surfaces, preventing ice
buildup on the coil and realizing the power of water for low-cost, high
efficiency, resilient building cooling. IHEX based thermal storage removes the
primary barriers to product adoption: high cost and spatial constraint
limitations. It helps building owners lower their cooling costs, strengthen
their cooling resiliency, and reduce their carbon emissions through affordable
and spatially adaptable solutions. From a broader perspective, storing energy is
imperative to a sustainable electric grid. Globally, an estimated potential for
up to 2.8% of worldwide GHG emissions can be offset through full scale
deployment of IHEX technology in building cooling. Beyond reliable access to
power from intermittent renewable sources, cost-effective thermal storage can
increase cooling resiliency by meeting cooling demand when the electric grid is
down.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes to catalyze
development of IHEX technology by demonstrating high reliability for IHEX
materials and establish high energy density, efficiency, and cooling resiliency
for commercial-scale IHEX systems. IOC systems use miles of tubing to generate
the necessary amount of surface area for heat transfer, which is costly and
energy intensive, and their modular systems require significant space. This
project will demonstrate that IHEX technology meets all the existing strengths
of IOC technology, such as durability, while addressing potential economic
concerns. First, materials testing will be completed after a year’s worth of
freeze/melt cycling on a prototype-scale system to indicate long IHEX system
life. Second, the ability to use customizable storage tanks with high energy
density will be demonstrated. Customizable, space-filling tanks will help IHEX
technology eliminate the physical space constraints that have thwarted so many
commercial projects. Third, a commercial-scale IHEX system will be used to
derive a 20% energy efficiency improvement compared to IOC solutions and a low,
$28/ton-hr cost. And finally, by working with our product end-users and
industry, a 67% reduction in total cost of ownership compared to conventional
cooling systems will be shown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.