* 2052442
* STTR Phase I:  Low-Cost Packaging Solution for Space-Grade and High-Reliability Integrated Circuits
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Abhijeet Ghoshal, APOGEE SEMICONDUCTOR, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2022
* USD 255,991.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project seeks to enable cost effective,
compact, and higher performing integrated circuits for space applications. Space
electronics have lagged the commercial state-of-the-art by over a decade. The
lack of high performing, cost effective packaging solutions further increases
this gap. Traditionally, space applications utilize large, expensive, and low-
performing ceramic packages that limit adoption of radiation-hardened
semiconductors into the “New Space” applications such as Low Earth Orbit (LEO)
mega-constellations for worldwide internet. “New Space” companies that design
and manufacture electronics for satellites are the primary target customers
while non-radiation-hardened applications that behave in extreme thermal
environments, such as aviation and “down borehole" electronics for the oil/gas
drilling, are also a target market for the technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR)
Phase I project seeks to prove the feasibility of the innovation to effectively
address the reliability challenges in interconnect (IC) packages operating over
the extended temperature ranges required in space applications. There are
multiple unknowns and technical challenges to be explored, requiring extensive
interdisciplinary research and development. The goal is to arrive at a solution
that effectively alleviates the mechanical stresses caused by the thermal
expansion, while having acceptable thermal and electrical performance,
particularly in high-power ICs, such as power converters/regulators. The
research will determine the level of stress applied by the structure to the
underlying silicon and the level of stress that is permitted before damage to
the underlying silicon die will occur. The project will also assess the
reliability/risks associated with the temperature cycling and evaluate materials
that are best suited to address the technical needs, while also offering a cost-
effective manufacturable solution. The team will investigate the suitability of
existing commercial fabrication processes and how modifications in them may
impact their manufacturability. They will also investigate possible geometry
enhancements to reduce buckling, explore the stress-alleviation versus thermal
resistance tradeoffs in various geometries and compositions of structures, and
create models that support design guidelines for optimal placement of sensitive
circuits on the die.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.