* 2052599
* EAR-PF The Role of Deformation in Triggering Volcanic Eruptions
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Amy Ryan, Ryan, Amy Grace
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Amy Ryan has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry out
research at the University of Minnesota to determine the role that deformation
of magma chambers plays in setting off volcanic eruptions. Supervolcanoes like
Yellowstone volcano (USA) are fed by magma chambers that have small pockets of
fluid magma distributed within a body of immobile magma “mush, dominated by
crystals with magma filling in spaces between. Volcanic eruptions and associated
unrest occur when physical forces cause changes in the Earth’s crust and those
pockets move through the mush to the surface. Studies of erupted lavas have
shown that this movement can occur suddenly, geologically speaking, taking as
little as a few months to hundreds of years. However, the physical conditions
and processes that allow the fluid magma to move through the stiff, immobile
mush are unknown. Dr Ryan’s work includes experiments that recreate conditions
beneath supervolcanoes to characterize the geologic processes that drive magma
movement beneath volcanoes. The results of Dr. Ryan’s study will provide insight
into the conditions that lead to increased volcanic unrest and help those
monitoring active volcanoes to create better risk mitigation strategies. The
work includes field work in northern Minnesota. Dr. Ryan will partner with the
Wolf Ridge Learning Center to develop Next Generation Science Standard
(NGSS)-aligned classroom lessons for K-12 students, as well as a series of
interactive field guides. Additionally, Dr. Ryan will mentor undergraduates in
all aspects of research and the development of educational materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Ryan will be conducting high-temperature and high-
pressure deformation experiments in a gas-medium, Paterson apparatus.
Experimental samples will consist of a disk of glass (“magma”) stacked in series
with a disk of a composite (“mush”) composed of crushed glass mixed with fine
quartz sand up to a crystal fraction of 80%. Samples will be heated and
pressurized then be subjected to pore-pressure gradients, compressed or sheared
at rates and magnitudes representative of deformation conditions mushes and
magmas experience in natural reservoirs. Following deformation, analyses of
samples will include specialized imaging to look for magma infiltration
structures and to measure the volume of migrated magma. The major project
objectives are to (1) determine the deformational conditions (type, rate and
magnitude) that create dilatant regions in the high-viscosity, low-permeability
mush that allow for magma infiltration and (2) based on experimental results,
identify the multi-scale geologic processes that can feasibly trigger magma
infiltration and, as a result, reservoir reorganization. These results will find
application in constraining input parameters for numerical models of magma
extraction and transport in the upper crust. Research outputs from this project
will be disseminated in high-impact, open-access, peer-reviewed articles,
conference presentations, public lectures, university-based websites and social
media. In addition, the project will also include a field study to compare
textures that form in experiments to those that developed in natural intrusive
bodies and are preserved in the rock record. Field work will involve the
participation of students from local community or tribal colleges. Finally,
educational materials will be developed based on the experimental work and field
study and be made available for local learning centers and
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.