* 2052497
* Rules of death across ontogeny in sexually dimorphic mammals
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Daniel Costa, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 09/30/2025
* USD 703,017.00

In many animals, males are notably larger, forage in different habitats, and
experience higher mortality than females. Although physiological constraints,
behavioral strategies, and predator-prey interactions have been proposed as
possible links between body size and mortality, their relative importance is
unknown. This project will determine the benefits and consequences of large body
size in northern elephant seals, in which adult males are 6x larger than
females. Diving abilities and food requirements will be quantified and compared
between males and females from birth to age four. During their foraging
migrations, each seal will carry a newly-developed biologger that transmits data
on diving behavior, migration route, and feeding success via satellites even if
animals die at sea. Identifying the mechanisms that drive differences in
foraging habitat and mortality rates between males and females will transform
our understanding of top predators including marine mammals and birds that exert
strong influences on ecosystems around the world. The project will also build
research capacity among students traditionally underrepresented in biology and
provide education opportunities for K-12 students and the public through an
interactive animal tracking website. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For sexually size
dimorphic species, it is unknown how ecological processes such as starvation and
predation act upon the disparate physiological and behavioral phenotypes of
males and females. This project aims to determine how male and female body size
differences throughout ontogeny lead to divergent use of the risk-reward
landscape. Male and female northern elephant seals will be anesthetized,
measured, weighed, instrumented, and sampled from birth through age four. The
resulting data will link three biological disciplines: physiological
measurements of diving development and energy demands, behavioral partitioning
of 3-dimensional space use and diet due to physiological constraints, and
ecological consequences of variation in physiology and niche partitioning. A
meta-analysis across all seal, sea lion, and walrus species will be used to
evaluate how sex-specific mortality rates correlate with the degree of polygyny
and sexual size dimorphism more broadly. Together, these aims will determine how
ecological risk and reward interact with physiological constraints to drive the
ontogenetic development of behavioral strategies in sexually dimorphic
mammals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.