* 2052810
* IUCRC Phase I: Center for Innovations in Structural Integrity Assurance (CISIA)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Michael Khonsari, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 07/31/2026
* USD 815,998.00

Louisiana State University (LSU) and Louisiana Tech University (LA Tech) have
established the Industry-University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) for
Innovations in Structural Integrity Assurance (CISIA). Structural integrity and
reliable life prediction of infrastructure and mechanical components have
relevance in every public and private sector, including but not limited to
energy, aerospace, construction, manufacturing and infrastructure. CISIA will
serve as a trusted source of transformative insights, predictive capabilities,
and materials innovations across broad industrial sectors, focusing on
structural integrity assurance for small and large structures and mechanical
components. CISIA will conduct use-driven, fundamental, pre-competitive research
to establish linkages between material properties and infrastructure performance
in terms of its structural integrity. The Center will elucidate and translate
these links and their collective impact on reliability across all U.S.
industrial sectors. The academic and industrial members of CISIA will work in
concert to produce a diverse workforce of engineers who are trained in state-of-
the-art facilities to utilize modern methods of structural health monitoring and
analysis. These engineers will become a highly qualified and productive
workforce that enhances the global competitiveness and resilience of U.S.
industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structural health monitoring, diagnosis, and
in-situ rehabilitation of aging civil and industrial infrastructure are critical
for public safety and economic development. Understanding, controlling, and
improving the mechanical integrity of near-surface regions of mechanical
components subject to high-stress/high-cycle contact (interfacial solid-solid
and solid-fluid conjunctions) are fundamental problems affecting U.S.
manufacturing and defense industries. The LSU site focuses on structural
integrity and materials innovationâ€”with emphasis on multiscale materials
characterization/testing and multiscale physics-based modeling/simulation to
understand component fatigue, wear, lifetime assessment, and non-destructive
accelerated testing. By integrating validated diagnostics, machine learning, and
data-driven decision making, CISIA will elucidate and translate the links
between new materials, manufacturing processes, service histories, and their
collective impact on reliability across all U.S. industrial sectors.
Establishing linkages between material properties, infrastructure performance,
and structural integrity requires multi-disciplinary research collaborations.
The members of this proposed IUCRC have the requisite multi-disciplinary
expertise, history of collaboration, proximity to a broad and strategic national
manufacturing corridor, and access to the necessary research infrastructure to
produce scientific advances in the structural integrity field, accelerated by
the proposed industrial partnership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.