* 2052053
* STTR Phase I:  Enhancing MRI performance by using nonlinear metamaterials
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Xin Zhang, PRIMETAZ, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 03/31/2023
* USD 255,992.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to improve clinical magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI). This project will enable improved image quality and/or shortened
scan time, increasing the throughput, and decreasing the cost of this modern
diagnostic tool. Potentially, this technology will improve patient access to
MRI. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase
I project advances magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) by constructing nonlinear
metamaterial (NLMM)-enhanced surface coils to improve the signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR). The coupling between the NLMM and the surface coil will be investigated
to optimize the SNR enhancement and avoid potential image artifacts through
theoretical modeling and numerical simulation. The fabrication and
implementation of the NLMM-integrated surface coil will be studied via the
marriage of novel additive manufacturing and conventional screen-printing
technology for mass production of such devices. The NLMM-enhanced surface coil
performance will be optimized with the tandem development of image
reconstruction algorithms to generate an improved MRI image acquisition by
taking the field gradient induced by the NLMMs into account. The ultimate goal
of this project is to provide highly integrated NLMM-enhanced surface coils to
significantly improve SNR of MRI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.