* 2052730
* IUCRC Planning Grant Indiana University: Center for Quantum Technologies (CQT)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2022
* Srinivasan Iyengar, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 04/30/2022
* USD 20,000.00

The Center for Quantum Technologies (CQT) is a partnership between Purdue
University, Indiana University, the University of Notre Dame, and Indiana
University Purdue University - Indianapolis (IUPUI). The mission of the CQT is
to collaborate with industry and government stakeholders to identify compelling
needs and challenges in quantum technologies, and then develop novel solutions
to address these opportunities. Quantum technologies are governed by the physics
of sub-atomic particles and have relevance to computing, sensing, imaging,
metrology, communications, and cryptography. Because of their wide-ranging
applicability, quantum technologies have the potential to be transformative,
with uses in intelligence, financial security, computing, medicine, and
navigation. Society has entered the second quantum revolution, but it is still
in its infancy, and the nascent quantum industry requires significant
fundamental research to mature novel technologies. In partnership with
industrial members, the CQT researchers will use their expertise in quantum
science and engineering to develop and transfer foundational knowledge into
industry-friendly quantum devices, systems, and algorithms with enhanced
functionality and performance. Additionally, the CQT will help train the next
generation of quantum scientists and engineers to support the development of a
critically needed quantum workforce. Students will not only conduct Center
research, but also help writing project reports, present at biannual meetings,
and interact with industry and government members. Finally, the CQT will
leverage established programs at each of the four universities to engage and
support students traditionally underrepresented in STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching vision of the CQT is to bring together
multidisciplinary experts in academia, industry, and government in a self-
sustaining, collaborative venture facilitating the transition of fundamental
research discoveries in quantum science and engineering into novel, commercial-
ready technologies. Specifically, CQT will focus on three significant industrial
and government interests: quantum computing (including simulation and algorithm
development), quantum sensing, and quantum communications. This includes:
algorithmic development for general purpose quantum computers, Noisy
Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) and hybrid quantum-classical platforms, graph-
theoretic tools for solving quantum molecular dynamics, topological quantum
computation, quantum certification and validation, quantum-enhanced sensing
(including entangled neutrons and photons), and fiber-ion quantum interconnects.
Due to the wide applicability of quantum technologies, the relevant industry
base is broad. The technologies developed in the CQT may save energy, speed up
computation, enhance national security and defense, and innovate health care.
Indiana University (IU) houses several unique facilities, including the IU
Center for the Exploration of Energy and Matter, a national resource for the
design and construction of large-scale equipment for use in nuclear, particle,
accelerator, and materials experiments. IU also has facilities for cold atom and
ion-trap state-of-the-art Laboratories; the Multidisciplinary Engineering and
Science Hall for machine and instrument making, electronic, vacuum, detector,
and cryogenic technologies as well as fibers and additive manufacturing-enabled
systems, with draw and additive manufacturing facilities, fiber preform
fabrication and optical/electronic characterization laboratories. The Nanoscale
Characterization Facility, which hosts many instruments for material
characterization is also available to researchers in CQT. IU investments in QIS,
featuring one of the country's first quantum engineering programs and an
intensive one-year, multi-disciplinary Masters degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.