* 2052631
* IUCRC Phase I: South Dakota School of Mines and Technology: Center for Solid-State Electric Power Storage (CEPS)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Alevtina White Smirnova, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 06/30/2026
* USD 665,192.00

The NSF Industry-University Cooperative Research Center for Solid-State Electric
Power Storage (CEPS) is comprised of three university sites: South Dakota School
of Mines and Technology (SD Mines) as the lead university and partner
universities: Northeastern University (NU) and Syracuse University (SU). CEPS is
established to provide integration between academia and industry in the pursuit
of research focused energy storage innovations. The Center enables industries,
government, and national laboratories to meet the challenges of safe, efficient,
and environmentally-friendly energy storage by adopting critical solid-state
energy systems and enabling translation into industrial use driven by upstream
basic research. As a multi-disciplinary collaborative consortium, CEPS will
acquire long-term sustainability through strong support from stakeholders and
leveraging partnerships at the state and national level. CEPS's intellectual
merit is in addressing significant challenges in energy storage. The Center
seeks to create and provide U.S. leadership in energy storage research closely
linked to green technologies and environmental sustainability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CEPS SD Mines site is built research and
infrastructure in materials design and testing as well as advanced manufacturing
capabilities to produce solid-state battery components. These manufacturing
capabilities include physical vapor deposition, supersonic cold spray, and
aerosol-jet deposition technologies to produce 3D solid-state batteries. The SD
Mines capabilities will be synergistically integrated to embrace atomic-level
modeling, environmental analysis, design of advanced battery management systems,
and performance evolution processes using artificial intelligence and machine
learning. Guided by industry, CEPS will expand these areas through industry-
driven research projects leading to safe and sustainable solid-state next-
generation energy storage for portable, automotive, and electric power grid
applications. The Center will seek to foster an inclusive learning environment
where faculty, staff, and students, regardless of race, ethnicity, and gender,
can grow and succeed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.