* 2052102
* SBIR Phase II: Information Model for Airspace Design and Planning
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Stavros Sidiropoulos, VIANAIR INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project seeks to improve the efficiency of air traffic operations and increase
airport and airspace capacity utilization, enabling reductions in emissions,
noise impact, flight delays, and operational costs of airports and airlines. The
anticipated result is to produce a software platform that will become an
industry standard used by 200 major metropolitan airports and over 50 airlines
globally, addressing an available market of over $100 Million. The technology
may contribute to a sustainable future aviation system that enables economic
growth, while minimizing environmental impact. Preliminary development and
testing of the technology in New York indicates the potential to increase
airport and airspace capacity by as much as 20%, with savings for delays, fuel
burn, noise impact and controller workload from 10%-21%, and cost savings of $2
Billion/year. The proposed innovation may increase the understanding of airspace
operations and related trade-offs by bridging the gap between aviation
professionals and the public through 3D visualizations of proposed airspace
changes and quantification of their expected impacts on the environment and
safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project seeks to develop a software platform for integrated airspace
and airport system planning, design, and management. Currently, airport
authorities, airlines, and air navigation service providers use legacy software
tools for the above. These tools are outdated and difficult to use, fail to
properly quantify trade-offs between design objectives, and produce
unsustainable design solutions leading to sub-optimal system performance. The
research objectives of this project are to unify the disjointed functions of
design, planning and performance evaluation of airport operations, quantify
trade-offs between competing design objectives, and optimize for system
efficiency in terms of maximizing safety and capacity while minimizing delays,
emissions, noise, fuel burn and operational cost. To achieve this, the company
will work with major airports and airlines to identify key requirements, develop
tractable mathematical models for addressing the tasks and validate the results
via application in real operational environments. The anticipated technical
result is a unified software platform that will enable airports/airlines to be
more efficient, while also balancing operational, societal, and environmental
objectives in building a sustainable aviation system for the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.