* 2052897
* EAR PF: Investigating the competition between thermal pressurization and dilatancy on rough surfaces at earthquake slip rates
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Monica Barbery, Barbery, Monica R
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 05/31/2024
* USD 174,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship
has been awarded to Dr. Monica Barbery to investigate earthquake physics at
Brown University under the mentorship of Dr. Terry Tullis. Dr. Barbery will work
to understand how rocks behave when exposed to the friction produced when there
is rapid movement on a fault. The postdoctoral fellow will use new experimental
machinery to conduct the first rock friction experiments at the velocity and
pressures of real earthquakes to understand earthquake processes and the
associated risks. This work will improve the ability to scale existing
laboratory results to nature. This research will help in the development and
modification of new and existing earthquake models that play a vital role in
mitigating earthquake risk. In addition to these research activities, Dr.
Barbery will work with Providence public schools to develop and implement
curriculum for an educational outreach program at Brown University and will co-
teach a stacked graduate and undergraduate course within the Department of
Earth, Environmental, and Planetary Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic
weakening by thermal pore fluid pressurization (TP) and dynamic strengthening by
dilatancy hardening (DH) are mechanisms theorized to contribute to the
frictional strength and stability of faults during earthquakes. TP occurs as
frictionally heated pore fluids expand along undrained faults to frictionally
weaken the fault. DH occurs as microcracks develop during shearing and as
previously mated fault surfaces become unmated with slip, both of which increase
pore space and frictionally strengthen the fault. Both processes are closely
tied to the roughness and displacement history of the sliding surface however TP
will only contribute significantly to the frictional weakening that leads to
earthquake instability if DH is minimal. Rock friction experiments will be
conducted to examine the efficacy of TP and DH at elevated slip rates (≥100
mm/s), elevated confining pressure (≥25 MPa), and elevated pore pressure (≥25
MPa) using a newly modified rotary shear apparatus. Experiment results will be
combined with modelling to characterize the competition between TP and DH across
a range of slip rate, roughness, and displacement scales to better understand
how to scale DH and TP processes to earthquakes on natural
faults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.