* 2052375
* SBIR Phase II:  A Provable Data Lineage System for Scaling the Data-Sharing Economy
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Jonathan Heinecke, BLOCKY INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 11/30/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) is to increase the quality of consumer products and services by
scaling the data sharing economy. Data sharing and reuse increases revenue
streams and allows companies to realize a 8-15x return on investment in improved
products and services. Despite these benefits, growth in data sharing is stymied
because approximately 60% of companies are unable to access needed data, and
only about 30% have taken first steps towards data sharing to realize its
potential returns. The major challenges of widespread sharing are “messy" data
and the legal issues surrounding ownership and utilization. Some organizations
have addressed these challenges internally with “feature stores,” which support
data processing pipelines that extract insights. While the current generation of
feature stores works well for a single organization, their centralized design
assumes a level of trust absent across multiple organizations. This proposed
work will develop a feature store that supports the trust requirements needed
for inter-organizational workflows to enable realizing the significant returns
from data sharing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes to
implement a decentralized feature store (DeFS) by solving two primary technical
challenges. First, a DeFS requires fast, reliable, and provably correct data
storage. While layer-1 blockchain storage is provably correct, it does not
provide the required write speed nor long-term availability if miners abandon
it. This project's proposed approach will meet the reliability requirement by
signing data on a virtual blockchain that can span and migrate between layer-1
blockchains. The continuity of the virtual blockchain allows it to survive as
layer-1 chains fail and improve as new chains come online. Moreover, the virtual
blockchain meets speed requirements by creating virtual blocks quickly on a
private blockchain and periodically migrating to layer-1. Second, a DeFS
requires integrating multiple data sources and pipeline code without leaking
either. While interactive proof techniques satisfy privacy, they do not scale to
large data sets. This project will support data processing pipelines, such as
data wrangling and model fitting, by developing a scalable and secure computing
framework. The framework preserves the privacy of both data and pipeline code
evaluated on virtualized trusted execution environments and controlled by a
trustless distributed protocol built around a virtual blockchain commitment
scheme.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.