* 2052113
* SBIR Phase I:  Feasibility of Dynamic Configurable Liquid Molding
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,11/30/2021
* Eleanor Derbyshire, Hummingbird Nano, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 11/30/2021
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/ commercial potential of this SBIR Phase I project is the
creation of a new set of tools for bioscience applications. The innovation has
shown promise in benchtop tests to fill a capability gap in manufacturing, and
the project will build upon this promise to create 3-dimensional nanoscale fluid
pathways. The first target application is to enable widespread use of nanometer-
sized particles (30-150 nm) to carry cell signaling information throughout the
body. Particles designed to signal a particular cellular response are a major
component of drug therapeutics as their size allows them to access parts of the
body otherwise impossible to reach, such as the blood-brain barrier in the event
of a stroke and tumor penetration for cancer patients. Problematic for these
research endeavors is the differentiating these particles from others due to
similarity in size (100-300 nm). The innovation could enable these nanoscale
entities to traverse nanoscale pathways, resulting in size and physics-based
exclusion from other particles. Success in this project aids in promoting the
advancement of detection and treatment for global health issues, adding to the
general welfare of society, as well as creating a new sector in U.S.
bioeconomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase I assesses the feasibility of a
potentially disruptive new manufacturing process to create a solid form
structure with 3-dimensional pathways, such as helices and sine waves, of
circular cross section interior channels for use in micro/nano-fluidics
products. The innovation uses the physics of fluid flow to dynamically mold a
fluid against a smart fluid, during which process the diameter of the channel
being formed can be changed by adjusting the process variables in real-time. The
work progresses the knowledge associated with advancing manufacturing
capabilities and enables a wide variety of fields based on the products made
using the method. For the former, the technology provides a new way to rapidly
create fluidic pathways for nano to micro structures, enhancing the
understanding of fluidic behaviors, polymerization, smart fluid applications,
and creates a new field of study for the dynamic behavior of fluid/fluid
molding. The technical goals of the Phase I work use a combination of fluidic
modeling and the set-up and execution of a series of experimental tests to
demonstrate active control of the channel diameter for 50-500 nm, 3-dimensional
structures with controlled diameter channels, and merging and diverging
channels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.