* 2052811
* Data-Driven Model Reduction and Real-Time Estimation and Control of Coherent Structures in Turbulent Flows
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* David Goldstein, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 07/31/2024
* USD 460,698.00

This grant will support research that can promote a paradigm shift in the way we
study, simulate and control turbulent flows whose potential benefits can have a
significant economic and environmental effect. The active flow control methods
are envisioned to play a key role in many real-world aerospace and
transportation engineering applications by having a positive impact on efforts
to reduce drag on, for example, airplanes, trains, and trucks (and thus increase
performance and reduce fuel consumption and greenhouse gas emissions). The
researched methods can also find application in the technology of extracting
renewable energy by large arrays of wind turbines. In addition, this research
project will promote nationwide efforts to enable synergies between the rapidly
emerging data sciences and traditional engineering fields such as control theory
and fluid dynamics. To promote research dissemination and reproducibility, the
algorithms will be made available to the public by means of relevant online
platforms and repositories. This research will also help recruit graduate
students from underrepresented and minority groups, help undergraduate research
and K-12 outreach and create a package of material for a course on turbulent
flow control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research project, we will create
novel active flow control methods which incorporate mechanisms for the detection
and manipulation of the so-called large-scale coherent structures that
characterize wall-bounded turbulent flows. The long-term goal of this effort is
to develop a holistic framework for modeling, estimation and control of
turbulent flows which can induce a paradigm shift in the way one can manipulate
and exploit wall bounded turbulence characterized by large-scale coherent
structures. The key idea of our approach lies in the direct detection and
control of isolated structures viewed as targets of opportunity. The specific
objectives of the work are (i) Generate data through high-fidelity direct
numerical simulations of a laminar and a turbulent boundary layer with force-
field inputs. These data together with sparsity promoting optimization tools
will form the basis for reduced order descriptions of the flow to control
inputs. (ii) Create robust real-time algorithms for flow field estimation and
control based on respectively, multi-model estimation and stochastic control
techniques, and (iii) Validate the algorithms for detection and selective
manipulation (e.g. steering toward or away from a target region) of large-scale
coherent structures using direct numerical simulations. The algorithms developed
in the work will be demonstrated in an abstracted version of a wind turbine
array performance optimization by selective steering of large-scale
motions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.