* 2052820
* Multiscale Multistage Ecological and Evolutionary Modeling with Applications to Social Insect Colonies
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Yun Kang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2024
* USD 175,935.00

Social insect colonies, such as bees, ants, wasps are excellent systems for
which to model organizational challenges in complex adaptive societies. Social
insect biologists face the challenge of integrating both the individual and
colony levels of a given organization. This research aims to develop and study
ecological and evolutionary models that not only adequately integrate the
different levels of interaction in a colony but also capture the complexity of
the internal dynamics within social groups, as well as their evolutionary
outcomes. The project serves as an ideal vehicle for interdisciplinary research
and education at the intersection of applied mathematics and life sciences. The
methods and theories developed in this research may be applied to many domains
outside of biology, including epidemiology (for example in the ongoing Covid-19
pandemic), optimization theory, the immune system and robotics. The research
continues to develop a template integrating interdisciplinary learning and
teaching for students from applied mathematics and life sciences through shared
research projects at both the undergraduate and/or graduate levels. The funding
will also support graduate students in applied mathematics during summer
studies. Summer research projects provide underrepresented, minority
undergraduate students with first-hand research experience. Lectures and simple
projects related to this research will be given to high school sophomores,
juniors and seniors who are participating in The SCience and ENgineering
Experience (SCENE) at ASU where SCENE provides cutting-edge science research
experience to the participating high school students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative research between Applied Mathematics and Biology at Arizona State
University fosters a culture of theory-experiment collaboration which aims to
develop novel and sophisticated modeling approaches to understand the interface
between social dynamical processes and multilevel selections. This
interdisciplinary collaboration will (a). integrate across ecological scales and
stages; (b). incorporate selection and thus evolutionary effects; and (c).
incorporate directly measurable parameters, including metabolic costs,
efficiency of energy flow, individual mass and group size. The new analytical
techniques and theories will be developed and added to current dynamical theory
and evolutionary game theory. The proposed integrated multiscale models will
address central themes in Behavior Ecology and Sociobiology, including: 1. How
do social groups balance the benefits of information flow against the costs of
pathogens that spread via the same mechanisms that foster communication? 2. How
does hierarchy formation of complex social groups, scale relative to
environmental conditions and constraints? 3. How do patterns of social
interactions at different colony stages influence fitness and how are they
shaped by selection? Rigorous mathematics will be integrated with extensive
field and laboratory data to study complex adaptive systems of social insect
societies in the evolutionary settings with multistage structures in both
individual and colony levels. Nonlinear, non-autonomous differential equations
as well as spatial stochastic processes, combined with available empirical data,
will be used to model ecological and evolutionary dynamics at different
ecological scales and stages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.