* 2052305
* Transitions:  Spatiotemporal Behaviors of Metabolic Fluxes in Cell Biology
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Daniel Needleman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 12/31/2023
* USD 759,295.00

Metabolism supplies the energy and material that living cells use to grow, move,
and establish their internal structure. Metabolic fluxes, the rate of turnover
of molecules through metabolic pathways, are known to exhibit spatial and
temporal variations between cells and within cells, but such heterogeneities
remain poorly understood. In this project, the PI will obtain training and
perform research that will enable him to transition so that a significant effort
in his laboratory is dedicated to studying the spatiotemporal behaviors of
metabolic fluxes in cell biology. The knowledge gained may help lead to an
understanding of how metabolic defects disrupt cell division, growth, and
subcellular organization. The Broader Impacts of the work include the intrinsic
merit of the research as all cells undergo metabolic flux and disruptions can
lead to diverse pathologies. In addition, graduate students, undergraduates, and
high school students will be trained in interdisciplinary research, both through
working on the project, and in classes, summer courses, and tutorials. High
school students, and members of the general public, will be given the
opportunity to use research grade microscopes to examine the growth and
behaviors of algae, and to learn about the connection between single cell
organisms and the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable the
PI to shift the focus of his research to a new area at the interface between
chemistry, physics, and biology: the nature, causes, and consequences of
spatiotemporal variations in metabolic fluxes. In the professional development
portion of the project, the PI, and members of his lab, will learn two
techniques for measuring metabolic fluxes: mass spectroscopy and stimulated
Raman scattering (SRS) microscopy. In the research portion of the project, they
will use these techniques, along with fluorescence microscopy and coarse-grained
theories, to study: 1) the impact of gene expression on temporal and cell-to-
cell variation of metabolic fluxes in E. coli, and 2) subcellular variations in
mitochondrial metabolism and metabolic fluxes in mouse oocytes. The long-term
goal of this work is to develop transformative methods and predictive theories
that will provide insights into biological self-organization and the rules
governing life's processes. This work is supported by both the Cellular Dynamics
and Function Cluster, along with the Systems and Synthetic Biology Cluster in
the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.