* 2052114
* SBIR Phase I:  Silicon Photonic Optical Gyroscope using Planar Waveguide Coil and Integrated Photonics Circuit
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2022
* Mike Horton, ANELLO PHOTONICS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 03/31/2022
* USD 255,834.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is improving the safety and reliability of
autonomous systems with affordable high-precision instruments. Due to high
component cost and extensive manual assembly, improvements in high-precision
inertial navigation equipment has traditionally been slow, with system prices
actually increasing instead of decreasing as in most other high-technology
products. An affordable yet highly accurate gyroscope will open a $10 B market
opportunity in autonomous systems applications, and it will provide disruptive,
more compact new technology into the $2 B existing high-performance inertial
navigation market. Possible market applications include sensors for consumer
electronics, automotive safety systems, industrial robots, and national security
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will develop a new 3-D Silicon Nitride bandgap waveguide to
enable small, high-precision integrated optical gyroscopes. Traditionally, on-
chip Silicon Nitride waveguides are short centimeter length structures with
optical loss on the order of a 100 dB per meter making them unsuitable to
fabricate long gyroscope waveguides. Gyroscope waveguides typically require a
spiraled sensing waveguide greater than 40 meters long to generate the
sufficient Sagnac Phase for performant operation. Additionally, there is a
trade-off between tight pitch waveguides that fit more sensing area per die, and
the errors generated from optical phase coupling between neighboring waveguide
spiral tracks. This SBIR will demonstrate a novel 3-D bandgap structure and
process methodology to densely pack an ultra-low loss waveguide that will enable
an approximate 400x improvement in optical loss and a 4x improvement in
waveguide density versus conventional Silicon Nitride waveguide approaches found
in todayâ€™s standard CMOS process. The results of the Phase I is a key-enabling
technology for small integrated optical gyroscopes as well as other photonic
devices that require low loss on-chip optical
waveguides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.