* 2052243
* SBIR Phase I:  An Injectable Protein Matrix to Enhance the Stability of Autologous Fat Grafts
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,10/31/2022
* Stefan Roberts, INSOMA BIO INC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 10/31/2022
* USD 252,992.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is related to the use of a patient’s own fat tissue for repair after
injury or surgery. Removing tissue to eliminate damage through disease or trauma
is universally followed by repairing tissue to restore form and function. While
a broad range of materials are available, the use of a patient’s own fat for
these procedures has long been considered an obvious option. Fat can be safely
harvested, is rich in stem cells and growth factors and has other desirable
properties, depending on the location from which it is harvested. The use of
this material for surgical procedures has been inhibited by a loss of specific
physical properties during the harvesting procedure. Providing a matrix to
reconstruct these properties is likely to render fat grafting a more commonplace
procedure. By optimizing structure and formulation of this matrix material,
tissue engineering can be disrupted with an off-the-shelf option enabling
harvested fat from a patient to address the hundreds of thousands of
reconstructive procedures undertaken each year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project is based on the use of elastin-based recombinant proteins to
address the current limitations of tissue repair scaffolds. The proposed
technology uses highly disordered proteins to produce defined 3D structures to
replicate mechanical and biological activities of the body. Using iterative
design and molecular engineering, the team has generated a new class of
biomaterials that are uniquely suited to meet the key criteria for a fat
grafting support matrix, including injectability, in vivo phase transition to a
firm solid, and biocompatibility to allow cellular viability and
vascularization. This project focuses on optimization of the matrix for
reconstruction procedures, including facial, breast, amputation sites and foot
pad tissues. A range of materials with unique biomechanical properties are
likely required to address each of the target use
cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.