* 2052809
* IUCRC Phase I University of California, San Diego: Center for Power Management Integration (PMIC)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Tajana Rosing, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2023
* USD 225,000.00

Integrated circuits and systems-on-a-chip in modern electronic devices have
transformed virtually every aspect of daily life. In these devices, the need for
efficient power delivery and management has never been more critical across
applications from low to high power: smartphones to data centers, battery-
powered components to renewable-energy-powered grids, and from stationary
systems to robots and aircraft. The challenge is to satisfy increasingly
demanding requirements for efficiency, size, reliability, and cost - all
simultaneously. The Power Management Integration Center (PMIC) addresses these
challenges. The University of California San Diego (UCSD) joins PMIC as a new
site in addition to the original site at the University of Massachusetts
Dartmouth to significantly expand the overall capability for research and
training students, adding new research capabilities to the Center. The UCSD site
will work with PMIC to bring together leading academic and industry researchers
to develop more efficient systems and higher-density integrated power
electronics with the potential to transform transportation, communication,
healthcare, and energy generation and consumption. The Center will integrate
fundamental research with education in integrated power electronics and energy
efficiency by attracting, training and mentoring a broad range of students,
including students from underrepresented backgrounds to become leaders in this
STEM area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UCSD's focus on power integrated circuits (ICs)
complements University of Massachusetts Dartmouth's emphasis on passive
components research and opens opportunities for collaborations combining UCSD
ICs and Dartmouth passive components. In addition, the UCSD researchers bring
unique expertise in high-voltage ICs, power management at very low power levels
for applications such as Internet-of-Things devices, wide-bandgap technologies,
and special techniques for power management in radiofrequency (RF) applications.
UCSD also brings access to faculty expertise in related areas such as materials,
devices, and systems. The UCSD site's research focus will be on three thrusts:
(I) integrated power delivery and management circuits, including integrated
converter topologies, architectures, circuits, and 3-D packaging for high-
performance computing and battery management; (II) power management for next-
generation communications systems with the focus on next-generation (5G/6G)
transmitters and power amplifier; and (III) wide-bandgap materials, devices, and
high-voltage circuits for power delivery and management. The contributions from
the UCSD site can provide fundamental additions to help PMIC achieve its goals
in enabling higher efficiency, smaller size, and reduced cost for a wide range
of electronic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.