* 2052210
* SBIR Phase I:  Increasing energy yield from dusty solar panels with a new generation of an electrostatic self-cleaning technology
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,03/31/2023
* James Smith, SUPERCLEAN GLASS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2023
* USD 255,974.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is in reducing environmental impact of energy generation
and improving the reliability of solar energy generation. Across all market
segments, solar power accounted for 36% of all new electricity-generating
capacity additions in the first half of 2019. Utility-scale photovoltaic power
maintained the largest share of installed capacity in the U.S. solar market but
dust can affect power output. For example, the average losses due to surface
contamination are about 7% in New York State, 15-25% in Arizona, and can go up
to 100% during the dust storms in the Middle East and North Africa region. This
project will develop a new cleaning method for solar panels. It will
significantly reduce Levelized Cost of Electricity (LCOE), prevent potable water
wastage, and save lost revenue due to solar panel cleaning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes a new electrostatic
method to restore the solar panel to 98% of its power capacity for a variety of
soiling conditions. This technique will provide a new and efficient approach for
cleaning the dust with negligible power consumption from solar panels itself
without the need for an external power supply. This project integrates advances
in laser-assisted manufacturing, modelling, thin-film solar panel manufacturing,
photovoltaic panel testing, and large-scale
installations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.