* 2052829
* Constraining Transcrustal Magmatic Systems with Receiver Functions Along the Aleutian Island Arc
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Helen Janiszewski, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 296,022.00

The subterranean plumbing system beneath volcanoes is still not well understood.
Recent advances in the understanding of crustal magmatic storage reveal them as
complex, multi-layered systems consisting of both melt and crystal mush.
However, it remains unclear how magma is stored and transported from the Earth’s
mantle through the crust at volcanic arcs. A volcanic arc is a chain of
volcanoes located above a subducting tectonic plate, i.e., a plate diving
underneath another. Magmatic systems at arc volcanoes are a critical link
between the subducting slab and the shallow magma reservoirs that feed volcanic
eruptions. However, many established methods of constraining depth of magma
storage have relatively low resolution in the mid-to-deep crust. Receiver
functions are a technique of seismic imaging relatively underutilized in
volcanic settings. They have recently shown promise in their ability to image
magma storage in the deep crust. Here, the researchers apply this technique to
image the magmatic system beneath volcanoes in the Aleutian Island arc, in
Alaska. Using state-of-the-art seismic analysis, they gradually unveil the
complexity of volcanoes’ plumbing system. This study also contributes to
developing an imaging technique that can be applied to other volcanoes around
the Globe. The project’s outcomes improve volcanic hazard assessment in Alaska
where eruptions threaten local populations and air traffic. Indeed, its primary
target volcanoes are classified as Highest Priority or High Priority for
monitoring by the National Volcano Early Warning System. The project also
provides support for an early-career female scientist. It fosters training in
volcano seismology to graduate and undergraduate students at University of
Hawaii. This project is jointly funded by the Geophysics program, and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here, the researchers conduct novel receiver
function analysis of seismic data to constrain the crustal magmatic structure
beneath a transect of volcanoes along the Aleutian Island arc. They calculate
P-to-s receiver functions using existing broadband data to determine crustal
seismic velocity models with primary sensitivity in the mid- to deep-crust (≥ 10
km depth). They focus on six Aleutian volcanoes - Okmok, Makushin, Akutan,
Westdahl, Pavlof, and Shishaldin - and incorporate previous results from
Cleveland Volcano. Receiver functions are well suited to detect low velocity
regions in the crust, which can indicate magma storage. This transect samples
variations in depth to slab, H2O content, volcanic seismicity distribution, and
overriding crustal properties; these factors have been hypothesized to relate to
variations in magmatic storage and transport beneath arc volcanoes. The team
also calculate receiver functions along a secondary transect in the Western
Aleutians (Gareloi, Tanaga, Kanaga, Great Sitkin, Korovin); while significantly
less data is available, this gives a basis for future expansion of the technique
across the Alaska-Aleutian arc. This project provides new constraints on the
depths and structure of magmatic storage throughout the crust beneath the
volcanoes. It enables investigation into the sources of variation in volcanic
behavior along arcs. Through collaboration with the Alaska Volcano Observatory
(AVO), the team utilizes these results to identify future monitoring and
research needs in the Aleutians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.