* 2052251
* Programmable Surfaces by Scalable Self-assembly of Particles Printed by Two-photon Polymerization
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Xun Wendy Gu, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 04/30/2024
* USD 413,280.00

Textured surfaces with micro-scaled features have many engineering applications
such as self-cleaning, enhanced gripping and directional light scattering, etc.
However, it is challenging to manufacture textured surfaces over a large area
with high fidelity, needless to mention the issues with quality control, pattern
complexity and special equipment needs, etc. This award supports fundamental
research in self-assembling of countless polyhedral particles in a solution to
achieve a wide range of micro-textured patterns. Beyond common geometry that can
be fabricated using conventional lithography techniques, the unique innovation
of this project is the use of two-photon polymerization to fabricate particles
of complex shapes, which enable tunable in-plane and out-of-plane periodicities
and out-of-plane protrusions in the self-assembly of micro-patterned surfaces.
The studied self-assembled textured surfaces can potentially be programmed and
achieve controllable wettability or be used as coatings, especially attractive
for curved and/or delicate substrates in applications such as organic
photovoltaics and wearable sensors. The educational activities consist of
developing and implementing a particle self-assembly learning module for
elementary school students, hosting a student, via summer internship, from a
local Hispanic community college, and incorporating the topic of self-assembly
into a graduate course on defects in crystalline
solids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a three-dimensional printing technology,
namely, two-photon polymerization, this project will fabricate micro-scaled
particles for self-assembly into textured surfaces. Arrays on the order of
200,000 particles will be printed on a solid substrate, transferred to a liquid-
filled well, and then self-assembled through a balance of sedimentation,
diffusion, interparticle and particle-substrate interactions. Particles of
different geometries will be investigated including tetrahedrons and square
pyramids of varying sized as well as binary particle systems, to obtain a
tunable feature height and periodicity formed at a millimeter scale. An optical
microscope will be utilized to acquire video images of particle motions along
the self-assembling time with automated image analyses to evaluate the quality
of the self-assembled surface. The bond and body order parameters will be
analyzed to understand the degree of uniformity that can be achieved under
different processing conditions, and the types of defects generated during such
a self-assembly process. Theoretical studies will include the Brownian motion
modeled using the Einstein-Stokes equation and the energetic driving force
modeled using the DLVO principle to design self-assembly experiments that are
likely to succeed, and then compared against experimental results to gain new
knowledge of what governs the self-assembly
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.