* 2052571
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: In-situ forest ecosystem response to wildfire
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2021
* Crystal Kolden, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Gary Lamberti
* 10/31/2021
* USD 69,485.00

Wildfire is increasing in frequency and duration in Western US forests because
of longer fire seasons, greater fuel load, prolonged drought, and intense heat
waves. In 2020, wildfires burned existing research forests in Oregon, USA,
creating the opportunity to study how and why fire kills some trees but not
others. This research will investigate and track the fate of forest trees that
suffered varying degrees of burn severity, determine reasons for tree death and
survival, and use the knowledge to determine the impact of wildfire on forest
recovery in similar systems across the western US. Knowing how trees survive
fire and drought is important for land owners and policy makers in developing
management plans for alleviating forest stress and for reducing the risk and
impact of wildfire. This project will provide training for a postdoctoral
researcher, and contribute to a broader understanding of how fire and forest
structure affect carbon and water cycling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will provide critical knowledge about sensitivity of trees to varying fire
severity, how traits of trees interacts with burn severity to impact survival,
and how variability in tree mortality at the individual scale affects larger
ecosystem processes, primarily net carbon balance. This research will quantify
ecosystem response and recovery across a gradient of fire severity to answer
this important research question: What are the immediate (weeks) and short-term
(&lt;1 year) impacts of wildfire on forest ecosystem carbon stocks and fluxes,
resilience, and mortality at tree, stand, and ecosystem levels? Post-fire data
will be compared with the existing 20 years of continuous pre-fire data from the
site, including eddy covariance, meteorology, subcanopy fluxes, automated soil
respiration and sap flow on mature trees. Being able to characterize mechanisms
for tree death and ecosystem recovery following fire is important for making
predictions with process-based models of the impacts of fire at larger scales
now and in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.