* 2052465
* Evolutionary dynamics of non-genetic mechanisms of drug resistance in cancer
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jasmine Foo, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2024
* USD 262,000.00

Although cancer is traditionally viewed as a genetic disease, it is becoming
increasingly recognized that non-genetic sources of heterogeneity amongst tumor
cell populations play an important role in disease progression and drug
resistance leading to treatment failure. For example, common sources of non-
genetic heterogeneity such as epigenetic phenomena and environmental noise have
been shown to induce transient or reversible drug-resistant states in tumor
cells. Since these phenotypic switches often operate at significantly faster
time scales than genetic evolution, they can exert large influences on the
course of tumor evolution and response to therapy. These observations have
generated tremendous interest in the clinical potential of novel drugs, such as
epigenetic therapies, that target the cellular machinery controlling these
phenotypic switches; however, the success of these therapies has been limited so
far. One obstacle to these efforts has been an inadequate mechanistic
understanding of how stochastic phenotypic transitions at the level of
individual cells arise and influence tumor population-level responses to
therapy. This project aims to elucidate these questions through the development
of mathematical theories that link the mechanisms of phenotypic transitions at
the subcellular level to population-level tumor evolutionary dynamics, within
the context of a changing tumor microenvironment. This framework will be applied
to understand the development of therapeutic resistance in leukemias and
colorectal cancers, and to explore novel treatment strategies for preventing
treatment failure. Since analogous phenomena occur in the context of bacterial
populations treated with antibiotics, such models can also be leveraged to
provide insights into antimicrobial therapy resistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
the first part of the project, the PI will develop and analyze a continuous-time
Markov process model of drug resistance driven by reversible phenotypic
transitions in response to stromal cell-secreted factors in the tumor
microenvironment. In the second part of the project, the PI will develop a novel
multiscale modeling framework using branching random walks to link stochastic
subcellular epigenetic dynamics to population-level evolutionary dynamics, and
use this model to explore the impact of epigenetic processes on the evolution of
drug resistance in cancer. These models will be analyzed to elucidate how the
underlying processes driving non-genetic heterogeneity in a population influence
overall evolutionary shifts towards drug resistance and tumor recurrence. This
work will involve the analysis of state-dependent branching random walks on
nonstandard geometries as well as branching process approximations of continuous
time Markov processes. In particular, analyses of the limiting behaviors of
these models, stochastic hitting times (e.g. recurrence time, gene
silencing/activation times), and extinction probabilities will be conducted. The
PI will work closely with experimental collaborators to apply these models and
results to understand specific cancer systems in which drug resistance is driven
by non-genetic mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.