* 2052190
* Just-in-Time Adaptive Interventions for Emotion Regulation
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Seth Kaplan, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 08/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

In the last 25 years, there has been an eruption of research on the prevalence
and impact of work-related emotions. Research has shown that negative emotional
reactions can impair employees’ task performance and result in counterproductive
work behavior and, in severe cases, insider threat behavior. Much of this
research has been guided by theories predicting causal event-emotion-behavior
sequences. However, the many empirical studies in this area are either
correlational rather than causal (e.g., ecological momentary assessment studies)
or conducted in the laboratory rather than in situ. This research will help
employees gain strategies to regulate their emotions, thereby potentially
improving task performance and deterring counterproductive and insider threat
behavior. Thus, the research has the potential to improve employee well-being.
The research also has the potential to aid organizations in weakening the links
between stressful events and insider threat behavior on the part of their
employees. Finally, this research will illustrate the JITAI as a new and very
different type of intervention that can fruitfully augment traditional
interventions in a variety of topic areas within the organizational sciences
(e.g., occupational safety interventions, sexual harassment prevention
interventions, leader development interventions, and technical skills training
interventions).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current pair of studies will
manipulate emotional experience via randomly assigned Just-in-Time Adaptive
Interventions (JITAIs), also known as ecological momentary interventions.
Tailored interventions are needed to help individuals regulate negative emotions
in the moment—when most needed and before the resulting deleterious performance
outcomes manifest. As such, the JITAIs in the current research are focused on
emotion regulation, thereby providing causal tests of the role of emotion on
behavior as well as testing additional research questions involving situational
and dispositional moderators of emotion-behavior relationships. Unlike standard
interventions, these JITAIs are within-person interventions that capitalize on
temporal states of vulnerability (e.g., high levels of negative emotion) and
aspects of the current context (e.g., the nature of the emotion-causing episode,
the feasibility of completing the intervention at that particular moment) to
optimize treatment effectiveness. Specifically, in the proposed studies,
participants will repeatedly be randomly (re-)assigned to different cognitively-
focused emotion reappraisal interventions or to no intervention (control
condition) over the course of several work weeks. The reappraisal strategies to
be contrasted against each other (and against a control condition) include
imagining that a negative emotional stimulus or situation had a positive
outcome, altering the impact of the emotional stimulus by adopting a more-or-
less objective perspective, and interpreting the focal emotion in a manner that
facilitates an accepting, observing, non-judgmental relationship to emotions.
The first study is a micro-randomized trial that will provide for causal
inferences regarding emotion and the effects of three cognitive reappraisal
JITAIs in achieving proximal (i.e., decision-point and day level) emotion and
performance outcomes. The results from the first study will permit the
optimization of decision rules (e.g., dropping a less effective intervention,
including decision rules for which intervention should be used when based on
context) to inform the second study. The second study is a randomized control
trial that will evaluate the effectiveness of the JITAIs in achieving distal
(i.e., end-of-study and post-study) outcomes against control
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.