* 2052063
* CoPe EAGER: Collaborative Research: A GeoAI Data-Fusion Framework for Real-Time Assessment of Flood Damage and Transportation Resilience by Integrating Complex Sensor Datasets
* GEO,RISE
* 01/08/2020,12/31/2022
* Yi Qiang, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 12/31/2022
* USD 25,560.00

Traditional modeling approaches for flood damage assessment are often labor-
intensive and time-consuming due to requirements for domain expertise, training
data, and field surveys. Additionally, the lack of data and standard
methodologies makes it more challenging to assess transportation network
resilience in real-time during flood disasters. To address these challenges,
this project aims to integrate novel data streams from both physical sensor
networks (e.g., remotely-sensed data using unmanned aerial vehicles [UAVs]), and
citizen sensor networks (e.g., crowdsourced traffic data, social media and
community responsive teams connected through a developed mobile app). The goal
is to develop a framework for real-time assessment of damage and the resilience
of urban transportation infrastructures after coastal floods via the state-of-
the-art computer vision, deep learning and data fusion technologies. The project
will also advance Data Science through multi-disciplinary and multi-
institutional collaborations. The project is expected to improve the
sustainability, resilience, livability, and general well-being of coastal
communities by having a direct impact on the effectiveness, capability, and
potential of using both physical and social sensor data. This will in turn
enable and transform damage assessments, and identify critical and vulnerable
components in transportation networks in a more effective and efficient manner.
The interdisciplinary research team, along with students and collaborators from
different coastal regions, will facilitate the sharing of knowledge and
technologies from different socio-environmental contexts and testing the
transferability of the research outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
harmonize physical and citizen sensors within a geospatial artificial
intelligence (GeoAI) data-fusion framework with a focus on three research
thrusts: (1) unsupervised flood extent detection by integrating UAV images
collected throughout this project with existing geospatial data (e.g., road
networks and building footprints); (2) flood depth estimation using deep
learning and computer vision techniques combined with crowdsourced photos and
UAV imagery; and (3) assessment of the impact on and resilience of
transportation networks based on near real-time flood and damage information.
The innovative methodology will be demonstrated and deployed through
collaborative efforts in response to future flood events as well as several
historical storms. The project will produce open-source algorithms for future
educational use, raw and processed datasets and associated processing software,
a mobile app to engage community responsive science teams, and three research
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.