* 2052958
* When was Summit, Greenland last ice-free: 81Kr dating of dirty ice at the bottom of the GISP2 ice core
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Michael Bender, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 05/31/2024
* USD 135,927.00

Ice sheets melt as Planet Earth becomes warmer. This melting causes sea level to
rise, constituting one of the most serious problems resulting from global
warming. Complete melting of the Greenland Ice Sheet would raise the average
level of the oceans by 7 meters, with significant consequences for cities and
towns along the coasts of the world. Understanding how extensively the Greenland
Ice Sheet melted in the past will help us predict how fast it will melt in the
future. The investigators will determine the age of ice at the very bottom of
the ice sheet. The measurements will be made on ice from a site called “GISP2”,
in central Greenland, where a hole has been drilled through the 3053-meter thick
ice sheet. The ice at the bottom of the hole is likely to be the oldest ice on
Greenland and the dating of this bottom ice will tell us the last time that
Greenland was not covered by a big ice sheet. By comparing the time when
Greenland was ice-free with global climate events that occurred in the past, we
hope to learn why the Greenland Ice Sheet melted in the past, and what human
activities might cause it to melt in the future. This work will have 2 major
benefits to society. First, it will lead to a better understanding of how human
activities are likely to affect sea level in the future. Second, it will lead to
the training of a postdoctoral fellow, who will collect most of the data,
understand the results, and develop research skills that will complete her
training as an outstanding independent scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The great
planetary ice sheets may melt due to global warming, causing sea level to rise.
Complete melting of the East Antarctic ice sheet would raise sea level by 53 m,
melting of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet would lead to a 5 m rise, and melting of
Greenland would cause a 7 m rise. The Greenland ice sheet is generally regarded
as most susceptible to melting and therefore of greatest concern. Melting of the
Greenland Ice Sheet would lead to a catastrophic rise in sea level, causing
flooding of coastal cities as well as lowlands near the ocean. A premise of this
proposal is that, if we determine when Greenland was last ice-free, we will have
new information which will help us predict the rate of melting in the future,
and, consequent rate of sea level rise. The investigators will determine the age
of ice at the very bottom of the ice sheet. We will do this using a method
called “krypton 81 dating”. Krypton 81 is a form of krypton that is radioactive
and gradually changes into another element. The lower the krypton-81
concentration in air trapped in ancient ice, the older the ice. The measurements
will be made on ice from a site called “GISP2”, in central Greenland, where a
hole has been drilled through the 3053-meter thick ice sheet. The dating
measurements will be made at the University of Science and Technology of China,
in Hefei. This University has the one instrument in the world capable of
measuring the abundance of 81Kr with the required accuracy. Having dated the
oldest ice, we will examine the age in the context of known global climate
events that occurred around the same time. For example, climate was particularly
warm at several times in the past, including 400,000 years ago and 1,070,000
years ago. A date near one of those 2 times would suggest that the planetary
warming was sufficient to melt the Greenland Ice Sheet, after which the planet
cooled and Greenland was continuously glaciated. This information would
challenge global climate models to account for global warming at the appropriate
time and would clarify what is required for the melting and regrowth of the ice
sheet. This new insight would, in turn, improve our ability to estimate the
melting trajectory of the Greenland Ice Sheet on human-relevant timescales (say,
thousands to hundreds of thousands of years). It would also improve our ability
to understand past climate events and the role of Greenland melting. A
Postdoctoral Fellow will be directly responsible for most aspects of the
project, including preparing ice core samples for analysis, extracting dissolved
gases, interpreting the results, preparing a paper reporting the data, and
submitting the results to the NSF Arctic Data Center. The post doctoral
scientist will be mentored by the PI and provide support for becoming an
independent scientist playing an important role in moving the field
forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.