* 2052739
* IUCRC Planning Grant Purdue University: Center for Quantum Technologies (CQT)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2022
* Andrew Weiner, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 04/30/2022
* USD 20,000.00

The Center for Quantum Technologies (CQT) is a partnership between Purdue
University, Indiana University, the University of Notre Dame, and Indiana
University Purdue University - Indianapolis (IUPUI). The mission of the CQT is
to collaborate with industry and government stakeholders to identify compelling
needs and challenges in quantum technologies, and then develop novel solutions
to address these opportunities. Quantum technologies are governed by the physics
of sub-atomic particles and have relevance to computing, sensing, imaging,
metrology, communications, and cryptography. Because of their wide-ranging
applicability, quantum technologies have the potential to be transformative,
with uses in intelligence, financial security, computing, medicine, and
navigation. Society has entered the second quantum revolution, but it is still
in its infancy, and the nascent quantum industry requires significant
fundamental research to mature novel technologies. In partnership with
industrial members, the CQT researchers will use their expertise in quantum
science and engineering to develop and transfer foundational knowledge into
industry-friendly quantum devices, systems, and algorithms with enhanced
functionality and performance. Additionally, the CQT will help train the next
generation of quantum scientists and engineers to support the development of a
critically needed quantum workforce. Students will not only conduct Center
research, but also help writing project reports, present at biannual meetings,
and interact with industry and government members. Finally, the CQT will
leverage established programs at each of the four universities to engage and
support students traditionally underrepresented in STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching vision of the CQT is to bring together
multidisciplinary experts in academia, industry, and government in a self-
sustaining, collaborative venture facilitating the transition of fundamental
research discoveries in quantum science and engineering to novel, commercial-
ready technologies. Specifically, it will focus on three significant industrial
and government interests: quantum computing (including simulation and algorithm
development), quantum sensing, and quantum communications. Purdue University
will contribute these areas using its expertise in quantum algorithm development
and machine learning, quantum devices and materials, quantum nanophotonics,
atomic, molecular and optical (AMO) and condensed-matter physics, and quantum
chemistry. Because of the wide applicability of quantum technologies, the
relevant industry base is broad. The technologies developed in the CQT may save
energy, speed up computation, enhance national security and defense, and
innovate health care. A variety of world-class facilities are available on the
Purdue University campus to support the CQT. These include the Birck
Nanotechnology Center, which houses a 25,000 sq. ft. clean room and has a
multitude of experimental capabilities including nanofabrication, materials and
surface characterization and microscopy, a quantum design physical property
measurement system, and optical characterization laboratories. The Physics
Department also houses a crystal growth facility, various portable radioactive
sources to test for radiation fidelity, machine and electronic shops, and a
helium re-capture and re-liquification system, which significantly reduces costs
of running cryogenic equipment. CQT will also leverage several existing
mechanisms at Purdue University for incorporating students traditionally
underrepresented in STEM disciplines into the quantum research, including the
Minority Engineering Program, the Science Diversity Office, and the Summer
Research Opportunities Program, a diversity recruitment opportunity aimed at
preparing high-achieving undergraduates for graduate
study.&lt;br/&gt;degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.