* 2052848
* EAR-PF: Deciphering the Timescales of Metamorphism via Size Sorted Garnet Geochronology
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Alexandra Nagurney, Nagurney, Alexandra Bobiak
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 02/28/2023
* USD 57,834.00

Dr. Allie Nagurney has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
investigate the timescales and nature of metamorphism via size sorted garnet
geochronology. This work will take place at the University of South Carolina
under the mentorship of Dr. Besim Dragovic. Mountain-building events thicken and
heat the upper most layer of the Earth (the lithosphere), causing physical and
chemical changes in crustal rocks, called metamorphism. Establishing the
duration of metamorphic processes during mountain building events is crucial to
characterizing the thermal evolution of the lithosphere. Traditional models
suggest that metamorphism happens over time scales of more than 10 million years
and is driven by slow cooling of overthickened crust. However, more recent
studies find that metamorphism is likely driven by increased, small-scale heat
production and may happen in geologically short (&lt;5-10 million year) pulses
during mountain-building events. Garnet is a mineral that occurs in metamorphic
rocks and is useful for determining time scales of metamorphism because it
progressively crystallizes (nucleates and grows) as metamorphic processes
progress. This project will couple textural analysis and size sorted garnet
geochronology to determine the duration of garnet crystallization in multiple
samples across the Western Blue Ridge Terrane, North Carolina. During her tenure
as an NSF postdoctoral fellow, Dr. Nagurney will mentor undergraduate
researchers, teach an Appalachian geology seminar course, and develop
educational resources about the methods explored in this project for NAGT's
Teach the Earth portal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will utilize
textural and compositional analyses of garnet crystals to apply a methodology of
size sorted garnet geochronology to constrain the nature and duration of
metamorphic processes during orogenesis. Metamorphic rocks from the Western Blue
Ridge terrane, North Carolina (part of the Appalachian Taconic Orogeny) will be
studied via X-Ray Computed Tomography (CT Scanning) to determine the size and
location of garnet crystals, the distribution of garnet crystal sizes, and
analyzed to interpret the mechanisms of garnet crystallization in each sample.
Representative garnets from each crystal size class will be characterized for
major and trace element compositions via electron microprobe and LA-ICP-MS, and
dated using the Sm-Nd isotopic system via MC-ICP-MS. The objectives of this
study are to understand: i) if garnet crystallization is pulsed or protracted in
a sample, ii) if the mechanisms controlling garnet crystallization vary across a
terrane, and iii) if metamorphism is pulsed or protracted across a terrane
during orogenesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship program, the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the EAR Petrology and Geochemistry
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.