* 2052794
* Seismic and Hydrostratigraphic Characterization of the Onshore-Offshore Freshwater Systems of Martha’s Vineyard and Nantucket, Massachusetts, USA
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Brandon Dugan, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2023
* USD 49,417.00

Coastal hydrological systems provide significant freshwater resources to coastal
communities around the world. These resources are exploited by groundwater wells
that produce from aquifers at depths of less than 100 m. Globally, these
resources are declining due to overuse, increasing population, and climate
change. To improve water supplies and security, new approaches to understanding
underused and poorly quantified freshwater resources are needed. One such
resource is freshwater that extends from onshore to offshore, potentially
extending up to 100km offshore in some regions, such as the northeastern margin
of the United States. To better understand the dynamics of these onshore-
offshore hydrologic systems, we need dedicated, coordinated onshore and offshore
hydrogeological studies. This research project on Martha’s Vineyard and
Nantucket, MA, USA will increase our understanding of the coastal freshwater
resources by characterizing the sedimentary layering in the coastal environment
through geophysical surveys. This work is a critical piece to the integrative,
multi-pronged (geophysics, drilling and sampling, modeling) research that is
required to understand the dynamics of the onshore-offshore systems and to
define their potential as a resource. This study has the potential to establish
the protocols for studying global onshore-offshore freshwater resources, to
improve understanding of under-developed freshwater resources, and to inform
future studies on the maintenance and sustainability of this
resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last 15 years, there has been growing
research on onshore-offshore freshwater systems including geophysical surveys
and numerical models that have been motivated by drilling data that were not
collected to address freshwater resources. To date, however, no dedicated and
integrated onshore-offshore study has been completed to study the dynamics,
volumes, and producibility of these offshore freshwater resources. Our proposed
study of the hydrostratigraphy on Martha’s Vineyard and Nantucket Island, MA,
USA through collection, processing, and interpretation of seismic data is a key
portion to the first complete onshore-offshore characterization. The data
obtained from this award will be used to support an International Continental
Scientific Drilling Program (ICDP) proposal to drill wells to quantify the
hydrologic properties and groundwater age for the onshore portion of this
coastal aquifer system. This complements an International Ocean Discovery
Program (IODP) proposal to drill wells to quantify hydrologic properties and
groundwater age for the offshore component of this onshore-offshore aquifer.
Combined, this research would be the first dedicated, shoreline-crossing
geological, geophysical, and hydrogeological study of onshore-offshore
freshwater addressing many questions related to the dynamics, sustainability,
and utility of these freshwater systems that exist globally. This award was co-
funded by the Earth Sciences Hydrologic Sciences
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.