* 2052889
* Focused CoPe: Supporting Environmental Justice in Connected Coastal Communities through a Regional Approach to Collaborative Community Science
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Poonam Arora, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2026
* USD 4,999,056.00

The project will strengthen coastal resilience in communities along the
Albemarle-Pamlico Estuary system of coastal North Carolina. This area has been
impacted by poor water quality that threatens ecosystems and economic activities
important to coastal communities. The team of researchers will measure how
contaminants flow throughout the natural and built environment over time to
understand processes that control their distribution and their impact on the
watershed. A key goal of the Hub is to integrate a broad coalition of academic,
community, NGO and government stakeholders to develop mitigation strategies and
understand tradeoffs in adaptation and management plans. The Hub’s Coastal
Environmental Justice Institute will serve as the central coordinating unit to
catalyze connections within the community, coordinate internships (high school
and college students) embedded with partners and communicate with community
stakeholders. Manhattan College, a primarily undergraduate institution, will
also serve to integrate STEM with non-STEM fields (business and management) to
better prepare and inform the next generation of decision makers in the
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Does engaging diverse communities in regional
science partnerships make them more resilient to coastal hazards and less
susceptible to environmental injustices? This project will investigate how the
co-production of scientific knowledge between community members, regional
stakeholders, and academic researchers contributes to understanding
socioenvironmental drivers that impact resilience to coastal hazards and the
adoption of solutions to overcome them, particularly for marginalized
populations that are being disproportionately affected by poor water quality,
hurricanes, floods, droughts, and sea level rise. Divergent economic interests,
significant racial inequities, and differing degrees of flood and water quality
risk for communities throughout the region around North Carolina’s Pamlico
Sound, along with the ecologic and economic importance of these coastal waters,
make this estuary an ideal study area for a CoPe hub. Stakeholders in the
project represent fishers, farmers, local and state government, tourists, and
residents at multiple nested scales of decision making reflecting different
social contexts built on environmental attitudes, economic incentives and
inequities, and propensities for social cooperation. These contexts are
themselves dependent on individual perceptions of identity, trust, norms, and
control over the environmental system. Our team of academic researchers takes a
transdisciplinary approach to understanding this complex system by pursuing four
objectives: (1) mapping key natural, built, and socioeconomic resources and
interdependencies that define the regional socio-engineered- environmental
system (SEES); (2) understanding how coastal hazards enhance vulnerabilities in
the region; (3) identifying opportunities for locally appropriate adaptation and
mitigation strategies to build community and regional resilience; and (4)
establishing a Coastal Environmental Justice Institute as a long-term mechanism
to promote and support collaboration among stakeholder groups from diverse
communities throughout the region and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.