* 2052109
* Stochastic Shielding for Dimension Reduction in Models of Biological Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Peter Thomas, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2024
* USD 198,592.00

This project will develop mathematical tools to enable scientists to understand
how biological systems function when only parts of those systems can be directly
observed. In the first part of the project the PI will collaborate with
scientists who study the basic biology of cystic fibrosis. This disease arises
when someone has a variant of the gene making a certain protein. The behavior of
this protein cannot be observed directly. The PI will help scientists better
understand what the cystic fibrosis protein is doing based on the partial
measurements available. In the second part of the project the PI will study
molecules called ion channels, located in nerve cells in the brain that allow
brain cells to communicate with each other. Ion channels can open and close.
Although the random opening and closing of ion channels cannot be observed
directly, their fluctuations can be observed indirectly through their effects on
the electrical activity of individual nerve cells. The PI will provide ways to
understand how irregular the electrical activity of certain nerve cells will be,
due to the random opening and closing of ion channels. Finally, the PI will work
on certain life stages of animals can be directly observed while others cannot.
Ecologists have carefully studied how populations of certain frogs change over
time. The frogs and their eggs can be counted in the ponds where they live, but
immature frogs spend a year living on land near the ponds, where they are
difficult to observe. The PI will provide mathematical tools that our ecologist
collaborators can use to understand fluctuations in populations that can only be
partially observed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Discrete state, continuous time Markov
processes occur throughout cell biology, neuroscience, and ecology, representing
the random dynamics of processes transitioning among multiple locations or
states. Complexity reduction for such models aims to capture the essential
dynamics and stochastic properties via simpler representations, with minimal
loss of accuracy. Classical approaches, such as aggregation of nodes and
elimination of fast variables, lead to reduced models that are no longer
Markovian. Stochastic shielding provides an alternative approach by simplifying
the description of the noise driving the process, while preserving the Markov
property, by removing from the model those fluctuations that have the least
impact on observable features of the process. The PI will build on their prior
work developing the stochastic shielding framework in three ways. 1. The PI will
establish rigorous mathematical foundations for the stochastic shielding
approximation by developing a nonlinear master equation description for the
evolution of the probability of the unobserved nodes, conditioned on the
observable trajectory of the process. 2. The PI will establish the applicability
of stochastic shielding to nonstationary hybrid (conditionally deterministic)
processes. Prior rigorous analysis of the stochastic shielding approximation was
confined to stationary processes, such as stochastic hybrid conductance-based
ion channel models under voltage clamp. Under current clamp conditions, each
edge makes a distinct contribution to fluctuations in pathwise properties such
as interspike interval variance. 3. The PI will extend stochastic shielding from
the constant population case, appropriate for noisy ion channels, to the case
where populations can grow or decline, as in ecological
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.