* 2052272
* SBIR Phase II:  An Ingestible, Intraluminal, Bioelectronic Capsule (IBC) for Closed-Loop Diagnosis and Treatment of Gastrointestinal Disorders
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Yi-Kai Lo, Niche Biomedical, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 02/29/2024
* USD 999,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project focuses on a new gastrointestinal therapeutic
device supporting multi-modal gastrointestinal measurements and treatment of
post-surgical complications. Over 300,000 patients in the US undergo abdominal
resection surgery each year. These patients often experience serious
complications, such as post-operative ileus, gastrointestinal hemorrhage, and
anastomotic leakage, that significantly impact quality of life. The success of
this project would not only benefit patients undergoing abdominal surgery and
their families, but also would significantly reduce health care expenditures by
decreasing the length of hospitalization as well as associated medical
resources. Furthermore, this interdisciplinary research brings together academic
collaborators from different fields of expertise. The project provides a unique
experience and training for engineers and scientists in the fields of neural
interface design and medical device experiments, bridging the gap between the
engineering and medical communities, as well as promoting and cultivating future
neural engineers to focus on developing emerging/unmet diagnostic and
therapeutic devices for improving human
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project develops and demonstrates a wireless, miniaturized,
intraluminal bioelectronic capsule capable of performing on-demand
neuromodulation and multi-modality sensing on the gastrointestinal tract,
supporting closed-loop neuromodulation. The device will be tested and
characterized on benchtop and also through porcine models to demonstrate its
potential for treating and monitoring post-surgical complications. The lengthy
process of diagnosing and treating post-surgical complications significantly
increases healthcare costs. Costs from hospitalization time alone exceed $2,000
per day for post-operative ileus alone. Additional costs due to prolonged
hospitalization time exceed $1.5 billion annually. Rapid detection and treatment
of these complications could reduce hospitalization time, accelerate recovery,
enable closed-loop therapies, and increase quality of life for patients. The
success of this project has the potential to bring disruptive impact and
revolution to the current pharmaceutical-based post-surgical management and
treatment. In addition, the technology developed during this project may be
useful to treat other chronic diseases and injuries that are incurable
pharmaceutically. The technique may be used as research tools for investigating
the biological mechanisms and new therapeutics for different
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.