* 2052172
* SBIR Phase II:  Improved Lithium-Ion Batteries via Solution-Deposited Nanolayers on the Surface of Formed Electrodes
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,12/31/2023
* SOURAV BASU, CORESHELL TECHNOLOGIES INC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2023
* USD 984,237.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be to reduce the cost of lithium-ion batteries
(LIBs) while simultaneously improving their performance. In doing so, the
project aims to accelerate the decarbonization of two of the largest sources of
CO2 emissions: the energy and transportation sectors. To date, cost reductions
in LIBs have been mostly driven by economies-of-scale, but these reductions are
now reaching a plateau. To further drive down costs, this SBIR project will
demonstrate a coating innovation that improves battery capacity and lifetime
while eliminating certain costly and time-consuming bottlenecks that exist in
current LIB manufacturing. The combined result of these enhancements will be a
LIB with greatly reduced cost per kWh relative to the state of the art,
ultimately enabling cost-competitive electric vehicles as well as widespread
renewable energy storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project will
focus on the application of protective thin-film coatings on LIB electrodes
using a low-cost, easily integrated process. These coatings protect LIBs against
degradation during charge and discharge, which extends battery lifetime,
improves energy density, and enables next-generation electrode materials with
greater capacity. This project will scale the company's coating technology as
demonstrated during Phase I from lab-scale coating tools to a pilot “roll-to-
roll” (R2R) coater that matches real-world LIB factory throughput, thereby de-
risking integration of the coating process into standard LIB manufacturing
lines. Phase II tasks will include optimization of process parameters to meet
throughput targets, equipment design to ensure coating uniformity, and continued
development of thin-film deposition chemistry to maximize cell performance
improvements. By its conclusion, the Phase II project will demonstrate prototype
LIBs with an anticipated &gt;20% enhanced energy density as well as 30% reduced
cost/kWh relative to the state of the art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.