* 2052367
* SBIR Phase I:  Integrated Technologies for Addressing Environmental Challenges in the Energy Industries
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Shyamsundar Chattanathan, DIRECT COMBUSTION TECHNOLOGIES, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2022
* USD 255,597.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to capture carbon dioxide from the burning of
fossil fuels and sequester it safely from the atmosphere. This project uniquely
combines two new technologies to eliminate the carbon dioxide emissions
resulting from flaring of huge volumes of natural gas in remote oil fields; the
technologies burn it in a novel combustion system and uses the generated heat to
treat the oil-field produced water. The cooled flue gases of combustion are then
injected via a novel process into oilfields for enhancing oil recovery. This
makes the entire process economically feasible and environmentally beneficial.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed combustion system involves a novel concept of
“Fire-in-Water” to carry out combustion of a fuel directly within a flowing
stream of water, thereby enhancing the heat transfer coefficients by several
orders of magnitude compared to conventional indirect heat transfer systems
involving metallic heat transfer surfaces (such as shell-and-tube heat
exchangers) separating the heated and heating media. This project proposes this
combustion system to burn natural gas currently wasted through flares in remote
oil fields, resolving a major environmental problem facing the industry. The
second innovation utilizes the heat generated by combustion of flare-gas in the
novel burner to treat oil-field produced water, another long-standing
environmental concern. The third innovation uses the flue gas generated by
combustion (of flare-gas) for injection into oil fields to produce trapped oil.
The project will demonstrate: (1) Successful adoption (through application of
combustion, heat transfer and two-phase flow principles) of the combustor design
from steam generator to flue gas generator; (2) The combustor’s ability to burn
flare-gas of varying hydrocarbon contents and compositions; (3) The ability to
treat oil-field produced water; (4) Field-scale viability; and (5) Mathematical
models and computer simulations for implementation and process scale-
up.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.