* 2052743
* IUCRC Planning Grant The Ohio State University: Center for Population Health Analytics &amp; Technology [CPHAT]
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Timothy Huerta, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 10/31/2022
* USD 20,000.00

The US healthcare system is one of the largest sectors of the American economy.
However, the industry is not designed to effectively address the social,
technological, and health problems facing the nation. For example, addiction is
among the leading cause of death and economic burden, but people with addiction
often receive poor healthcare. Healthcare is designed to deal with clinical
problems, but social determinants are the largest drivers of costs and poor
health. Healthcare organizations need analytic tools to help manage the needs
and risks of entire populations. New technologies and scientific advancements
are needed to improve national health and prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
partnership between Indiana University, The Ohio State University, and
University of Florida, The Center for Population Health Analytics &amp;
Technology (CPHAT) will advance technologies, knowledge, and methods that
improve health and wellbeing related to social determinants of health,
population health analytics, and addiction. CPHAT will produce tools that
support clinical and business decision making, models to identify and support
high-risk populations, analytics that address health inequities, and
interventions for addiction. The Ohio State University Site will develop tools
that support both clinical care and business decision making models that better
meet the needs of high-risk populations, analytics responsive to the inequities
experienced by vulnerable populations, and develop new interventions to address
the social and health needs prompted by addiction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
CPHAT will have a positive impact on the well-being of individuals in society by
improving the effectiveness and the equity of US health care. The CPHAT will
partner with innovative industry members to develop the science and technology
necessary to deal with the social and behavioral drivers of poor health.
Population health is a dramatic departure from traditional approaches in that it
specifically focuses on improving health outcomes and health equity for all
individuals. In addition, the CPHAT will further the NSFâ€™s goal of increased
partnership between academia and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CPHAT will
maintain project repositories for the duration of the project period. Each
university partner site will maintain individual and shared project repositories
consistent with data sharing and usage agreements. A centrally-hosted project
repository will include all CPHAT project results, publications, and related
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.