* 2052651
* FRG: Collaborative Research: New Challenges in the Derivation and Dynamics of Quantum Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Gigliola Staffilani, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2024
* USD 432,714.00

The main scientific goal of this project is to study the interplay between
certain nonlinear evolution partial differential equations (PDE) and the natural
progenitor particle systems from which these equations are derived. The
equations considered are fundamental models for wave propagation phenomena
ranging from the microscopic (Bose Einstein Condensate) to the macroscopic
(rogue waves in deep sea), and for the dynamics of gases (Vlasov equation). To
address important challenges in studying these equations, the PIs adopt an
innovative approach combining deterministic and probabilistic perspectives.
Informed by the qualitative properties of these PDE, the principal objective of
this project is to identify the correct analogues of such properties at the many
particle level, and to demonstrate that these correspond to the known properties
at the PDE level. The award will foster collaborations among US based
researchers at various stages of their careers and provide research
opportunities and support for students and postdoctoral scholars. Additional
activities include three annual research workshops aimed at training,
dissemination, and stimulate further research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In their
analysis, the PIs consider two different but intimately related research
directions at the forefront of mathematical physics, nonlinear PDE and
probability. The first direction concerns the derivation of the Hamiltonian
structure for nonlinear evolution equations, including kinetic equations such as
the Vlasov equation, as well as a novel viewpoint on such derivations guided by
Ebin-Marsden's seminal program in the context of hydrodynamics. The second
direction is rooted on the integrability of the 1D cubic nonlinear Schrodinger
(NLS) equation and pursues two lines of inquiry. One of these questions focuses
on exploring the origins of integrability of the 1D cubic NLS through a series
of projects aimed at unveiling correct analogues of integrability at the many
particle level, and then at demonstrating that these correspond to the known
properties at the NLS level. A second line of inquiry stems from the work of
Lebowitz, Rose and Speer who posited that the grand canonical ensemble
description of equilibrium behavior is expected to be false for integrable PDE.
The PIs plan to settle this major open problem by constructing a suitable
substitute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.