* 2052168
* SBIR Phase I:  High-Performance, Low-Cost Anode-Free Lithium-Ion Batteries for Electric Vehicles and Consumer Electronics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Donald DeRosa, Eonix LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 10/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to create a new type of lithium-ion battery for
electric vehicle (EV) battery packs. Passenger vehicles representing 27% of
global oil consumption. The proposed material will enable a new affordable,
long-range EV reducing battery costs by reducing the battery size by 65% and the
cell cost by up to 40%. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes
to understand the influence of formation conditions and electrolyte composition
on the generation of anode-free solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) using
electrochemical and thin film characterization techniques. In the absence of a
robust SEI, anode-free batteries experience rapid capacity loss that stems from
either “mossy” lithium growth or precipitous electrolyte decomposition. These
degradation routes result in cells that typically function for less than 50
cycles at room temperature. The impact of formation temperature and current
density on anode-free SEI formation during galvanostatic charge/discharge will
be analyzed using Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and X-ray Photoelectron
Spectroscopy (XPS) as well as conventional electrochemical techniques. These
techniques will also measure the impact of varying electrolyte salt/solvent
compositions on anode-free SEI formation. The dependence of temperature on cycle
life with the optimized SEI conditions will be evaluated through galvanostatic
charge/discharge. The key objective of the project is to clarify the formation
conditions and electrolyte composition that results in the generation of a
smooth SEI layer featuring ideal lithium mosaic columns capable of reversibly
cycling with minimal capacity fade at room
temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.