* 2052701
* IUCRC Phase 1 University of Central Florida: Center for Electronic-Photonic Integrated Circuits for Aerospace (EPICA)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2026
* Peter Delfyett, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 05/31/2026
* USD 375,000.00

As mankind continues to expand a wide range of activities into space to support
essential communications, climate monitoring, research and exploration, it is
imperative to establish the viability and safety of key enabling integrated
electronics and photonic technologies for operation in harsh environments.
Integrated photonics enable systems with unmatched power efficiency, longevity
and capability thus improving everything from internet availability and
reliability around the planet to improving environmental sensing and enhanced
security by enabling robust DoD systems. EPICA’s objective is to enable the use
of increasingly sophisticated electronics and photonics in communications and
sensing applications for space-borne and aerospace platforms. The diverse team
of component, systems and aerospace researchers will collaborate to advance
knowledge of associated environmental considerations, and craft specific
components and architectures to meet the unique reliability and performance
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EPICA’s objective is to enable the next wave
of communications and sensing technologies for aerospace and space-borne
platforms. The focus is on investigating the reliability of these devices and
systems operating in extreme environments such as space. The project has three
major thrusts: i) Assessment, understanding, and development of robust
integrated photonic hardware for reliable operation under radiation and
temperature extremes; ii) Development of components and architectures using
system-level methods and tools to extract maximum advantage of integrated
photonic systems for aerospace platforms; iii) Definition of flight hardware and
mission architectures for subsequent flight demonstration. A three-university
team, comprised of Georgia Tech, The University of Central Florida and
Vanderbilt University, with complementary expertise and facilities, will apply
both analytical and experimental capabilities to this project. UCF researchers
will developing components and architectures that are focused on thin-film
lithium niobite technologies and precision optical frequency comb sources in the
application sector of aerospace wideband communication and signal processing and
lidar. This research will be conducted in collaboration with researchers at the
other Center locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EPICA will advance US-based
capabilities in the design and manufacture of robust integrated electronics and
photonics, enabling reliable internet access around the planet and creating new
environmental sensing capabilities. The EPICA team is also actively creating a
diverse workforce that includes a mentoring program designed to increase the
success of students from underrepresented groups in areas of advanced photonics,
electronics and optical sciences. Each site will engage professional societies
and have active Bridge Programs to support and transition underrepresented
students from the baccalaureate level to graduate school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
project repository for data, code, results, IAB meeting summaries and
publications will be digitally archived. Each site will maintain their own local
storage and Georgia Tech will manage a comprehensive cloud storage site
accessible to the project partners. The repository will be maintained
continuously from the first year and for three years after conclusion of the
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.