* 2052641
* Collaborative Research: Secure and Efficient Post-quantum Cryptography: from Coding Theory to Hardware Architecture
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Xinmiao Zhang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 04/30/2024
* USD 245,000.00

Public-key ciphers are used for digital signature and secure information
exchange in numerous communication and storage systems to ensure data
confidentiality, authenticity, and non-repudiability. The current standards for
public-key ciphers are based on large number factorization or discrete
logarithm, which can be solved in polynomial time by a quantum computing
algorithm. Substantial advancements have been made on quantum processors
recently and there is imminent need of new cryptography schemes that are secure
against quantum computing attacks. The team will make advances in error-
correction code (ECC)-based McEliece/Niederreiter cryptography. The approach
will be based on low or medium-density parity-check (LDPC or MDPC) ECCs that are
among the most promising schemes resistant to quantum computing attacks. The
advances will be achieved by coupling research on cryptography and error-
correction coding theory, thus eliminating possible backdoors and attacks for
these ciphers. The team will also develop efficient and secure hardware
implementations that are indispensable in order to adopt the ECC-based ciphers
broadly in practical systems. The new challenges posed by the different
constructions of LDPC/MDPC codes for cryptographic purposes will be addressed
and advanced decoding algorithms will be investigated to unleash the performance
potential of these cryptosystems. Additionally, low-overhead schemes will be
developed to prevent the leakage of secret key from side-channel information,
such as the timing and power consumption of the circuit chip implementing the
cipher. This project will also contribute to the development of workforce
skilled in coding, cryptography and hardware architecture design for the growing
security needs in the US. The participating students will receive advanced
training in engineering, and their educational experiences will be enriched by
close collaboration between the PIs and their international
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal fills the gaps among the
research on cryptography, error-correction coding theory, and hardware
architecture design for the ECC-based post-quantum McEliece/Niederreiter
cryptosystems. Efficient and highly secure hardware implementations will be
developed through integrating theoretical study, attack analysis, and hardware
architecture design. Such a cross-layer design approach enables the development
of unprecedented short-latency, small-area, low-power, and secure ECC-based
cryptosystems. For the first time, possible attacks from coding theoretical
perspective will be studied comprehensively and low-overhead mitigation
methodologies will be developed for existing and new potential attacks. Taking
into account the specifics of the codes utilized in the ECC-based cryptosystems,
novel approaches and decoding scheduling schemes will be designed to
substantially improve the hardware efficiency. A framework of design and
implementation of the ECC-based cryptosystems satisfying various system
constraints, such as latency, silicon area, and power consumption, will be
developed to enable broad application of post-quantum cryptography. Moreover,
algorithmic-level side-channel attack resistant approaches, which have much
lower overheads compared to circuit-level methodologies, will be developed by
exploiting the variations of LDPC/MDPC decoding data flow and
scheduling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.