* 2052972
* Focused CoPe: Building Community Sensor Networks for Coastal Hazards and Climate Change Impacts in Southeast Alaska
* GEO,RISE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Ron Heintz, SITKA SOUND SCIENCE CENTER INC
* Continuing Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 01/31/2027
* USD 4,000,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The high precipitation rates and
steep topography of Southeast Alaska combine to create flooding and landslides
that endanger lives and destroy property. This Focused CoPe hub will bring
geoscientists, atmospheric scientists, and local residents together to deploy
and monitor a network of natural hazard sensors across the region. The hub will
integrate weather forecasts with real-time sensor data in a project dashboard.
The on-line dashboard will enable members of six Alaska tribal communities to
plan and prepare for extreme rainfall hazards and the subsequent impacts on
subsistence activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An innovative, community-led
project, this hub seeks to respond to research questions of local relevance
while increasing engagement and opportunities for experiential learning among
rural and Alaska Native students and community members, who are underrepresented
in STEM disciplines. The sensor networks that are the foundation of this hub
include tipping-bucket rain gauges, stream gauges, and soil moisture and
groundwater sensors connected to the regional dashboard via satellite telemetry.
The dashboard will incorporate machine learning and Bayesian analysis of real-
time sensor data to create a landslide warning system that may be modified for
use in other hazard-prone U.S. communities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.