* 2052788
* IUCRC Phase I: Mississippi State University: Center for Environmental Sustainability through Insect Farming (CEIF)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Florencia Meyer, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2026
* USD 272,270.00

This Industry University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) for Environmental
Sustainability through Insect Farming (CEIF) represents a first of its kind
IUCRC to support the animal nutrition and human food industries that go beyond
conventional protein sources currently available. At current rates of population
growth, traditional agriculture will be under intense pressure to meet protein
demands. Insect farming can increase the food supply for both animals and
humans. In addition, sustainable and cost effective methods for remediating
agricultural waste while producing high value protein is essential to the long
term health of ecosystems and agriculture. Select insects can take waste, such
as that produced in agro-ecosystems or urban environments, and convert it into
protein and compost. Industry can utilize the knowledge created in the center to
further explore the use of insect protein, with suitable regulatory approvals,
as food for humans and animals. Thus, insect-farming and its innovations could
represent a circular economy, which reduces land and/or water use and reduces
greenhouse gas emissions. Insect farming may also relieve the stress imposed on
marine and agricultural resources to generate protein for food and animal feed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Environmental Sustainability through Insect
Farming (CEIF) comprises of three sites (Indiana University-Purdue University
Indianapolis [IUPUI], Texas A&amp;M AgriLife Research [TAMU], and Mississippi
State University [MSU]), with each site specializing in a specific area of
research. The sites will work collaboratively to deliver industry-desired,
fundamental research into the genetics/genomics of the insect systems,
evaluating the heritability of traits, and determining the genetic contributions
to traits, allowing for future optimization and mass production. Through this
research, new knowledge and technologies will fill critical scientific and
industrial gaps related to insect farming for livestock and aquaculture
production as well as insect production for human consumption. Laboratory and
field-based experiments will also engage interdisciplinary expertise in
microbiology, engineering, chemistry, food nutrition, physiology, and biology
with cutting edge technologies. The purpose of the MSU site is to: 1)
Investigate insect microbiomes to optimize and evaluate their utility for
increased insect nutrition, nutrition as feed, and waste conversion; 2) Conduct
experiments to determine the effects of probiotic supplementation on insect
nutrition, feed nutrition, and waste conversion; 3) Use classical and molecular
microbiology to develop and implement management plans for quality assurance
(prevention) and control (detection) of microbial pathogens. MSU will work with
the other sites to integrate research thrusts across the three sites with IUPUI
and TAMU focusing on genetics, insect biology, engineering, and feed trials. All
three sites will work with strains produced by industry as well as strains
developed internally as a means to optimize mass
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.