* 2052661
* IUCRC Planning Grant IUPUI: Center for Quantum Technologies (CQT)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2022
* Ricardo Decca, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 04/30/2022
* USD 20,000.00

The Center for Quantum Technologies (CQT) is a partnership between Purdue
University, Indiana University, the University of Notre Dame, and Indiana
University Purdue University - Indianapolis (IUPUI). The mission of the CQT is
to collaborate with industry and government stakeholders to identify compelling
needs and challenges in quantum technologies, and then develop novel solutions
to address these opportunities. Quantum technologies are governed by the physics
of sub-atomic particles and have relevance to computing, sensing, imaging,
metrology, communications, and cryptography. Because of their wide-ranging
applicability, quantum technologies have the potential to be transformative,
with uses in intelligence, financial security, computing, medicine, and
navigation. Society has entered the second quantum revolution, but it is still
in its infancy, and the nascent quantum industry requires significant
fundamental research to mature novel technologies. In partnership with
industrial members, the CQT researchers will use their expertise in quantum
science and engineering to develop and transfer foundational knowledge into
industry-friendly quantum devices, systems, and algorithms with enhanced
functionality and performance. Additionally, the CQT will help train the next
generation of quantum scientists and engineers to support the development of a
critically needed quantum workforce. Students will not only conduct Center
research, but also help writing project reports, present at biannual meetings,
and interact with industry and government members. Finally, the CQT will
leverage established programs at each of the four universities to engage and
support students traditionally underrepresented in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At Indiana University-Purdue University
Indianapolis, one of the four Center sites, the academic expertise in the fields
of quantum materials, quantum sensing and quantum information will be meshed
with the needs of industrial partners. Indiana University-Purdue University
Indianapolis faculty excel in the development and characterization of novel
quantum materials with unique properties that can be used both as platforms for
quantum computation or as interfaces. The researchers also explore novel schemes
to improve sensing by using quantum materials, for example, by using optically
trapped nanocrystals cooled to their ground state of translational motion or the
exploitation of extraordinary points in parity-time (PT)-symmetric systems. They
also explore quantum information and key distribution, obtained in novel
applications of photon entanglement scenarios. These approaches and methods have
been developed recently within IUPUI in close collaborations with the existing
Nanoscale Imaging Center and the Integrated Nanosystems Development Institute. A
new Masters level program jointly developed by the School of Science and the
School of Engineering &amp; Technology will incorporate existing courses in
quantum science and technology and develop new curricular materials to better
prepare graduates to join the workforce in these rapidly evolving fields. The
Center will collaborate with the STEM Education Innovation and Research
Institute (SEIRI), a hub for education innovation, research, evaluation and
consultation in STEM disciplines and will directly interact with Project EPIC
(Evidence-Informed Promotion of Inclusive Climate) to promote equity and
diversity in STEM professions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.