* 2052454
* IUCRC Phase I Texas A&amp;M: Center for Environmental Sustainability through Insect Farming (CEIF)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Jeffery Tomberlin, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2026
* USD 459,051.00

This Industry University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) for Environmental
Sustainability through Insect Farming (CEIF) represents a first of its kind
IUCRC to support broad nutritional needs that go beyond conventional protein
sources currently available. At current rates of population growth, traditional
agriculture will be under intense pressure to meet protein demands. Insect
farming can increase the food supply for both animals and humans. In addition,
sustainable and cost effective methods for remediating agricultural waste while
producing high value protein is essential to the long term health of ecosystems
and agriculture. Select insects can take waste, such as that produced in agro-
ecosystems or urban environments, and convert it into protein and compost.
Industry can utilize the knowledge created in the center to further explore the
use of insect protein, with suitable regulatory approvals, as food for humans
and animals. Thus, insect-farming and its innovations could represent a circular
economy, which reduces land and/or water use and reduces greenhouse gas
emissions. Insect farming may also relieve the stress imposed on marine and
agricultural resources to generate protein for food and animal feed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Environmental Sustainability through Insect
Farming (CEIF) will be comprised of three sites (Indiana University-Purdue
University Indianapolis [IUPUI], Texas A&amp;M AgriLife Research [TAMU], and
Mississippi State University [MSU]), with each site specializing in a specific
area of research. TAMU will serve as the lead site for the center. The sites
will work collaboratively to deliver industry-desired, fundamental research into
the genetics/genomics of the insect systems, evaluating the heritability of
traits, and determining the genetic contributions to traits, allowing for future
optimization and mass production. Through this research, new knowledge and
technologies will fill critical scientific and industrial gaps related to insect
farming for livestock and aquaculture production as well as insect production
for human consumption. Laboratory and field-based experiments will also engage
interdisciplinary expertise in microbiology, engineering, chemistry, food
nutrition, physiology, and biology with cutting edge technologies. TAMU will: 1)
Optimize mass production of insects used for either food or feed; 2) Conduct
trials using insects as feed (e.g., poultry and aquaculture); and 3) Develop
strategies for maximizing quality assurance (prevention) and control (detection)
of contaminants (e.g., pathogens, heavy metals, and toxins). TAMU will work with
the other sites to integrate research thrusts across the three sites with IUPUI
and MSU focusing on genetics and microbiology. Further, all three sites will
work with strains produced by industry as well as strains developed internally
as a means to optimize mass production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.