* 2052126
* SBIR Phase I:  Pulsed Electric Field Mediated Intradermal Vaccine Delivery (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2022
* Michael Sano, GRADIENT MEDICAL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 02/28/2022
* USD 255,930.00

The broader impact / commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of more efficient delivery
techniques for specific vaccines. The proposed technology increases the
efficiency of DNA vaccine delivery while improving patient safety and reducing
unwanted cell death. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project will address the need for innovative technologies for
administering DNA vaccines. Among the vaccines in development, DNA vaccines are
particularly promising as they have the potential to induce positive humoral and
cellular immune responses, avoid anti-vector immunity challenges, are easily
scaled for production, and are stable at room temperature; However, these
vaccines require an additional assist to transport the large DNA molecules into
target cells. The proposed research will demonstrate the feasibility of a new
approach to vaccine delivery which utilizes ultrashort electrical pulses to
safely and effectively enhance DNA vaccine delivery in clinically relevant
volumes of sub-dermal tissue. The scope of the proposed research includes
designing a new pulse generation topology based around cutting edge transistors
and evaluating previously unachievable waveforms in an in vitro skin model. Data
from these experiments will then be used in computational multiphysics
simulations to optimize the design of clinical
applicators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.