* 2052817
* IUCRC Phase II: UC Davis/Berkeley: Center for Rational Catalyst Synthesis (CeRCaS)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Alexander Katz, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2026
* USD 200,000.00

The science of catalysis drives the creation of novel materials called catalysts
that make chemical transformations occur that would otherwise be difficult or
impossible. Catalysts are perhaps best known in automobile catalytic converters
to reduce pollution in automobile exhaust. Catalysts are used to produce a wide
variety of products of societal importance such as fuels, textiles, plastics,
food and pharmaceutical products to name a few. Catalysts are used to produce
common chemicals such as gasoline, textiles, plastics, food and pharmaceutical
products to name a few. It has been estimated that catalysis accounts for over
95% (by volume) of all products and over 80% of added value in the chemical
industry. About one third of the worldâ€™s economy depends directly or indirectly
on catalysis. Yet in spite of their immense importance, the development of new
catalysts is still largely done by trial-and-error, and is therefore time-
consuming and expensive. A grand challenge of catalysis research is the precise
design and controlled synthesis of catalytic structures. Discoveries which
transform catalyst synthesis from an art to a science will serve to enhance the
productivity, energy efficiency and economic impact of a very broad industry
base that involves the conversion of raw materials into finished products
through chemistry. The NSF Industry University Cooperative Research Center
(IUCRC) for Rational Catalyst Synthesis (CeRCaS) addresses this challenge and
the new university site located at University of California Davis/Berkeley
emphasizes zeolite catalyst design and synthesis on the atomic length scale.
Interactions of researchers in the new site with industry have already led to
fruitful collaborations involving new member companies as well as the existing
Virginia Commonwealth University and University of South Carolina sites. The UC
Davis/Berkeley site will augment the current capabilities of CeRCaS by
increasing participation of new pools of students at the respective
campuses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of California (UC) Davis/Berkeley
site focuses on enabling rational design and synthesis of zeolite catalysts in
CeRCaS through state-of-the-art spectroscopic characterization and atomic-
resolution imaging. The site focuses on zeolite catalysts, because their regular
porous structures facilitate unprecedented opportunities in developing
connections between synthesis, structure, and function. Zeolite catalysis
includes established processes such as fluid catalytic cracking for gasoline
manufacture. High value added applications of zeolite catalysis are emerging
rapidly, such as for pollution abatement in diesel trucks, chemicals for
polymers (and their upcycling and reuse), and pharmaceuticals. The researchers
work with state-of-the-art catalyst synthesis and characterization capabilities
as well as molecular modeling. The UC Davis/Berkeley site is dedicated to
providing education of students as part of their career
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.