* 2052796
* IUCRC Phase I: Northeastern University: Center for Solid-State Electric Power Storage (CEPS)
* ENG,EEC
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2026
* Sanjeev Mukerjee, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 05/31/2026
* USD 271,600.00

The NSF Industry-University Cooperative Research Center for Solid-State Electric
Power Storage (CEPS) is comprised of three university sites: South Dakota School
of Mines and Technology (SD Mines) as the lead university and partner
universities: Northeastern University (NU) and Syracuse University (SU). CEPS is
established to provide integration between academia and industry in the pursuit
of research focused energy storage innovations. The Center enables industries,
government, and national laboratories to meet the challenges of safe, efficient,
and environmentally-friendly energy storage by adopting critical solid-state
energy systems and enabling translation into industrial use driven by upstream
basic research. As a multi-disciplinary collaborative consortium, CEPS will
acquire long-term sustainability through strong support from stakeholders and
leveraging partnerships at the state and national level. CEPS's intellectual
merit is in addressing significant challenges in energy storage. The Center
seeks to create and provide U.S. leadership in energy storage research closely
linked to green technologies and environmental sustainability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Northeastern University (NU) Site brings to CEPS
unique capabilities of (a) in situ and operando spectroscopy using synchrotron
X-ray facilities and methods for investigating mechanisms at solid-state
interfaces; (b) materials processing and composites for solid-state chemistries
that are of interest to CEPS industry partners, e.g., lithium metal anodes and
sulfur-based electrolytes; (c) computational research in molecular dynamics and
Monte Carlo approaches probing the interfacial aspects of lithium-ion
intercalation, and (d) design of power management systems that consider
heterogeneous energy storage solutions with varied chemistries within the ambit
of solid-state interfaces to meet the desired energy and power density with
requisite lifetimes. These capabilities of CEPS will be used to develop and
commercialize safe and reliable solid-state battery technologies. CEPS seeks to
cultivate an inclusive learning environment where faculty, staff, and students,
regardless of race, ethnicity, and gender, can grow and
succeed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.