* 2052268
* RAPID: Hurricane Evacuations in the Age of COVID-19
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2020,08/31/2022
* Amy Polen, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 08/31/2022
* USD 78,821.00

Pandemics pose a potentially lethal threat to large numbers of people during a
natural disaster. Understanding risk perception and responses to those risks is
critical for emergency managers. This project will analyze public perceptions of
risk of contracting a lethal virus that inform the choice to shelter in place
during a hurricane, or to seek safety in a public shelter. As such, COVID-19
represents an unprecedented public health challenge to evacuation in hurricane-
prone coastal areas as well as areas impacted by inland flooding. Emergency
managers and public health planners, including federal officials, private
sector, and nonprofit organizations need to understand how hurricane evacuation
plans change during a pandemic. This study will help advance knowledge of
hurricane evacuation behavior, risk, and decision making to anticipate crucial
resource needs, to reveal the need for mutual aid agreements, and to improve
public messaging during pandemics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study documents
risk perceptions from those who made evacuation decisions from threatening
hurricanes in the active 2020 hurricane season, starting with data collected
from those impacted by Hurricane Laura. These post-hurricane risk perceptions
will be compared to pre-hurricane risk perception data collected from 7,102
residents that that live in hurricane prone regions. The pre-hurricane survey
found that almost half the respondents viewed themselves as vulnerable to
COVID-19, and that 74.3% of individuals viewed the risk of being in a shelter
during the pandemic as more dangerous than sheltering in place. This RAPID study
will utilize a similar survey to collect data about how residents that
experienced a hurricane in 2020, starting with Hurricane Laura actually
evaluated risk and how they responded to their perceived risk of contracting
COVID-19 and their utilization of shelters. Officials can use the results of
this study to better inform strategies of shelter preparedness and pandemic risk
mitigation to minimize risk to those who may be affected by hurricanes during a
mandatory evacuation order.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.