* 2052668
* Survival Probability Approaches and Scalable Algorithms to Elucidate Molecular-Tether Reactions in Immunoreception and Cell Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Jun Allard, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 03/31/2024
* USD 273,352.00

Much of biological inquiry has focused on the chemically-active parts of
proteins that have a stable, rigid shape. However, over 30% of our proteins have
regions that are not rigid, but rather are floppy tethers that connect the
chemically-active regions. Two examples of tethers are: immunoreceptors, the
proteins involved in how immune cells receive signals from other cells; and
formins, proteins that maintain the cell's architectural skeleton and are
hijacked by invading bacteria including cholera. Tethers are easy to overlook.
In part, this is because the mathematical descriptions that allow understanding
of rigid proteins do not work for tethers. Therefore, mathematically
characterizing tethers may lead to novel avenues of research in biology and
medicine that were missed by focusing only of the rigid regions of proteins.
This project will develop a mathematical description of tethers. The mathematics
will be used to, first, develop a rapid computational algorithm to simulate the
first few steps of how immune cells respond to external signals, including how
they respond to off-switch signals through the protein PD-1, signals that is
exploited by cancers to evade immune detection. Second, the mathematics will be
used to study the tethers in formins. The resulting mathematics will create new
connections between two separate fields of mathematics: stochastic process
theory, and polymer physics. The project will also result in the training of
graduate students with skills in immunology, cell biology, applied mathematics,
computational science, and biophysics. Open-access resources for enabling
computational science researchers will also be developed. These will have a
special focus on creating tools for research in the remote era, including
tutorials for high school and undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
proteins (around 30% in humans) have regions that lack well-defined structure,
but rather fluctuate through an ensemble of configurations characterized by high
intrinsic disorder. Many of these act as tethers that connect chemical reaction
sites. Examples include immunoreceptors like the T Cell Receptor, PD1 and CD28,
and formins, which regulate cytoskeleton assembly. Tethered reactions are
ubiquitous; they have properties that are fundamentally distinct from standard
solution reactions, requiring novel mathematical characterization; they are
exploited by biology; and, in some cases, they provide novel avenues for
therapeutics. This project exploits and extends a long-known mathematical
correspondence between stochastic process theory and polymer physics to study
tethered reactions. The mathematical theory aims to resolve biological
mysteries, first, concerning the formin tethers and their ability to assemble
the cytoskeleton even when bound at both termini, in a force-responsive manner.
Second, the project addresses experimental data on immunoreceptor tethered
signaling that cannot be explained by models that omit volume exclusion
(crowding). The project will also develop 3 online resources that will help the
Mathematical Biology community thrive in a future dominated by online
interaction, including tutorials for high school and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.