* 2052608
* SBIR Phase I:  Artificial Intelligence (AI) System for Enterprise Software Incident Management
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,01/31/2022
* Xiaohui Gu, InsightFinder Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Diane Hickey
* 01/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be improving the robustness and performance
of enterprise information infrastructure. Automated solutions for incident
management are critical. The proposed project develops an automated artificial
intelligence (AI) system to interpret reports of IT problems and recommend
solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project aims at transforming IT incident management for enterprise
companies. The novelty of the proposed solution lies in two unique features: 1)
intelligent learning techniques that can automatically infer effective
remediation actions without requiring tedious and error-prone user-defined
rules; and 2) active learning capabilities which can adaptively refine the
prevention actions based on continuous system health monitoring data and user
feedback. Specifically, the proposed project consists of three thrusts: 1)
building universal pattern extraction schemes which can extract precise and
reusable patterns from various data sources including complex incident ticket
data, metric data, and log data; 2) exploring a self-learning remediation
recommendation system that can recommend proper remediation by analyzing both
the incident pattern and root cause patterns; and 3) easy-to-use remediation
workflow engine which allows the user to trigger different remediation workflows
to prevent the predicted incident in one place.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.