* 2052559
* Upgrade of Scanning Electron Microscopy Facilities at Montana State University: Supporting Research on the Lithosphere, Cryosphere, and Critical Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2021,06/30/2024
* David Mogk, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2024
* USD 488,500.00

This project is jointly funded by the EAR Instrumentation and Facilities Program
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). This
project will upgrade imaging and analytical capabilities of two scanning
electron microscopes operated in the Imaging and Chemical Analysis Laboratory at
Montana State University. The new instrumentation includes a) energy dispersive
spectrometry for elemental analysis and mapping; b) electron back-scattered
diffraction detector for in situ micron-scale phase identification,
determination of crystallographic orientation, and textural mapping; c) a
cathodoluminescence detector that is used to detect small scale variations of
trace activator elements (transition metals and rare earth elements) and crystal
defects in host materials; and d) updated computer and software to enable
advanced image and spectral processing. This instrumentation will provide the
means to address the research agenda defined in the recent National Academy of
Science, Engineering and Medicine report (2020) A Vision for NSF Earth Sciences
2020-2030, "Earth in Time", and will contribute to the analytical capabilities
available through the National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These instruments are broadly used in the
chemical and physical characterization of Earth materials, and related
engineered materials such as semi-conductors and ceramics. Applications include:
geochronology/thermochronology, deformation mechanisms of mid-crustal rocks,
igneous processes and volcanology, reactive transport of fluids in porous rocks,
sedimentary diagenetic processes, evolution of dinosaurs through
characterization of fossil bone, eggshells and teeth, use of cryogenic-SEM
methods to characterize snow, ice and glacial textures, geomicrobiology and
biomineralization processes and products, exploration for mineral resource
deposits and environmental remediation of mines, and studies of impacts of Earth
materials on human health. Montana State University is a land grant institution
that seeks to prepare the workforce of the future, and also supports technology
transfer to regional and national companies to support their research and
development programs. The ICAL facility serves as a nexus of learning to recruit
and train future scientists through K-12 class demonstrations, undergraduate
student class projects and research experiences, graduate student thesis and
dissertation research, and continuing professional development training. This
instrumentation is essential for early career faculty development to prepare for
their emerging research initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.