* 2052720
* Floquet Theory for Stochastic Temporal Networks and Optimization Theory for the Design of Schedules for COVID-19
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Dane Taylor, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 03/31/2024
* USD 239,983.00

No problem facing humanity is more severe and more urgent than COVID-19, and the
shelter-in-place approach to social distancing has decimated the U.S. economy.
COVID-19 social distancing may be required for a long period for a multitude of
reasons including the uncertainty of the effectiveness of vaccines on emerging
strains. Therefore, it is desired to identify mathematically principled
solutions that strike an optimal balance between productivity and risk to
infection through developing a “science and engineering for social distancing”.
Thus motivated, the PIs will develop (1) novel mathematical theory to better and
more rigorously understand epidemic spreading on social-contact networks that
undergo weekly and/or daily cycles; and (2) optimization theory to design
realistic social-contact networks (e.g., using curfews for community and course
scheduling for academic institutions) that both mitigate pandemics and allow an
acceptable level of social/economic activity. These techniques will be applied
to social-network datasets related to COVID-19 to validate theory and obtain
practical knowledge. These mathematical and computational tools and related
datasets will support policy makers for educational institutions, large
companies, and governing bodies as they manage the economic and health impacts
of COVID-19 as well as future pandemics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first goal of
the project is to extend Floquet theory of ordinary differential equations to
(a) characterize epidemic spreading on social-contact networks that are
stochastic, time-varying, and periodic; (b) identify and analyze novel behaviors
for disease dynamics that arise because the social-network’s periodicity and the
disease progression change at similar time scales; and (c) study the effects of
network structures that contribute to disease localization (e.g., in hub nodes
and communities in the network). These questions remain underexplored for
dynamically changing networks. The second goal of the project is to develop
network optimization theory to design mathematically principled social-
distancing protocols that can both suppress COVID-19 spreading and also maintain
an acceptable level of economic and social activity. Specifically, network
perturbation and optimization techniques for Floquet decompositions will be
developed, and then they will be combined with non-convex optimization
algorithms. To date, mathematical or even computational foundations for social-
contact engineering in dynamically changing contact networks due to human
activity are lacking. Finally, these techniques will be applied to social-
network datasets related to COVID-19 which provide summarized and anonymized
movements of individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.