* 2052997
* Structure-Function Analysis of Type II Metacaspases to Reveal Distinct Activation Mechanisms
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Eric Lam, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 08/31/2024
* USD 927,614.00

Plant stresses caused by diseases, insect pests, heat, cold or drought are major
causes of crop loss globally. Understanding how plants respond and recover from
stress can greatly facilitate the effort to improve crop productivity through
improved breeding and bioengineering approaches. Highly conserved proteases,
enzymes that can cleave other proteins, are important in mediating stress
resistance as well as developmental pathways in plants. This research will
address how plant metacaspases, one type of these conserved proteases,
contribute and control the developmental processes associated with stress
response. Using advances in visualization techniques of crystallography and
cryo-Electron Microscopy techniques, the structures for key members of the plant
metacaspase family will be clarified to atomic resolution. In parallel, studies
of variants for these metacaspases in transgenic plants will inform on their
effects on stress response pathways. Together, these advances will likely have
important impacts on agriculture through engineering crops in the future to
enhance pathogen resistance and stress tolerance by modifying metacaspase
functions. This project will provide diversified, interdisciplinary training to
postdoctoral researchers and graduate students to enrich the scientific
workforce. In addition, involvement of undergraduate students in experiential
training in our multi-disciplinary project should contribute to science
education at large. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genetic studies have shown that the
metacaspase (MC) proteases are involved in abiotic and biotic stresses-induced
cell death in higher plants. Two classes of Type II MCs are exemplified by MC4
and MC9 from Arabidopsis with their activity dependent on calcium ion and mildly
acidic pH, respectively. The crystal structure of AtMC4 has been reported at 2.8
Ã… resolution and uncovered evidence for a multi-step autolytic process in the
activation and maturation of the AtMC4 zymogen upon calcium induction. In this
project, the structure for AtMC9 will be solved by using crystallography and
cryo-Electron Microscopy (cryo-EM), which will enable discovery of the molecular
determinants that underlie its activation at acidic pH and independence from
calcium. In addition, the structure will be solved for a chimeric protein
created from swapping the linker domain between AtMC4 and AtMC9 that resulted in
an active proteases which no longer show autolytic cleavage upon its activation
by calcium. These new protein structures should help rationalize their observed
biochemical differences. To complement these structural studies, in vivo
function of mutated and chimeric Type II MCs that have novel combinations of
regulatory characteristics will be examined using atmc4 and atmc9 knockout
mutants as genetic backgrounds. Lastly, proposed active translocation of AtMC9
zymogen to the acidic apoplastic space upon stresses will be tested by using
fusions with acid-stable GFP variants. Together, these in vitro and in vivo
trait analysis will reveal the detailed molecular basis for activation of these
two metacaspases to induce plant stress response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is co-funded by the Cellular Dynamics and Function cluster in the Division
of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Plant, Fungal and Microbial
Developmental Mechanisms Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.