* 2052590
* RCN: Creating and Fostering the Plant Cell Atlas Community
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Seung Rhee, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 05/31/2026
* USD 463,322.00

Rapid climate change and other environmental factors are increasing societal
demands for plant-based solutions from scientists and engineers. The long-term
goal of the Plant Cell Atlas (PCA) community is to build a comprehensive map of
the locations, interactions, and functions of molecules in plant cells and
tissues to accelerate both fundamental research and meeting societal challenges.
The PCA community will set standards for generating and integrating large plant
data sets that will ultimately contribute to the foundation of synthesizing how
biology works at the cellular level. The RCN will establish and nurture the
community that will ultimately generate data and infrastructure for the PCA.
This RCN will also provide excellent networking and interdisciplinary training
opportunities for early career scientists and outreach to K-12 students and the
general public about the importance and fascination of plants. The PCA community
will emphasize broadening participation of scientists and students from
underserved communities by providing financial support for participating in
workshops and events and establishing a strong presence on campuses of
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) via a travelling scientific
art exhibit, among other initiatives. Future generations of scientists trained
by the RCN will pioneer innovative and sustainable solutions to mitigate and
overcome food, materials, and energy shortages expected to result from climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many questions in fundamental, translational, and
applied plant biology await answers, requiring both new data and analytical
frameworks that make connections among disparate data types. Rapid advances in
technologies are being made in synthetic biology, genome engineering, robotics,
artificial intelligence, structural biology, mass spectrometry, and microscopy.
These technologies are being applied to plants to dissect the functions and
interactions of specialized cell types and their capacity to respond to
environmental stresses, host symbioses, and to produce useful products. However,
the information provided by these new technologies will be most powerful if it
is integrated and standardized to provide fresh insights into the functional
connections among diverse biomolecules, to suggest new hypotheses for cellular
functions, and to model cellular processes. The community established through
this RCN will pioneer the integration of large, diverse plant datasets into a
Plant Cell Atlas that will ultimately enable innovative and sustainable
solutions to the challenges expected from climate change. The RCN will: 1)
develop rubrics for defining plant cell types; 2) provision networking and
training opportunities for the PCA community, especially for early career
participants through workshops, webinars, and symposia; 3) establish guidelines
and best practices for data integration, resulting in standardized data
collection protocols and analysis methods; 4) facilitate the generation of new
methods for image annotation/analysis driven by connections to the artificial
intelligence community; 5) develop the PCA website as a central platform where
scientists can find experimental protocols, community standards, and links to
available resources; and 6) foster collaborations on research and grant
applications for generating data, developing tools, and creating computational
infrastructures. This award is being co-funded by the Cellular Dynamics and
Function and the Genetic Mechanisms clusters of the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences, along with the Plant, Fungal and Microbial Developmental
Mechanisms Program and the Plant Genome Research Program of the Division of
Integrative and Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.