* 2052173
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Infant Feeding System for Breastfeeding Support and Biofeedback Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2021,11/30/2022
* Lauren Wright, NATURAL NIPPLE CORP., THE
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 11/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will address the primary cause of the premature cessation of
breastfeeding. Globally, this issue causes 820,000 deaths in children under the
age of five and costs the United States over $300 billion in preventable medical
costs annually. By creating an infant feeding system designed for seamless and
stress-free breast and bottle feeding, with the only nipple that is researched
and designed to mimic a mother’s shape, feel, and flow, this project can offer
families bottle to breast continuity-reducing latching problems while promoting
breastfeeding. In accordance with the market demand found in customer discovery,
this project will supply the first bottle to come with tele-health support for
the breastfeeding journey and immuno-biome feedback with remote stool sampling
and microbiome data driven insights to support families on how to feed their
child best during the first three years of life. By combining remote tele-health
and immuno-biome testing services, this integrative model improves access to
preventative care while providing bio-feedback insights that can save the U.S.
economy an additional $10B annually. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
addresses the gap in the $114 billion global baby and femtech industry, where
92% of parents who introduce a baby to a bottle are unable to return to
breastfeeding for the recommended two years. The majority of women do not
continue breastfeeding after 3 months after introducing a bottle when maternity
leave ends. In the hospital, preterm infants are invariably exposed to nipples
unnaturally fast milk flow, resulting in infant hypoxia, bradycardia, and long
term neurological defects. This problem costs hospitals approximately $50
million annually by increasing consultation and length of stay costs. The
proposed technology will mimic unique maternal nipple geometry and evolutionary
milk flow specifically with regard to dynamic infant suckling pressures. The
technical objectives of initial lab testing are to ensure the prototypes closely
replicate the mother’s nipple, in terms of shape and volumetric flow rate, the
silicone thickness, the media density, and the proprietary, dynamic valve
diaphragm. Initial non-inferiority testing will measure if the project reduces
latching problems for mothers after discharge, decreases complications for
preterm patients, and the daily $3,000 per preterm infant cost to hospitals
associated with flow rate of standard nipples in a quarter-long
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.