* 2052046
* Does synergy among litter, organic horizons, and roots bolster nutrient retention and production?
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Ashley Keiser, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 05/31/2024
* USD 74,660.00

Temperate forests are under increasing environmental stresses from changes in
land management, atmospheric pollution, and a changing climate. These
environmental changes have important effects on how inorganic nutrients
(Magnesium, Phosphorus, Potassium, Calcium) are stored and cycled in the soils
of temperate forests. Inorganic nutrients are essential for plant growth and are
sourced to soils from mineral weathering, deposition from the atmosphere, and
leaf litter from plants. While roots are known for their role in extracting
inorganic nutrients for plants, they can contribute organic matter to help store
inorganic nutrients in soils. This research project explores how leaf litter and
surface roots promote inorganic nutrient storage in soils and the extent of
their codependence. To understand climatic controls on leaf litter and roots for
inorganic nutrient cycling, the researchers will leverage a network of research
sites spanning from the warm temperate forests of Virginia to the cold temperate
forests of northern New England. The findings will be used to inform the U.S.
Forest Service and several state Forestry and Natural Resources Departments of
the current and future inorganic nutrient cycling in their forests. Furthermore,
the research site in Massachusetts will serve as an instructional tool for
university and community college courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
objective of the project is to quantify the codependence of leaf litter and
roots on Mg, P, K, and Ca stabilization in temperate forest soil. Leaf litter
and roots may act synergistically to stabilize inorganic nutrients in the
mineral soil through generating organic matter and aggregation. To avoid the
common issue of heterogeneity of soil materials and duration of development, the
project will leverage soil columns buried three years ago, containing a quartz-
feldspar-kaolinite mixture to examine the effect of leaf litter and tree roots
on inorganic nutrients in mineral soil. Researchers will quantify the rate of
inorganic nutrient stabilization in bulk soils and use microprobe analyses to
examine rhizosphere and microaggregation. Moreover, the project will utilize
existing litterfall and atmospheric deposition monitoring to estimate nutrient
cycling budgets. When examined across the climate gradient, the findings can be
used to predict future shifts in nutrient cycling from shifts in leaf litter-
root codependence with changes in climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.