* 2052527
* Spin-orbitronic devices based on 2D Rashba Janus crystals as active materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Sefaattin Tongay, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 02/29/2024
* USD 405,000.00

Named after the two-faced Roman god one looking to the future while the other
facing to the past, Janus crystals are new atomically thin materials having two
different phases with different atomic arrangements. Theoretically these
materials have extraordinary spintronic properties, to design and fabricate
spin-based electronic devices instead of traditional charge-based transistors
found in current computers. So far device fabrication has been restrictive due
to limitations in sample preparation. This project aims to understand the
spintronic properties of Janus layers and to integrate them into spin-based
field-effect transistors and gating devices for next-generation electronic
applications. The societal impacts will manifest through the introduction of a
new generation of spintronic devices and lowering energy consumption in high-
speed electronic devices. The project plans to integrate high school,
undergraduate, and master’s students into an active research environment to
create next-generation engineers and scientists. Career opportunities will be
offered to underrepresented communities through research in an active laboratory
environment and laboratory tours. Outreach activities include, involvement of
K-12 students through ASU’s SCENE program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on studying the device physics of two-dimensional (2D) Janus transition
metal dichalcogenide materials to demonstrate high-performance spin-FETs,
tunable spin-texture devices, ballistic spin transport FETs by equalizing the
Rashba and Dresselhaus effects by external gating. The initial experiments will
involve synthesis of epitaxial and excitonic grade 2D Janus layers of MoSSe,
WSSe, WSTe, and others with tunable Janus fields, followed by an understanding
of Schottky junctions on 2D Janus semiconductors by using ohmic contact of a
variety of metals. In addition, high-performance spin-FET devices will be
fabricated with channel engineering insulation and optimized gate-stacks.
Materials will be characterized, and devices will be optimized for process-
structure-performance relations to achieve the highest spin-FET performance.
Efforts will focus on establishing the foundations for spin precession and spin
transport, gate-tunable spin textures, and spin FET operation on 2D Janus Rashba
layers. The project will seek ways to achieve ballistic spin-transport and
manipulation of spin-texture by suppressing spin relaxation through the
Dresselhaus-Rashba crossover phenomena. The successful completion of this
project will establish the fundamental device physics of 2D Janus layers,
demonstrate spin-FETs based on these 2D Rashba Janus layers, and estswblish the
basis for high-temperature scattering-resistant spin-FET operation through an
interplay between Rashba-Dresselhaus terms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.