* 2052329
* SBIR Phase II:  Mobile manipulation platform for rebar tying
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Eohan George, RotoYe LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,199,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the development of a robotic solution to
automate a dangerous and repetitive rebar tying task in construction. Rebar
tying is performed by “rodbusters”, 88% of whom reported that they suffered some
form of musculoskeleton disorder during their career. Removing the repetitive
bending over and tying actions can have significant impacts on the quality life
of the workers who commonly suffer from carpal tunnel complications and back
injuries. The market for rebar tying services solely for bridge decks in the US
is valued at over $370 million across the next ten years. The general
construction market is estimated to spend at least $1.3 billion annually for
rebar tying. A quality transportation infrastructure has direct impacts on
national defense readiness, economic competitiveness, disaster response,
exchange of goods, and standards of living. However, at present, the US has a
growing backlog of bridges deemed deficient. A successful Phase II project may
play a key role in addressing the infrastructure maintenance backlog and
allowing a key foundation of the national economic engine to function
properly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project seeks to demonstrate multiple robots to perform automated rebar
tying. Many construction projects have thousands of rebar intersections that
need to be tied; A system to detect these intersections is proposed. Various
algorithms for detecting rebar will be improved and integrated to build a semi-
automated rebar map building software. The research project will build an
aircraft configuration and develop various computer vision and controls
algorithms to demonstrate that a drone can fly over placed rebar, identify the
intersections to tie, land on top of them and tie the rebar together. A small
swarm of the customized drone prototypes will be built for demonstration. Speed
in executing the job is critical for most construction projects implying that
each intersection has to be tied in a matter of seconds for viable adoption of
the proposed technology. The success of this project may result in the first
commercially-viable swarm of mobile manipulation robots for unstructured
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.