* 2052051
* SBIR Phase I:  Sensor-based bra to measure breast milk output and monitor changes in breast volume before and after breastfeeding or breast pumping
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,01/31/2022
* Adriana Vazquez, LILU, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 01/31/2022
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be significant to breastfeeding mothers who experience difficulties
producing milk or knowing the volume of milk expressed during each session.
While the benefits of breastfeeding throughout the first year of a babyâ€™s life
are widely accepted in the medical community, 60% of mothers do not succeed in
sustained breastfeeding. The success or failure of breastfeeding is dependent
upon a baby getting enough milk, and currently there is no objective method of
determining the amount of milk a baby is receiving and how much residual milk
remains in the breasts. The proposed device will collect objective data that
will help mothers overcome challenges in breastfeeding and avoid further
complications like clogged ducts and/or mastitis. Specifically, the device will
help mothers track their milk output accurately, therefore reaching lactation
goals, and allow mothers to ensure that babies receive the required nutrition to
thrive during the early stages of life. The depersonalized data collected from
the bra will enable medical professionals and researchers to gain insights about
human milk production volumes and factors influencing milk production and infant
health, thereby expanding horizons for further research in this
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project will create a proof-of-concept prototype bra that utilizes textile-based
sensors to accurately measure the volume of milk expressed during a
breastfeeding/breast pumping session. This project will lay important groundwork
to create the first medical device using embedded fabric sensor technology to
determine three data points: breast emptiness, milk volume output per session
and changes in breast milk production over time. Research will focus on the
design of the sensors and the form-factor of the bra that will facilitate
capturing accurate data. There will be associated data capture and analysis
demonstrating both measurable metric data trends to inform breastfeeding moms
and aggregate cohort-level data trends for high level data analysis in an area
with a paucity of actual data. When in use, the bra will be fitted to women
while breastfeeding or pumping and be able to determine both the milk depletion
and residual volume in the milk ducts and the volume of milk produced. After
completing additional R&amp;D, the product will perform three different
functions: 1) determine the degree of breast emptiness; 2) measure the volume of
milk expressed per session; 3) detect early risk of clogged ducts to avoid
mastitis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.