* 2052772
* ERASE-PFAS: Understanding the surface-active properties of PFAS for enhanced removal by bubbling-assisted water treatment processes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Benjamin Hsiao, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2025
* USD 400,655.00

PFAS are a group of manufactured chemicals that have been used in hundreds of
different applications since the 1950s. One of their most important and life-
saving applications is in the production of firefighting foams. The extreme
stability of PFAS molecules makes them highly persistent in the environment,
which has led to them being referred to as ‘forever’ chemicals. PFAS have been
associated with numerous health effects in both humans and animals. PFAS are
also widely detected in the environment, including in drinking water,
groundwater, and landfill leachate. Unfortunately, commonly used water treatment
processes do not remove PFAS efficiently. The goal of this project is to
characterize the unique detergent-like properties of PFAS and use that
information to develop an air bubble-assisted PFAS water treatment process. Like
detergents, PFAS can accumulate at the surface of air-bubbles. The enriched PFAS
layer at the water surface can then be removed leaving behind PFAS-free treated
water. The specific objectives designed to achieve the goal of this project are
to: i) characterize the mechanisms controlling PFAS interactions at air bubble
surfaces, ii) identify conditions leading to increased accumulation of PFAS, and
iii) use the results to develop an optimized bench-scale reactor using
precision-controlled bubbles with commonly used water treatment chemicals to
enhance PFAS removal. The simplicity and scalability of the proposed approach
are ideal for application in combination with conventional unit processes used
in drinking water treatment plants. Successful completion of this research holds
promise for the development of cost-saving water treatment technology to help
water utilities and other stakeholders address PFAS-related regulations.
Additional benefits to society result from education and outreach to underserved
populations to increase scientific literacy and diversify the Nation’s STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PFAS exhibit both lipophobic and hydrophobic
properties, and thus tend to accumulate at air-water interfaces due to surface
tension interactions. The mechanisms governing the interaction of PFAS with air-
bubbles are relatively understudied, and there are significant gaps in our
knowledge of these processes. The proposed research is designed to address this
important knowledge gap to provide a mechanistic understanding of air-water
interfacial accumulation of PFAS. These results will be used to develop a
bubble-assisted water treatment process to efficiently capture and remove PFAS
from contaminated water. The governing hypotheses of this study are that: H1)
introduction of nano- to micro-sized air bubbles in water can effectively
capture and concentrate PFAS molecules at the air-water interface; and H2) the
stability and lifetime of the accumulated PFAS at the air-water interface is
dependent on the individual PFAS surface tension, presence of cationic
modifiers, and self-assembly behavior at concentrations below their critical
micelle concentration (CMC). The specific research objectives designed to test
these hypotheses are to: i) determine the surface tension, self-assembly
structure at the air-water interface, and CMC of selected PFAS using
conventional and synchrotron X-ray scattering techniques as a function of water
quality composition; ii) assess conditions that can increase air-water interface
accumulation of short-chain PFAS to improve separation from source water; iii)
elucidate the impact of bubble size on accumulation and subsequent extraction of
PFAS from water; and iv) develop an optimized air-bubbling system in combination
with conventional coagulants for effective removal of PFAS from water.
Successful development of this approach may lead to effective and scalable
treatment technology for removal of PFAS and, potentially, aqueous film forming
foam (AFFF) from various sources such as drinking water, groundwater, and
landfill leachate. More generally, knowledge on the interfacial accumulation of
PFAS may reveal previously unrecognized fate and transport mechanisms of PFAS in
the environment. Additional benefits to society result from increasing
participation in STEM through outreach activities with the Simons Summer
Research and Women in Science and Engineering programs to involve high school
students and female undergraduates in hands-on
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.