* 2052493
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Comparative analysis of endocytic trafficking during cell division
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Christina Cota, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 04/30/2024
* USD 700,000.00

This research project explores the interplay between cell division and the
signals that cells exchange to coordinate their behavior. This is a critical
area of investigation because signal-dependent coordination of cell behavior is
essential for the growth of all life forms. Signaling also plays a crucial role
in dividing stem cells, ensuring that the proper number of stem cells are
available to participate in tissue renewal and repair. Additionally, errors in
signaling are the primary cause of cancer. Because cancer also entails
unregulated cell division, it is particularly important to understand how
division may exacerbate signaling errors. To explore this fundamentally
important question, this collaborative research project encompasses three
institutions, Princeton University, Swarthmore College and Colby College. The
combined expertise will enable comprehensive investigations of signaling in
dividing cells using an array of organisms, along with cutting edge genetic
manipulation and imaging technologies. Additionally, this collaboration will
pursue an ambitious outreach program which will include – 1) providing enriching
research experiences for a diverse group of undergraduates, 2) development of a
class focused on cancer biology for elementary school students in an underserved
school district as part of the established Science for Kids summer program at
Swarthmore College, 3) integration between Summer Scholars Programs at Colby,
Princeton and Swarthmore which focus on preparing URM and other diverse students
for a successful college transition and 4) teacher-training opportunities at the
Colby Center for Teaching and Learning for Princeton post-docs who will be
teaching courses in the Colby January Term program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cellular trafficking of receptors and associated membrane
proteins can profoundly impact cell signaling. Due to the long-held assumption
that membrane trafficking is shut down during mitosis, current research has not
addressed fundamental questions regarding the nature and regulation of
trafficking in dividing cells. In particular, the contributions of mitotic
kinases to endocytic trafficking remain poorly characterized. Additionally, the
roles of specific endocytic pathways have not been delineated. This project aims
to fill these critical gaps through a collaborative effort incorporating two
experimental systems in which prior research has demonstrated an essential role
for mitotic trafficking: polarization of mammalian epidermal cells and induction
of heart progenitor cells in the basal chordate, Ciona intestinalis. It will
investigate two hypotheses; 1) Cyclin dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) suppresses
lysosomal degradation in a cargo-specific manner. 2) CDK1 and Aurora Kinase
(AurK) suppress recycling broadly during mitosis. These hypotheses will be
examined with well-established methods that disrupt specific mitotic kinases and
endocytic pathways and employ high-resolution live-imaging assays to visualize
the impact on receptor trafficking in both model systems. By conducting these
studies on a range of cargo proteins in two highly divergent cell types, these
findings will provide insights into the impact of mitotic trafficking on – 1)
fate decisions in developing embryos 2) re-establishment of polarity in dividing
epithelial sheets and 3) signal dependent behaviors of stem cells or
differentiated lineages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.