* 2052424
* CAREER: Advancing Online Social Support for Older Adults with Disabilities
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Anne Marie Piper, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2023
* USD 163,093.00

The field of human-computer interaction has yet to address the complexities of
designing online social technologies for older adults with severe late-life
disability, a challenging problem that will grow in importance and scale with
future generations. Social computing has changed how people communicate to such
a degree that exclusion from online experiences can mean exclusion from critical
aspects of society, and older adults are particularly vulnerable to such
exclusion. While many people age without significant disability, one in four
Americans who are 65 and older has a severe disability. Contact with one's
social support network becomes increasingly important as health declines,
whereas late-life health conditions and associated disability make staying
connected difficult. A promising solution to this emerging problem is the PI's
concept of "hybrid social computing" in which familiar communication interfaces
are integrated with online social platforms while harnessing support networks to
enable and protect users online. In this project the PI will focus on two
pervasive conditions among older adults: late-life vision impairments and late-
life speech-language impairments. She will utilize field research methods to
understand the needs and challenges around online interaction for the two
populations of study. She will then refine and extend three innovative
prototypes developed in preliminary work, and rigorously evaluate the effects of
these new tools through usability and field studies. Without online tools for
older adults with severe late-life disabilities, we are unable to study the
effects of online interaction for those who may benefit most, and the benefits
may be vast. Staying socially connected can affect late-life physical and mental
health, and staying connected online is associated with lower rates of
depression and loneliness among older adults. With evidence of how the developed
systems support online interaction, the results will impact strategies to
promote late-life social connectedness and well-being. The integrated education
and outreach plan fosters experiential learning with local community impact,
including a mentorship program that enriches an accompanying undergraduate
curriculum while drawing community members with disabilities into university
activities. The PI will release the developed software as open
source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to develop a
conceptual and technical framework for enabling and studying online social
support for older adults with severe late-life disabilities. Extending an active
program of research, this work will contribute: a conceptual and technical
framework for connecting familiar communication interfaces with dynamic online
systems while enabling and protecting users; new knowledge of the needs and
challenges around online interaction in the context of late-life disability,
providing the foundation for the proposed framework through design guidelines
and a taxonomy; three innovative hybrid social computing applications, which
will further refine this framework and introduce new techniques for accessible
online interaction; and empirical and theoretical understandings of online
communication for two understudied populations, including evidence of how online
interaction affects social well-being. The integrated education plan involves
developing a community-based mentorship program, which will extend a new
undergraduate curriculum on design, computing, and disability. The proposed
framework is potentially transformative in that it enables new forms of online
interaction, making it possible to examine phenomena of online behavior with
entirely new demographics. The rapid evolution of social computing presents
major research challenges for many disciplines; this research will contribute
new knowledge, new tools, and a new framework to address interdisciplinary
challenges across computer science, communication studies, and gerontology.