* 2052512
* Collaborative Research: Economic Modeling and Control Methods for Next Generation Carpool Services
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Lewis Lehe, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 04/30/2024
* USD 200,000.00

This NSF grant will contribute to the sustainability of the nation's future
green transportation by exploring the dynamics of carpooling in urban
transportation systems, considering that an individualâ€™s choice to use a
carpooling service depends on how many others choose to do so as well. The
research will model new mechanisms of positive feedback in a range of settings,
validate these results using data from public agencies and private firms, and
leverage this information for improved control of pooled transportation systems.
The knowledge obtained can be used to develop and refine pricing, taxation, and
other policy strategies that can both promote pooling and reduce urban traffic
congestion. Improving carpool options can also improve environmental outcomes,
by reducing vehicle travel, and social equity, by providing reasonable travel
times to those who cannot buy or drive a car but who do not live close to
convenient transit options. The education and outreach plan includes recruiting
students, especially those from underrepresented groups, to work on the research
tasks and provide them with opportunities to mentor junior colleagues on
research activities. The research will develop interactive web modules to
describe these carpooling behaviors to a wide audience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will specifically focus on two mechanisms of
positive feedback in carpooling. The first is hyperdemand, whereby the share of
people choosing to carpool both depends on and affects traffic congestion. The
second are matching externalities, whereby the quality of matches among
carpoolers increases as more choose to carpool. The research will break new
ground by bringing to bear tools from dynamical systems, search/matching theory
and network-level traffic relations to build a robust theory of carpooling. To
validate the theory, the research team will use empirical data collected from
open data sources, as well as our industry partners. In addition, case studies
of real policies to promote carpooling will inform the research and provide an
evidence base for future work. The research activities will provide a new
paradigm for modeling carpooling services and ride-hailing systems that will
have significant impacts for the next generation of urban transportation
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.