* 2052246
* Can optimal energy allocation in bioenergetic models improve predictions?
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Blaine Griffen, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 411,574.00

All organisms consume energy via food and use that energy for daily processes,
including growth, reproduction, and body maintenance. Scientists commonly use
energy budget models to describe and predict the flow of this energy through
individual organisms. Existing model use unrealistic assumptions about the
partitioning of energy to different processes, and as a result, they often make
inaccurate predictions. This research will modify this standard modeling
approach to incorporate optimal energy partitioning, assuming that organisms
evolve to partition energy resources in a way that maximizes their future
survival and reproduction. Predictions using this new way of modeling will then
be compared to predictions from the standard modeling approach, and both will be
used to predict how animals should allocate energy after an injury. The Asian
shore crab, a species that has invaded rocky shores along the US east coast from
North Carolina to Maine, will be used as a model organism to test the hypothesis
that this new optimal modeling approach provides better predictions than the
standard approach. Energy partitioning will be examined through field and
laboratory studies in crabs that have lost one or more limbs. The research will
also provide early scientific training to junior high and high school students
from underrepresented backgrounds by involving students from an existing summer
program in making predictions using the models, and then testing these
predictions using data collected in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing
bioenergetic models generally assume fixed energy allocation strategies, and
consequently yield predictions that are often inaccurate. This research uses
optimal energy allocation in a 4-step process to improve bioenergetic modeling,
with a focus on studying energy allocation following nonlethal injury in the
invasive Asian shore crab Hemigrapsus sanguineus. The first step is to develop a
bioenergetics model that includes injury. The second step is to measure
condition-dependent metabolic rates needed to complete the parameterization of
the bioenergetics model. The third step uses the bioenergetic model within
dynamic state variable modeling framework to identify the optimal energy
allocation strategy of injured crabs as a function of crab age, body condition,
injury status, reproductive status, and time of the year relative to the
reproductive season. The fourth step is empirically testing model predictions to
determine whether a model that includes an optimal energy allocation strategy
performs better than a null model with a fixed energy allocation strategy. The
proposed work will improve our understanding of the energetic responses to
nonlethal injury, will provide a general theoretical framework for understanding
when injury recovery should be prioritized, and will demonstrate a modeling
strategy that can predict and clarify context-dependent tradeoffs in energy
allocation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.