* 2052612
* IUCRC Phase III Site Addition Request Pennsylvania State University (PSU): Manufacturing and Materials Joining Innovation Center (Ma2JIC)
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Todd Palmer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 05/31/2026
* USD 76,032.00

The Manufacturing and Materials Joining Innovation Center (Ma2JIC) is a multi-
university consortium focused on materials joining and metal additive
manufacturing research. The Center fosters and translates scientific discovery
to application while educating the next generation of scientists and engineers
that will develop new advanced manufacturing technologies and process
innovations to rebuild the competitiveness of U.S. domestic manufacturing. Given
the importance of materials joining for the manufacturing of products that are
critical to health, safety, national security, and the continuity of multiple
industries, Ma2JIC serves multiple sectors of the U.S. economy and defense. The
center provides a highly collaborative research environment among government
partners, industry, and university faculty and students to promote the
development and application of fundamental knowledge in materials joining and
additive manufacturing. The Center is a platform for the education of a well-
trained and diverse scientific and engineering workforce. Ma2JICâ€™s primary focus
is on research and development that translates to industry members' and
consumers' benefit. The coordinated effort across all sites increases public
awareness and scientific literacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on the needs of
its large and diverse industrial membership, Ma2JIC supports research in the
following three thrust areas: (1) Materials &amp; Joints Performance, (2)
Additive Manufacturing, Process Development &amp; Control, and (3) Materials,
Microstructure &amp; Weldability &amp; Printability. The Materials &amp; Joints
Performance thrust focuses on the effect of materials and manufacturing
processes on the mechanical, functional and environmental performance of
manufactured or printed components, in particular as they relate to improved
reliability, cost reduction and the extension of the service life of critical
infrastruture. The Additive Manufacturing, Process Development &amp; Control
thrust addresses fundamental challenges in joining and additive manufacturing
(AM) processes, robotics and control, as well as integrated computational
materials engineering (ICME) frameworks for joining and AM. Finally, the
Materials, Microstructure &amp; Weldability &amp; Printability thrust seeks to
develop fundamental understanding and testing capabilities to enable evaluation
and development of materials more amenable to advanced joining and manufacturing
processes. Pennsylvania State University is a natural partner in Ma2JIC and
brings complementary capabilities in materials weldability, manufacturing and
joining process development, materials performance, modeling innovation, and
additive manufacturing. In addition to enhancing its existing strengths, Penn
State will also bring new capabilities and research focus areas to expand the
range of projects and industry partners affiliated with Ma2JIC. Penn State has
historical strengths in powder metallurgy, and ceramic and plastics processing.
While these focus areas complement the current Ma2JIC research thrusts, they
also allow for an expansion of capabilities and research into related advanced
manufacturing processes and promote the integration of multi-material systems
into existing and new product forms for the industry partners. These
capabilities will also compliment the industry partner base within Ma2JIC and
bring new industry partners in related manufacturing areas, such as materials
and aerospace parts suppliers. Future work will build upon modeling and material
characterization to develop new research involving multi-
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.