* 2052930
* Focused CoPe: Fundamental research to inform holistic decision-making for historically underrepresented communities impacted by coastal hazards
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2026
* Siyu Yu, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 07/31/2026
* USD 4,159,480.00

Coastal communities increasingly experience disasters due to a combination of
acute and chronic hazards, including hurricanes, tsunamis, coastal storm surges,
flooding, sea level rise and erosion. Enhancing community resilience to these
hazards requires planning and effective use of community resources, but also new
knowledge on the dynamic interplay among coastal hazards, built environment,
geodemographics, and social as well as cultural factors. Particularly at risk
are tribal communities along the Northern Gulf Coast, from Texas to Florida,
that face similar risks as non-tribal coastal communities do but are also
confronted with additional risks such as multi-hazard damages or entire loss of
historical properties/sites and cultural heritage, as well as their autonomous
areas that may host cultural rituals or grow traditional environmental products
needed for economic and cultural traditions. This project will inform the
creation of science- and evidence-based decision-making strategies and future
hazard mitigation plans for marginalized communities that will be readily
implementable to Northern Gulf Coast tribal communities. The research outcomes
are expected to be both transferable to other locations and scalable. Through an
integrative and convergent research approach, this Hub will establish an
interdisciplinary framework to quantify the interdependence among coastal
hazards, built environment, geodemographics, and social and cultural factors,
thus informing holistic decision-making aimed at minimizing the socio-economic
impact of coastal hazards to historically underrepresented communities. This
project, via community events, surveys, roundtables and discussion forums, will
identify critical community needs, priorities, and concerns, determine key
issues, co-collect data and solicit expertise, co-develop and refine research
and create evaluation metrics. This framework will be validated with empirical
data collected from tribal communities in the Northern Gulf Coast and cultural
preservation sites through engaged research and experiential drills in order to
understand, assess, measure, and enhance resilience. The proposed research will
result in a diverse set of models and decision-making tools for measuring
Coastal Hazards Impact, Infrastructure Damages, Evacuation Performance, and
Social Vulnerability which will all be integrated through engaged participatory
research into a community resource to evaluate and optimize various adaptation
and mitigation strategies and prioritize policy levers. This project will
develop an engagement program to support a pipeline for high school students
from tribal communities into and through graduate
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will achieve a novel transdisciplinary
integration of anthropology, archeology, urban planning and engineering
disciplines via community engaged research. In doing so, the project will
establish and sustain effective partnerships with tribal communities to pursue a
systematic approach that promotes social trust to ensure community-driven
research questions and decision-making are incorporated in this project. The
research objectives are to: (1) Quantify coastal and coast-induced hazards; (2)
Quantify the impacts of hazards on physical and social infrastructure; (3)
Measure community evacuation capabilities and identify gaps for informed
decision-making and emergency planning; (4) Develop theoretical-driven methods
for collection and analysis of various data types and local perspectives on
adaptation of social and physical infrastructure systems, and (5) Optimize and
prioritize community decision-making to mitigate impacts and improve adaptation
of communities according to their needs. The core community-engaged data
collection will uniquely address the modeling need for quantified data on how
tribal communities experience and perceive coastal hazards, how to respond to
such hazards, as well as cartographic expressions (GIS maps) of at-risk
resources and infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.