* 2052728
* SBIR Phase II:  Photopatternable Quantum Dot Downconverters for Microdisplays
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Yu Kambe, NANOPATTERN TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,207,282.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to
demonstrate product-scale properties of photo-patternable quantum dot (QD) inks.
These include: 1) scalability, 2) long lifetime under device operation, and 3)
compatibility with display manufacturer protocols and facilities. Following the
demonstration of these parameters, the ink can be commercialized in partnership
with a large chemical manufacturer for global distribution. The photo-
patternable QD ink is a novel product that will enable display manufacturers to
produce the next generation of high color gamut, triple energy efficiency, and
high refresh rate displays for consumer electronics (e.g. TVs, monitors, laptop
screens, smartphones, wearables, and virtual reality and augmented reality
headsets). Such an ink can broadly impact an $8.4 billion market by 2024 by
simplifying the manufacturing and improving the performance of organic light
emitting diode (OLED) and micro light emitting diode (microLED) displays
recently announced by companies such as Apple, LG, BOE, and Samsung.
Furthermore, the efficiency improvement in displays made by the projectâ€™s
success could reduce carbon emissions by as much as 110 million tons of carbon
dioxide equivalent (MTCO2e), contributing to broader environmental impacts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project focuses on
converting a ligand chemistry into an ink product by demonstrating performance
at production scale. The intended product is a photo-patternable QD ink that
enables high resolution patterning of red and green QD downconverters to enable
a tri-color display with excellent color gamut, energy efficiency, and refresh
rate. To date, resolution and conversion efficiencies meeting customer
requirements have been demonstrated for the ink at the film level. In this
project, the focus will be on the end product - a functioning display enabled by
this ink technology. To accomplish this, the project objectives are: 1) to
develop lifetime metrology tools and techniques; 2) to develop a protocol and
demonstrate the film lifetime simulating device conditions; 3) to scale the ink
formulation to 20 L/y to enable a sufficient number of tests; and 4) to produce
a prototype at production scale with an industry collaborator. The successful
completion of these objectives will yield a working display device that is
enabled by the QD ink product. A demonstration of a device is critical evidence
to engage customers and convince them of the compatibility of the ink with their
product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.