* 2052904
* The contribution of introgression to convergent floral adaptation in Penstemon
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2026
* Carolyn Wessinger, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Paco Moore
* 05/31/2026
* USD 578,294.00

Convergence is the repeated evolution of the same traits in different species.
Understanding how and when unrelated organisms have converged in response to
their environments provides important biological insight. It is often assumed
that mutations drive such evolution. Yet, beneficial genes may also be
transferred between species through hybridization speeding up evolution. This
research examines evolution of flowers that are attractive to hummingbird
pollinators. These attractive flowers have evolved approximately 20 times in one
group of plants, even though it requires altering several floral traits. This
project will clarify the relationship of species within that group of plants and
determine the likely genes involved in the floral evolution. It will also study
natural populations to determine the ecological consequences of species
hybridization. In the process of this research a diverse group of graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained in genetics and botany providing an
increased understanding of the practice of science in society. This project is
jointly funded by the Evolutionary Processes Program, the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Systematics and Biodiversity
Science Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research examines genetic variation
causing floral adaptation in the North American plant genus Penstemon. It uses
genome-wide data that is analyzed in a phylogenetic framework. This approach
will enable the researchers to determine if hummingbird-adapted flowers arise
through introgression after hybridization. The analysis will focus on regions of
the genome known to affect floral traits. Complete genomes of members of the
genus will be collected. Associations of genetic variation, trait variation, and
reproductive success of individual plants in a naturally occurring hybrid
populations will then be determined. This will allow the researchers to examine
the consequences of natural hybridization and test predictions that
hybridization may contribute to convergent origins of hummingbird-adapted
flowers. Together these investigations address whether and how hybridization
leads to convergent adaptive evolution of a complex
trait.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.