* 2052729
* IUCRC Phase III University of Tennessee, Knoxville (UTK): Manufacturing and Materials Joining Innovation Center (Ma2JIC)
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2026
* Dayakar Penumadu, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 05/31/2026
* USD 114,813.00

The Manufacturing and Materials Joining Innovation Center (Ma2JIC) is a multi-
university consortium leading materials joining and metal additive manufacturing
research by fostering and translating scientific discovery to application. The
Center also educates the next generation of scientists and engineers that will
develop new advanced manufacturing technologies and process innovations to
rebuild the competitiveness of U.S. domestic manufacturing. Given the importance
of materials joining for the manufacturing of products that are critical to
health, safety, national security, and the continuity of multiple industries,
Ma2JIC serves multiple sectors of national interest for the U.S. economy and
defense. The center provides a highly collaborative research environment among
government partners, industry, and university faculty and students to promote
the development and application of fundamental knowledge in materials joining
and additive manufacturing. The Center also serves as a platform for the
education of a well-trained and diverse scientific and engineering workforce.
Ma2JICâ€™s primary focus on research and development translates into industry
members' and consumers' benefit. The coordinated effort across all sites
increases public awareness, scientific literacy and a diverse STEM
pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on the needs of its large and diverse
industrial membership, Ma2JIC supports research in the following three thrust
areas: (1) Materials &amp; Joints Performance, (2) Additive Manufacturing,
Process Development &amp; Control, and (3) Materials, Microstructure &amp;
Weldability &amp; Printability. The Materials &amp; Joints Performance thrust
focuses on the effect of materials and manufacturing processes on the
mechanical, functional and environmental performance of manufactured or printed
components, especially with regard to improved reliability, cost reduction and
extension of service life of critical infrastructure. The Additive
Manufacturing, Process Development &amp; Control thrust area addresses
fundamental challenges in joining and additive manufacturing (AM) processes,
robotics, and control, as well as integrated computational materials engineering
(ICME) frameworks for joining and AM. Finally, the Materials, Microstructure
&amp; Weldability &amp; Printability thrust area seeks to develop fundamental
understanding and testing capabilities to enable evaluation and development of
materials more amenable to advanced joining and manufacturing processes. The
University of Tennessee, Knoxville (UTK) site complements collaborative research
within the center with its unique research capabilities and infrastructure
resources for conducting various characterization studies and a Machine Tool
Research Center (MTRC) with milling and additive manufacturing
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.