* 2052026
* Technique For Remote Location Of Underwater Sites
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Morgan Smith, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2022
* USD 34,990.00

The goal of this research is to study the effectiveness of a technique which may
result in the ability to detect some types of indigenous archaeological sites on
landscapes that are now submerged due to sea-level rise during the Late
Pleistocene and Holocene (i.e., following the last Ice Age). While methods exist
that can non-invasively identify underwater historic archaeological sites (such
as shipwrecks) efficiently and reliably, no such method exists for indigenous
archaeological sites. Thus, the indigenous archaeological record on continental
shelves is mostly unknown and at potential risk of illegal looting, impact due
to climate change, and offshore energy development. Remote detection and
avoidance of such sites expedite comprehensive cultural resource surveys on
submerged lands while simultaneously increasing the number of recorded (and
thus, preserved) sites on continental shelves. Despite many more millennia of
indigenous use of submerged landscapes than that which is recorded during
colonial seafaring times, indigenous sites are less frequently identified, less
often studied, and thus underrepresented in the underwater archaeological
record. The results of this project will attempt to ensure that future research
on the continental shelves is more balanced. The project will also provide
hands-on training to a graduate and undergraduate student in underwater
archaeology and geophysics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will lead a team of
archaeologists to test a method which could remotely detect lithic (stone)
artifacts, a hallmark of indigenous cultures worldwide. The primary research
question being addressed is whether or not lithic artifacts produce an acoustic
resonance that is observable in remote sensing data. This method relies on using
a sub-bottom profiler, which emits low-frequency acoustic waves (~4-24kHz), to
produce vibrations within lithic artifacts. These vibrations may then be
observed as wavy signatures in the water column of sub-bottom profiler data
readouts. The test site for this project is Apalachee Bay, Florida, where a
total of 23 indigenous sites will be scanned with a sub-bottom profiler, and the
presence or absence of acoustic resonance features at each site will be
recorded. Precise locations of each resonance feature will then be explored by
divers to test for the presence or absence of lithic artifacts at each location.
The overall accuracy and effectiveness of the method will be determined through
this field trial, and recommendations will be made based on these results to
policy-makers and researchers. If successful, the method will facilitate the
location and preservation of submerged indigenous sites during cultural resource
management surveys and provide researchers with a new tool for understanding the
role submerged landscapes played in the early hominid dispersal out of Africa,
the adaptation of early peoples to marine resources, the peopling of Australia
and the Americas, and environmental change during Late Pleistocene and Early
Holocene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.