* 2052932
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Agricultural Labor Organizations and Management
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Xinyi Liu, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2023
* USD 14,490.00

In this doctoral dissertation research project researchers will adopt a multi-
disciplinary approach to investigate millet cultivation and food preparation
strategies during a multi-period site organization. By combining
paleoethnobotanical and isotopic studies, the team seeks to understand the
dynamic of interplay between subsistence strategies and social relations in the
field and in the domestic context at multiple localities. The research question
is twofold. Was the millet harvest shared within or between households, or both?
Were farming practices determined on the household level, the communal level, or
a combination of the two? In answering these questions, the project connects
with broader anthropological issues, namely, the moral and social nature of food
habits and food production. While much of the thematic discussion on the social
use of food draws on contemporary and historical examples, this study examines
the dimension of daily food performance in archaeological contexts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to test hypotheses about millet production and
consumption, the research team will employ two principal methods: (a)
macrofossil crop processing analysis; and (b) stable isotopic analysis performed
on plant remains. These measurements build on significant improvements in sample
preparation and methodological refinements in recent years, and their successful
applications in archaeological contexts in a range of markedly different
environments. The project will expand the understanding of regional farming
practices in a global context. This project aims to raise awareness of the past,
present and future utility of millet, to understand the nature of primary
producers of this crop and their societies, and to situate their role in the
broader trajectory of human agricultural systems on a global
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.