* 2052555
* PlantSynBio: Regulatory Systems to Tune Gene Expression in Synthetic Chloroplast Operons
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Alice Barkan, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Kan Wang
* 02/29/2024
* USD 999,220.00

Investments in basic research over the past five decades have been rewarded with
remarkable advances in understanding fundamental biological processes, including
mechanisms of heredity, metabolism, and organismal development. The discipline
of synthetic biology applies this understanding to practical problems within a
framework of engineering design principles. This project will use this framework
to apply recent advances in understanding mechanisms of gene expression in
plants to improve agronomic and nutritional traits, and to foster the use of
plants as “green” factories for pharmaceuticals and other beneficial
biochemicals. Foundational principles inferred from basic research will be used
to design genetic “parts” to optimize the expression of genes that confer
beneficial properties. This project will also provide research training for
undergraduate and postdoctoral students, and it will engage at-risk high school
students in hands-on workshops in nutritional biochemistry as part of a broader
program at the University of Oregon that aims to encourage such students to
enroll and succeed in college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this
project is to develop tools for metabolic engineering, biotechnology, and
enhancement of agronomic traits in plants. Many such applications require
expression of multiple genes, with optimal outcomes depending upon their
suitably balanced expression. The chloroplast genetic system offers particular
promise as a chassis for the expression of multiprotein assemblies and multi-
enzyme metabolic pathways because chloroplast genes are naturally expressed in
operon-like polycistronic transcription units, they do not experience epigenetic
effects, and they can achieve very high expression levels. A current limitation,
however, is a paucity of characterized genetic elements to program predictable
expression over a wide dynamic range, especially for the purpose of multigene
applications. This project aims to fill this gap by leveraging recent advances
in (i) understanding mechanisms that determine expression levels in natural
chloroplast operons, (ii) elucidating the basis for sequence-specific RNA
recognition by pentatricopeptide repeat proteins, which are key to this
regulation, and (iii) cataloging translational efficiencies of native
chloroplast genes. This deep knowledge base will be used for the rational design
of a palette of cis-elements and cognate trans-factors to achieve predictable,
regulatable, and suitably tuned gene outputs in synthetic multigene
transcription units.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the Plant
Genome Research Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems and
the Systems and Synthetic Biology Cluster in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.