* 2052165
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of prediction-driven credit scoring and ruling platform for behavioral lending
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,04/30/2022
* Gilad Gavlovski, SMART FLIP, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 04/30/2022
* USD 255,948.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will enable credit to currently under-served populations.
Creditworthiness is largely determined by the quality of the applicant’s credit
and financial history. However, limited information regarding "credit-invisible"
(one out of ten American adults) and "thin-file" applicants (62 million
Americans) prevents accurate evaluation of a credit score. The proposed
artificial intelligence (AI) based personality-driven lending platform will
provide lenders a reliable creditworthiness prediction without an extensive
financial history. Moreover, the proposed system will include a transparency
module, preventing biases and expanding credit equity and identifying new
banking customers from under-represented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop the
first personality-driven credit scoring and ruling platform. While traditional
scoring models base their assessment on financial history data, the proposed
algorithm will produce a reliable credit score based on an applicant’s
personality. No history of financial transactions (such as gas, water,
electricity, TV, phone, broadband services, or rent payment records) is needed
to reach a conclusion about an applicant’s creditworthiness. Research efforts of
this Phase I project will focus on 1) the evaluation of alternative data points
such as psychometric testing questionnaires, telecommunications data,
demographics, firmographics, and publicly available data, 2) the development of
a semi-supervised machine learning approach to predict credit reliability for
individuals, and 3) the development of an unsupervised clustering approach to
identify customer clusters associated with high credit reliability. Moreover,
the prevention of bias in the underlying training data of machine learning
approaches will be a priority. The primary objective of this project is to
develop the predictive engine as the core element of the proposed personality-
driven lending platform and develop a prototype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.