* 2052791
* IUCRC: Planning Grant: Georgia Institute of Technology: Center For Building Reliable Advances and Innovation in Neurotechnology (BRAIN)
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Susan Margulies, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 12/31/2022
* USD 20,000.00

Disorders of the brain are the leading cause of disability in the United States.
There is a critical need for new technology to address this problem. However,
creating the technology calls for very collaborative efforts between academic
researchers with unique technical expertise and industry companies with deep
product development expertise. The Georgia Tech site of the Building Reliable
Advances and Innovations in Neurotechnology (BRAIN) Center will develop product-
ready technology innovations that prevent brain disorders and provide better
diagnosis and treatment for affected patients. The Georgia Tech site will also
initiate new industry-focused programs promoting diversity and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building the aforementioned technologies
requires fundamental understanding of the brain, which is limited by the state-
of-the-art in basic science and engineering. Understanding is advancing through
innovative research; however, research impact is currently limited because
innovation greatly outpaces productization due to insufficient shepherding of
innovation through the “valley of death” in the translational pipeline. To
address this shortcoming, the Georgia Tech BRAIN Center site will develop
product-ready neurotechnology innovations by spanning science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM) fields, model systems (e.g., human, animal, in
vitro, and computational), spatial scales (i.e., neuron to organism), and brain
function verticals (e.g., neurovascular and
neurological).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another thrust area of the Georgia Tech site
is Neuroethics. Emerging neurotechnologies present enormous ethical implications
relating to autonomy, identity, and privacy. We assert that the integration of
neuroethics into BRAIN Center activities is critical to maximizing broader
impacts such as social benefit, acceptance, trust, and justice in
neurotechnology innovation. Another broader impact of the Georgia Tech site will
be combatting underrepresentation in STEM fields. Located in Atlanta, which is
home to a majority Black population, Georgia Tech has a unique opportunity to
leverage its place toward this end through the vehicles of entrepreneurship and
internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data products to result from the proposed
planning grant may include experimental, computational, text-based, and/or
curricular data. All digital data products will be stored in compliance with the
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), the Health
Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act, and the final HIPAA
Omnibus rule. Further, these products will be accessible only through user-
specific password-protected access. All archived materials will be retained for
a period of five years. A landing page for navigation to archived data has
already been created at
http://sites.gatech.edu/avl/iucrc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.