* 2052584
* Collaborative Research: Elucidating Brine-Dominated, Segment-Scale Hydrothermal Discharge Along The Cleft Segment, Juan de Fuca Ridge
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Charles Wheat, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 387,085.00

Hydrothermal Brines on the Juan de Fuca Ridge&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New oceanic
crust is formed by magma that is injected beneath the seafloor and then cooled
by seawater circulation. This hydrothermal circulation exchanges heat and
chemicals between hot rocks and seawater, which produces mineral deposits and
unique seafloor ecosystems. The injection of magma is irregular as is
subseafloor hydrothermal circulation and the composition of the discharging
fluid. During and after a magmatic injection event, the heated seawater
separates into a low salinity vapor phase lacking many dissolved metals and a
high salinity metal-rich brine phase. Seafloor discharge of the vapor is
typically short-lived (years) and is followed by a much longer phase (decades to
centuries or longer) of brine discharge. Knowledge of brine composition and its
temporal and spatial evolution is currently limited. During this investigation
hydrothermal fluids along the Cleft Segment of the Juan de Fuca Ridge off the
coast of Oregon will be sampled and analyzed for their chemical composition.
This portion of young oceanic crust experienced a magmatic event in 1986 and has
been discharging brines for more than three decades. Systematic variations in
the composition of these fluids will allow us to document the long-term
evolution (decades) of brine-dominated submarine hydrothermal systems,
characterize the transport of dissolved minerals and gases in brine phases, and
contribute to our understanding of element exchange between Earth’s crust and
ocean. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intrusion of magma into the oceanic
crust results in the thermal and chemical modification of seawater during
convective circulation within the oceanic lithosphere before discharging at the
seafloor. This hydrothermal discharge impacts biogeochemical cycles in the
ocean, the formation of seafloor metal-rich mineral deposits, and seafloor
ecosystems. The net effect is dictated by cyclic temporal and spatial evolution
of hydrothermal activity. Many systems begin with discharge of a short-lived
(years), vapor phase and evolve to a longer-lived (decades to centuries to
longer) discharge of brine phase. Relative to vapor-dominated hydrothermal
systems, systematic time-series studies of brine-dominated systems are limited.
Understanding brine-dominated hydrothermal systems is particularly important
because numerical and conceptual models of magma-driven subseafloor hydrothermal
circulation indicate that such circulation of brine-dominated fluids can last
for centuries or longer, and potentially impact global fluxes of elements from
the lithosphere to the ocean. Gas-tight fluid samplers will collect hydrothermal
discharge from the Cleft Segment, which has discharge brine-dominated,
hydrothermal fluids from the same seafloor features for at least 32 years. In
addition, the investigators will measure discharge temperatures, deploy and
recover short-term continuous fluid samplers, and deploy temperature recorders
for legacy studies. Results from a shore-based fluid characterization program
will address the long-term stability, connectivity, and potential changes in
subsurface, segment-scale processes within brine-dominated hydrothermal
systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.