* 2052645
* Harmonic Analysis on the Hamming Cube
* MPS,DMS
* 08/16/2020,10/31/2021
* Paata Ivanisvili, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 10/31/2021
* USD 116,236.00

Many complex structures that arise in nature are perceived globally as
continuous objects, although at the microscopic level they emerge from certain
laws that appear to be discrete. What the relation is between the discrete and
continuous "worlds", how one impacts the other, and what laws they obey are the
fundamental questions that the PI intends to investigate. This project focuses
on the Hamming cube, the simplest discrete object that consists of binary
strings of given length and that can encode any complex information. As the
complexity of the information increases, the lengths of the encoded strings
increase exponentially. The goal of the project is to develop mathematics on the
Hamming cube that would allow us to encode the structures of the continuous
world into the discrete world, and vice versa. The new techniques developed
could have surprising applications in complexity theory as well as classical and
quantum algorithms. Many of these problems are accessible to students and this
project aims to continue the PI's work with undergraduate and graduate students
in this area.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will consider a series of
problems in the Gauss space and, most importantly, in its discrete counterpart,
the Hamming cube. Unlike the classical case of the unit circle, many fundamental
questions of Fourier analytic type are still open for the Hamming cube due to
its unique discrete geometric structure. The first and main direction of the
proposal is to resolve Weissler's conjecture, an old open problem in complex
hypercontractivity theory on the Boolean cube that gives necessary and
sufficient conditions for boundedness of the Hermite operator with complex time.
Weissler's conjecture has important implications in several areas of mathematics
including combinatorics, computer science, probability, isoperimetry, and
approximation theory. The new techniques will be based on developing "two-point"
inequalities. The second direction of this research is to develop methods of
harmonic analysis to find good estimates on the norms of various linear
operators acting on a class of functions on the Hamming cube whose Fourier
spectra belong to given prescribed sets. The basic examples include Bernstein-
Markov type inequalities and their reverse forms for functions on the Hamming
cube that live on the low and high frequencies respectively. The third direction
is to understand the universality phenomena of the Gaussian measure. In
particular, the goal is to investigate uniqueness of the functional Ehrhard
inequality, which is the sharp analog of Brunn-Minkowski inequality for the
Gaussian measure. The analysis will be based on Monge-Ampere type partial
differential equations and semigroup methods. The fourth direction is to develop
the duality between martingale inequalities related to sharp dyadic square
function estimates and the problems of isoperimetric type; that is, gradient
estimates for functions on the Hamming cube. Our methods will use heat
envelopes, "four-point" inequalities, and "inf-sup" Legendre transform. The
fifth direction aims to obtain sharp forms of the classical triangle
inequalities in the Lp spaces using the theory of developable surfaces and
minimal concave functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.