* 2052663
* EAR-PF: Predator-driven evolution of shell structure at different scales during the Mesozoic Marine Revolution: An interdisciplinary experimental investigation
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Erynn Johnson, Johnson, Erynn
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 03/31/2024
* USD 174,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The world’s marine ecosystems are
currently experiencing many pressures from human activities. For example,
warming global temperatures have changed ocean chemistry in ways that influence
the strength of many mollusk shells. These shells are key to the survival of
organisms like clams and snails, which use their shells as a defense mechanism
against shell-crushing predators like fishes and crabs. In addition to climate
change, marine ecosystems have been stressed by overfishing, where the
preferential removal of predators has cascading effects on their prey. One way
to anticipate the long-term impacts of climate change and changing marine
predatory regimes is to study similar events from the past. During the Mesozoic
(250-65 million years ago) the world was experiencing extremely warm, greenhouse
conditions. Additionally, shell-crushing predators became increasingly powerful,
putting increased selective pressures on their prey. This study will use
physical and numerical experiments to analyze how increasing temperatures and
changes in predation pressures impacted the shells of marine snails during the
Mesozoic to inform modern ecosystem conservation efforts. Moreover, by studying
the exceptional strength of snail shells, this research will have applications
for the bio-inspired design of crack resistant materials. The use of physical
models for this research will also enable the creation of accessible,
interactive 3D printed museum displays applicable to educational modules across
disciplines including paleontology, conservation, and biomechanics. While
conducting this interdisciplinary research, Dr. Johnson will mentor
underrepresented and underserved students from high school and undergraduate
programs, who are interested in biology, ecology, paleontology, biomechanics, or
related STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes in defensive snail shell
morphologies are central to the Mesozoic Marine Revolution hypothesis—an event
of predator-driven evolution during a period of greenhouse conditions. However,
we lack rigorous quantitative metrics by which to evaluate predator-driven
evolution throughout this time. This project will use an innovative approach to
quantify prey response by experimentally determining how gastropod shells would
evolve in a model system driven primarily by shell-crushing predators. This will
be accomplished using a novel cross-scale approach, applying finite element
analysis modeling incorporating both shell macrostructure (shape) and
microstructural material properties, and validating the analysis with modern and
fossil shells. This research will generate a theoretical morphospace which
quantifies the defensive capabilities of a range of shell shapes and
microstructural combinations. The model framework generated from this research
will have fundamental applications for studies of predator-prey driven
evolution, conservation paleobiology, and materials science. The world’s oceans
are currently facing intense anthropogenic pressures from overfishing and a
rapidly changing climate, which are highly likely to negatively impact mollusks
and fishes. This study will inform conservation efforts which extend beyond the
temporal scale of modern ecological studies. Furthermore, the results of this
study will have implications for the development of stronger, crack resistant
bioinspired materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.