* 2052316
* STTR Phase II: Integrated Gallium Nitride (GaN) Field Effect Transistor (FET)-Based High Density On Board Electric Vehichle (EV) Charger
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Amitava Das, TAGORE TECHNOLOGY, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 02/29/2024
* USD 978,087.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Phase II project is to improve energy efficiency of power electronics
systems through the use of Gallium Nitride (GaN). Power electronics are
ubiquitous in today’s society – used inside the electric vehicles, laptops, and
data centers. A high-power GaN half-bridge (HPGHB) integrated circuit, a generic
building block of the power-electronic systems, will be developed and
manufactured. This project seels to demonstrate use of HPGHB in an on-board
charger (OBC) applications. The use of HPGHB may lead to smaller and more
efficient OBCs. On the educational front, this project will help train graduate
students at the University to use GaN for power electronics which is a high
demand employment area. Companies will be able to recruit and benefit from this
training of graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project seeks to develop a robust, high
current high-power GaN half-bridge (HPGHB) and a reference design for an on-
board charger (OBC). High-current integrated GaN half bridge is challenging due
to the need for short-circuit protection and thermal management. HPGHB is
planned for areas where long-term reliability is important, such as in
automotive/electric vehicle (EV) applications. This STTR project seeks to
complete the design of HPGHB increasing its reliability in demanding
applications including EVs. Development of an OBC with high efficiency and high-
power density may accelerate the adoption of EV. Key challenges for this project
are: a) providing protection against short circuiting that causes catastrophic
damage; b) demonstrating high efficiency to reduce cooling requirements and
reduce size and weight; c) designing novel converter control techniques to
enable usage of relatively low cost GaN-on-silicon technology; d) establishing
good long-term reliability for the automotive/EV market via dynamic high-
temperature-operating-life (HTOL) testing; and e) reducing overall system
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.