* 2052837
* EAR-PF: Mid-Miocene climate, vegetation, and disturbance dynamics of the Pacific Northwest
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Christopher Schiller, Schiller, Christopher M
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2023
* USD 174,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Dr. Christopher Schiller has been awarded an NSF EAR
Postdoctoral Fellowship to conduct research, professional development, and
outreach activities at the University of Washington and Boise State University
under the mentorship of Drs. Caroline Stromberg and Mark D. Schmitz,
respectively. Understanding the Earth system under climates warmer than today is
a useful approach for understanding the consequences of future warming resulting
from human-caused climate change. One such warm period in the Earth’s history is
the Mid-Miocene Climatic Optimum (MMCO), approximately 17-14 million years ago,
when global temperatures were 4-7°C warmer than the modern, pre-industrial
period. Fossil plant assemblages from the MMCO have been used to understand how
the climate and ecosystems of that time functioned on long (millions of years)
timescales. However, the importance of climate and ecosystem processes that
function on shorter (hundreds of thousands of years and shorter) timescales has
not often been considered. New research has suggested that climate change on
short timescales and large, frequent volcanic eruptions may have greatly
affected MMCO ecosystems. Therefore, it becomes unclear if ecosystem changes
seen in fossil plant assemblages are representative of long-term climate
conditions or a response to short-term processes. This study of MMCO vegetation
in the Pacific Northwest aims to understand the cause of ecosystem change seen
in fossil plants. Fossil pollen assemblages will be studied to examine ecosystem
change over short timescales and if climate, fire, or volcanic eruptions may
have caused those changes. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project
will examine two mid-Miocene paleofloras in Oregon, the Succor Creek Flora and
Mascall Flora, from which short-term (high-resolution) vegetation states will be
reconstructed from pollen and contemporaneous ecological disturbances of several
types will be constructed from charcoal (fire), polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
(fire), elemental geochemistry (landscape stability), and detailed lithological
descriptions (landscape stability and volcanic eruptions). Short-term records
will be compared with long-term (coarse-resolution) vegetation records, which
will be produced from longer stratigraphic sections from the same floras and
Miocene-length records produced from a concurrent project (EAR-1924390). Suites
of U-Pb zircon dates from each flora will allow for a robust chronology for all
vegetation-disturbance reconstructions and enable correlation with insolation
solutions and marine climate records. This project will contribute a modern
examination of the understudied field of pre-Quaternary palynology, an
investigation of the response of vegetation to a past period of dramatic climate
change and intense volcanism, and an application of multiple proxies to
understand MMCO ecosystem function, and mentorship of undergraduate science
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.