* 2052992
* EAR-PF: Mammals as sentinels of biotic recovery and the topographic diversity gradient in the aftermath of the Cretaceous–Paleogene mass extinction
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Lucas Weaver, Weaver, Lucas N
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2023
* USD 174,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Lucas N. Weaver has been
awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to investigate the ecological
recovery of mammals during the Cretaceous–Paleogene (K–Pg) mass extinction
event. Insight from other environmental catastrophes in Earth’s past can provide
information about the current environmental crisis. Additionally, impacts of
environmental disturbances are not equal across time and space; therefore, it is
important to see how resilient or susceptible species are to extinction in
different temporal and geographic settings. The K-Pg mass extinction event,
which occurred 66 million years ago and is famous for leading to the extinction
of the dinosaurs, is similar to the kind of extinction seen today. Towards this
end, this project aims to study how mammal communities (including the ancient
ancestors of the group to which humans belong) recovered from the K–Pg mass
extinction over the first 1 million years of the ‘Age of Mammals,’ in the Denver
Basin of Colorado. Mammals are often used as ‘canaries in the coal mine’ for
ecological health because environmental variables such as temperature and
moisture are related to mammals’ ecological health. The work is based on the
hypothesis that the Rocky Mountains acted as a buffer during the K–Pg mass
extinction and allowed more mammalian species to survive and diversify in a
post-dinosaur world. Given that the Earth is likely in the midst of a sixth mass
extinction event in its history, this study provides crucial insight into which
ecosystems are at greatest risk, and which ecosystems are better able to
‘weather the storm.’ Broader impacts of this work include working with the
Denver Museum of Nature and Science to disseminate results to a broad audience
through their exhibits; mentoring of undergraduates at University of Michigan
and City University of New York, and development of curriculum for high school
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to investigate the spatial and
temporal heterogeneity of mammal recovery after the Cretaceous–Paleogene (K–Pg)
mass extinction (66 million years ago) in the Denver Basin of Colorado. Denver
Basin fossil localities are highly resolved chronostratigraphically, allowing
precise correlation of the pattern and timing of biotic recovery in different
paleogeographic regions of the basin during the first ~1 million years of the
Paleogene. Since mountainous regions today are biodiversity hotspots, this
project is based on the hypothesis that mammal communities close to the emerging
Rocky Mountains (1) were more resistant to the K–Pg mass extinction, and (2)
recovered more quickly in its aftermath. To explore these hypotheses, the work
will quantify and compare the taxonomic (richness, relative abundance), dietary
(inferred via tooth shape), and body mass (inferred via tooth size) diversity
between two stratigraphic sequences of fossil mammal assemblages: (1) close to
and (2) far from the Rocky Mountain front range. This project will involve field
and laboratory work and will use new paleoecological methods to infer community-
level mammal diversity patterns through time. This study will be the first to
(1) look at spatial heterogeneity in post-K–Pg mammalian recovery in high
resolution and (2) explore whether mountain habitats were a driver of early
mammalian diversity. These results will help identify geospatial features that
promote biological community resilience/reassembly after environmental
disasters, and will shed light on the tempo and mode of the post-K–Pg radiation
of mammals, which ultimately led to the distribution of terrestrial biodiversity
we see today. This work will also integrate data from the mammal fossil record
with the broader vertebrate and plant fossil record, and with paleoclimate
proxies. This novel multidisciplinary approach will allow collaboration with
other scientists to track whole-ecosystem recovery in the aftermath of the K–Pg
mass extinction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.