* 2052795
* IUCRC Phase I: Center for Innovations in Structural Integrity Assurance (CISIA)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Arun P. Jaganathan, Louisiana Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 07/31/2026
* USD 150,000.00

Louisiana State University (LSU) and Louisiana Tech University (LA Tech) have
established the Industry-University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) for
Innovations in Structural Integrity Assurance (CISIA). Structural integrity and
reliable life prediction of infrastructure and mechanical components have
relevance in every public and private sector, including but not limited to
energy, aerospace, construction, manufacturing and infrastructure. CISIA will
serve as a trusted source of transformative insights, predictive capabilities,
and materials innovations across broad industrial sectors, focusing on
structural integrity assurance for small and large structures and mechanical
components. CISIA will conduct use-driven, fundamental, pre-competitive research
to establish linkages between material properties and infrastructure performance
in terms of its structural integrity. The Center will elucidate and translate
these links and their collective impact on reliability across all U.S.
industrial sectors. The academic and industrial members of CISIA will work in
concert to produce a diverse workforce of engineers who are trained in state-of-
the-art facilities to utilize modern methods of structural health monitoring and
analysis. These engineers will become a highly qualified and productive
workforce that enhances the global competitiveness and resilience of U.S.
industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structural health monitoring, diagnosis, and
in-situ rehabilitation of aging civil and industrial infrastructure are critical
for public safety and economic development. Understanding, controlling, and
improving the mechanical integrity of near-surface regions of mechanical
components subject to high-stress/high-cycle contact (interfacial solid-solid
and solid-fluid conjunctions) are fundamental problems affecting U.S.
manufacturing and defense industries. The CISIA site at Louisiana Tech
University will leverage its extensive infrastructure for research into
installation, inspection, structural health assessment, and rehabilitation of
underground utility systems as well as innovative non-destructive evaluation
methods for above-ground civil infrastructure. The site includes facilities for
the testing of metal, composite, and concrete structures including beams, slabs,
and pipes both above and below the ground. The siteâ€™s current research also
includes the formulation of geopolymeric materials from fly ash and steel slag,
which appear to have highly tunable structural and mechanical properties. By
integrating validated diagnostics, machine learning, and data-driven decision
making, CISIA will elucidate and translate the links between new materials,
manufacturing processes, service histories, and their collective impact on
reliability across all U.S. industrial sectors. Establishing linkages between
material properties, infrastructure performance, and structural integrity
requires multi-disciplinary research collaborations. The members of this
proposed IUCRC have the requisite multi-disciplinary expertise, history of
collaboration, proximity to a broad and strategic national manufacturing
corridor, and access to the necessary research infrastructure to produce
scientific advances in the structural integrity field, accelerated by the
proposed industrial partnership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.