* 2052515
* Computational modeling of cytoskeleton-cytoplasm mechanics at the mesoscale
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Brennan Sprinkle, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2024
* USD 299,989.00

Cell mechanics is largely determined by the cytoskeleton, which is a dynamic
mesh made of semiflexible fibers such as actin filaments, as well as multiple
types of cross linking proteins, and molecular motors such as myosin. The
fundamental problem addressed in this project is to understand the connections
between structure, dynamics, and function of the cytoskeleton. It is not yet
known if microscopic filaments can self-organize into the macroscopic chiral
structures responsible for left-right asymmetry seen in some tissues, or why
networks of actin gels are typically contractile (with or without molecular
motors like myosin). The stochastic nature of sub-cellular processes coupled
with the ever-changing topology of cytoskeletal networks make these questions
difficult or impossible to interrogate through lab measurements or existing
simulation techniques. This project will develop computational tools required to
close this knowledge gap; tools which carefully capture the microscopic features
of cellular fiber networks, at the extraordinary computational scale required to
probe their macroscopic structure. The goal is to derive a macroscopic
hydrodynamics-like theory from the numerical simulations of the cytoskeletal
gels that will allow PI to simulate whole-cell mechanochemical phenomena, like
cytokinesis. Education and outreach activities related to this project will
include learning modules focused on cell mechanics simulation and biological
fluids, implemented in both summer research experience programs for
undergraduates and after school programs at New York area middle
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to answer five
fundamental questions in cellular biology: (1) What are the (hydro)mechanical
properties of cross-linked actin networks? (2) Why are actin-myosin gels usually
contractile? (3) Can microscopic twists of actin filaments self-organize into
macroscopic chiral structures? (4) How much do thermal forces contribute to the
viscoelastic gel moduli? (5) Can thermal forces transduce random microscopic
twists and bends of actin filaments into macroscopic gel contraction without
myosin? To interrogate these questions, the team will develop novel numerical
methods which utilize creative representations of fibers to directly enforce
their inextensiblity and describe the local twist along their length. The
methods will reconcile the hydrodynamics of both passive and active filaments
with fluctuations from the surrounding cytosol, in addition to carefully
accounting for intra-network dynamics from the motion of molecular motors and
dynamically binding/unbinding cross-linkers. The team will employ efficient,
iterative linear algebra to compute fiber dynamics in linear time in the number
of fibers, enabling unprecedented simulations of the cellular cytoskelton. The
team will develop spectrally-accurate Chebyschev discretizations of semi-
flexible fibers that dramatically reduce the total degrees of freedom needed to
describe a single filament, and implement them in efficient, parallel, public-
domain codes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.