* 2052944
* EAR-PF In-situ and bulk sulfur isotope constraints on crustal recycling: a bridged investigation of superdeep diamonds and ocean island basalts
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* James Dottin, Dottin, James Wosley
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 12/31/2023
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. James W. Dottin III has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
pursue research and education endeavors at the Carnegie Institution for Science-
Earth and Planets Laboratory (CIS-EPL) under the mentorship of Dr. Steven Shirey
and Dr. Michael Walter. The Earth’s crust, which can be transferred from the
surface to the interior of Earth through plate tectonics, provides many of the
chemical elements that control the habitability of life on our planet. However,
the detailed nature, relative ages of the various crustal materials, and where
they ultimately reside in the Earth’s interior are not well understood. For this
project, Dr. Dottin will use chemical signatures (specifically those of the
element sulfur) measured in rocks and minerals erupted from the deep interior of
the Earth to provide insight into the finer details of plate tectonics. Dr.
Dottin’s work involves analyzing rocks and diamonds that come from different
parts of the Earth’s interior to determine how elements found in the crust move
around and are distributed across the globe. The proposed research will use
unique characteristics of sulfur to identify specific crustal materials that are
recycled through the Earth’s interior and provide relative constraints on the
timescales on which crustal recycling occurs. Dr. Dottin will also lead an
education program that incorporates students from historically underrepresented
minority groups directly into the research project. Student involvement will
take form through a strong collaboration with Smith College, a women’s college
in Massachusetts. Dr. Dottin also plans to engage with students that will be
actively recruited from local high schools and the many Historically Black
Colleges and Universities in the Washington, D.C. area as a mentor and advisor
through a summer internship program at CIS-EPL.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
Earth’s mantle is compositionally heterogeneous, comprising geochemically
distinct reservoirs from the process of crust extraction and recycling of crust
into the mantle. The HIMU (high μ=238U/204Pb) mantle reservoir is an enigmatic
endmember with extreme Pb-isotopic compositions, and is postulated to be
composed of subducted altered oceanic crust that is associated with a carbonated
component. However, the nature, origin, and global distribution of the
components that make up the HIMU mantle remain poorly understood. For this
project, Dr. Dottin will combine sulfur isotope information from key HIMU
basalts and from sulfide inclusions in superdeep diamonds using microbeam and
bulk digestion techniques. Dr. Dottin aims to trace the global distribution and
interaction of recycled protoliths in HIMU mantle reservoirs that are thought to
reside at the base of the mantle and/or within the mantle transition zone. The
proposed analytical techniques, choice of key HIMU basalts, and choice of
sulfides from transition zone diamonds offers an opportunity to address the
potential isotopic heterogeneities that exist among mineral, hand sample, and
global scales. From this work, Dr. Dottin plans to provide insight into the
finer details of plate tectonics through constraints of source heterogeneity
among HIMU mantle reservoirs and the proposed depth of slab accumulation that is
possibly linked to the age of the reservoir and/or hotspot
location.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.