* 2052578
* IUCRC Phase I USC: Center to Stream Healthcare In Place (C2SHIP)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* David Armstrong, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 04/30/2026
* USD 431,497.00

Chronic health conditions are financially and emotionally costly. Immediate,
creative action is needed to provide solutions for managing physical, social and
psychological needs that maintain autonomy and quality of life. Research on
long-term functioning of those with chronic illnesses is lacking. The Center to
Stream Healthcare In Place (C2SHIP) unites the best minds in academic medicine
with leaders in biomedical industry to research, develop and promote in-place
care technologies for managing chronic diseases in the home. The University of
Arizona serves as the C2SHIP Lead Site with Partner Sites being University of
Southern California, Baylor College of Medicine, and California Institute of
Technology. The Center will accelerate innovation through partnerships, multi-
specialty collaborations, and resource sharing. C2SHIP will prepare an educated
workforce to promote wellness through self-care
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center’s trans-disciplinary team will
pursue research and development in new material-based sensors, reconfigurable
designs, and system integration with data mining, machine learning, and
Artificial Intelligence. Through “Internet of Things”, patient data can be
streamed to medical professionals at remote locations in real-time, establishing
a mobile hub for vulnerable patients in their own home. C2SHIP will focus on
mitigating physiological, environmental, and psychological changes for real-time
management and intervention. University of Southern California (USC) will focus
on the clinical medicine aspect of the Center, proving cutting-edge technologies
to patients in-place, while training students and fellows in remote patient
care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center will accelerate knowledge and intellectual
property transfer between academia and industry through collaborative
partnerships. This will promote rapid development of new technologies, and
transform health care delivery by enhancing the quality of life of chronically-
ill patients while reducing health care costs and preventing hospitalizations.
Student engagement in the proposed research projects will create opportunities
with Center companies and organizations, and provide multidisciplinary
participation at C2SHIP conferences and workshops. USC C2SHIP will recruit
students and engage faculty in medicine, biomedical engineering, allied health.
USC promotes an inclusive environment, allowing the Center to engage
underrepresented individuals from diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data
produced from the projects will be housed in Center-wide servers at the C2SHIP
Center using a password protected Box data sharing folder. Box is a cloud
computing business which provides file-sharing, collaborating, and other tools
for working with files that are uploaded to its servers. Data will be maintained
for five years. USC C2SHIP projects that collect patient data will be approved
by USC IRB prior to project onset. All data will be deidentified, with no
personal identifiers recorded or retained in any form.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.