* 2052478
* I-Corps:  Scheduling software to enable visualization of changes for the construction industry
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Martin Fischer, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a software tool that would help teams to effectively manage
changes and their negative impacts on project schedules and resources. The
current inefficient management and lack of tools to minimize negative impacts
from changes hurts the cash flow of a project and its stakeholders. Changes also
delay projects significantly and lead to cost overruns. A recent study showed
that the US construction industry spends $50 billion on change orders annually.
Aside from the money spent on the direct cost of the change, such as materials
and resources, much of these costs are wasted due to an inefficient use of time
and lack of optimized planning procedures. Reducing the impacts of changes on
duration and cost is paramount and may help construction companies to develop
sustainability strategies for their projects and the environment. Further,
infrastructure projects funded by taxpayersâ€™ money may leverage this tool as
part of their value engineering mechanisms to gain more with the same level of
resource allocation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of an artificial intelligence (AI)-based visualization method that
may assist project teams to effectively manage change events on any project.
Current visualization tools do not have the capacity to analyze the impact of
change orders on all three fronts: temporal, spatial, and resources. The
proposed method leverages the integrated approach towards schedule, workspace,
and resources using advanced natural language processing (NLP) and machine
learning to label and characterize change events data. These advanced AI-driven
computational techniques may help project teams to visualize, review, and plan
for changes within a fraction of time as compared to traditional methods. More
specifically, this method visualizes the individual and cumulative direct and
indirect impacts of change events on associated schedule activities using
spaghetti graphs in which spaghetti lines and the change events are color coded
by the usage of underlying resources. It also visualizes the utilization of
space and resources, the underlying conflicts and over utilization due to the
impacts of change events. The goal is to create an array of planning options to
allow project teams to choose a sequence that minimizes both cost and duration
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.