* 2052185
* SBIR Phase I:  Accelerating Machine Learning on Encrypted Data
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,03/31/2022
* Ahmet Ozcan, SEMIOTIC AI, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 03/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be to enable organizations to collaborate and extract insights from
data without revealing private or proprietary information. Data-driven
innovations benefit all aspects of our lives, ranging from better healthcare and
increased productivity to smarter energy consumption. Artificial intelligence
(AI) has so much potential but access to data has become the major bottleneck.
Improved data security and privacy techniques enabled by this proposal will
remove barriers to realizing these benefits. Commercialization of the proposed
technology will have major implications for the cloud computing and data
analytics market. The proposed technology eliminates the security risks that
prevent companies from moving computations to the cloud, which offers affordable
and scalable data processing infrastructure. Furthermore, organizations can
collaborate on sensitive data without revealing the underlying
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase
I project will enable machine learning and AI on encrypted data based on Fully-
Homomorphic Encryption (FHE). Current approaches are too slow and difficult to
use; therefore, they have limited applicability in enterprise settings. This
Phase I project extends current approaches by designing a hardware-accelerated
FHE service that meets mandated security standards and targets enterprise AI
applications. To advance translation quickly, off-the-shelf accelerators will be
used, which are available in major cloud computing data centers. Further
performance gains will be achieved through neural network optimizations that
reduce the computation overhead of encrypted computations. In addition to the
performance improvements, software integration with common machine learning
frameworks will be implemented to lower the barrier for
usability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.