* 2052776
* IUCRC Phase I: Case Western Reserve University (CWRU): Center for Materials Data Science for Reliability and Degradation (MDS-Rely)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Roger French, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 06/30/2026
* USD 717,995.00

The Center for Materials Data Science for Reliability and Degradation (MDS-Rely)
is a joint industry/university cooperative research center (IUCRC) between Case
Western Reserve University (CWRU) and University of Pittsburgh (Pitt). Data
science-informed approaches can revolutionize the development, manufacturing,
and lifecycle applications of materials, parts, and products for U.S.
infrastructures in energy, defense, and transportation. MDS-Rely will improve
the capabilities of students, employees, and the broader workforce by bringing
together research and innovation in materials-based value chains to take on
technological and societal challenges. The goals of MDS-Rely include developing
solutions to materials reliability, degradation, and lifetime performance
problems, based on robust open source codes and datasets, coupled with improved
study protocols and standards that can be effectively implemented. The team also
seeks to create a cross-cutting community to address the societal and materials
challenges arising from degradation and failure of materials, components, and
systems and to unite industry, national labs, and academic researchers to
address these challenges by developing materials data science solutions.
Finally, the team seeks to develop educational programs for a diverse STEM
workforce prepared for dynamic careers in the materials and data sciences and to
take on research problems with industrial and commercial impact.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through unique team research capabilities and
infrastructure resources, MDS-Rely will develop reliability, performance, and
degradation solutions, establish standards and reliability study protocols, and
develop materials data science codes, packages and datasets to inform the
materials value chains of polymers, elastomers, coatings, metals, alloys,
semiconductors, and optoelectronics. This research will be achieved in three
thrust areas: Weathering and Performance, Subtractive and Additive
Manufacturing, and Components, Devices, and Systems. Projects include, but are
not limited to: a) network models of mechanistic degradation pathways in
materials and systems; b) machine learning on images to identify defects and the
progress of degradation with exposure time; and c) identification of defects
from tomographic images impacting the reliability of additively or traditionally
manufactured parts. These new materials data science study protocols and
analytics will enable MDS-Rely members to implement state of the art methods in
their own research and manufacturing processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.