* 2052413
* Collaborative Research: Scaling Properties of Ecological Variation in Complex Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Jake Ferguson, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 05/31/2023
* USD 147,466.00

Ecologists forecast future animal populations to manage harvested populations
and assess extinction risks of populations of conservation concern. A critical
component of these forecasts is understanding how variation in limiting
environmental factors such as food, water, or shelter drive population
fluctuations. In the absence of specific data on these factors, ecologists must
use the properties of the observed variation in the data to make projections
about future risk. In ecology, these forecasts often make simplifying
assumptions about the underlying biology that may impact their accuracy. The
project will integrate new mathematical ideas and models with empirical field
observations to study the properties of populations that experience large
fluctuations, allowing the PIs to test fundamental assumptions about how
populations are structured. This work will focus on populations that experience
regular cycles, a common phenomenon arising through factors such as competition
for resources among individuals or predator-prey interactions. This work will
improve both the tools used in the management and conservation of wildlife and
the understanding of how external factors drive variation in nonlinear dynamical
systems. The mathematical ideas and models developed in this project will use
techniques similar to those that economists use to project stock market
fluctuations or meteorologists use to predict paths of hurricanes; thus, the
results may have important implications for many areas of general societal
interest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emerging work has shown that universal laws
describe the fluctuations of biological systems, regardless of the biological
scale at which these processes operate. A key prediction of these laws is that
the fluctuations of many biological systems will increase monotonically in
response to increases in extrinsic variability, often termed “environmental
noise”. However, this scaling has only been studied in linearized models that
are valid when fluctuations are small. When populations exhibit larger
fluctuations, the assumptions underlying this theory break down. This project
will develop the mathematics needed to study the variance scaling properties in
nonlinear biological systems subject to increased environmental variation. In
particular, the PIs will study the scaling properties of extrinsic noise in
nonlinear biological systems focusing on how increases in the magnitude of
external perturbations may drive declines in total system variance. The goal is
to understand how nonlinearities in ecological systems may lead to robust or
sublinear responses to environmental noise. The research scope includes
developing mathematical theory to model how environmental variation interacts
with highly nonlinear population dynamics, mainly for single species. The PIs
will also develop the statistical approaches to better detect the signal of the
predicted variance scaling relationships from empirical population surveys. This
work will be the first to determine how increases in external variability can
drive increases in the stability of biological systems, an essential step in
constructing a more nuanced description of how nonlinear biological systems
interact with and respond to noisy environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.