* 2052174
* STTR Phase I:  Highly Efficient and Robust Photocatalyst Systems for CO2 Conversion to Valuable Fuels Using Renewable Solar
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Saemin Choi, NX FUELS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2022
* USD 255,948.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this STTR Phase I project is in
reducing carbon dioxide emissions while delivering a sustainable solution to
meet the global demand for green fuels and chemicals. Carbon dioxide is a major
greenhouse gas linked to climate change and environmental concerns. Solutions to
sequester carbon dioxide underground and in deep oceans are expensive, and the
long-term effectiveness, safety, and associated environmental impacts are
unclear. This project allows highly efficient conversion of carbon dioxide into
valuable green products using only renewable solar energy. The cost-effective,
sustainable production of green fuels utilizing carbon dioxide as a feedstock
will be key to reducing emissions and lowering dependency on fossil-based
sources. Low-cost green fuels, such as methane, are expected to accelerate the
penetration of a $30 billion market for the transportation and power generation
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the fact that the high
stability of carbon dioxide and conventional approaches to convert these
molecules involve high temperature, high pressure, and/or extremely reactive
reagents, rendering them expensive and harmful to the environment. Artificial
photosynthesis is a promising approach to convert carbon dioxide and water into
commercially valuable chemical products, such as methane, methanol, formic acid
and syngas, using only solar energy. This project will assess the technical
feasibility of a revolutionary artificial photosynthesis system based on
photocatalyst wafers prepared using magnetron sputter epitaxy (MSE) to generate
green methane from carbon dioxide in a single step. The proposed project
utilizes low-cost, scalable processes to prepare photocatalyst wafers with high
efficiencies and stabilities that can be extrapolated to 20+ years of operation
lifetime. The key challenge is to effectively combine the novel carbon dioxide
reduction functionality with the unique light harvesting and water oxidation
platform, and optimize the operating parameters to enhance the overall system
efficiency and robustness. The goal is to demonstrate photocatalyst wafers with
10+% solar to fuel efficiencies, unprecedented long-term stability in the carbon
dioxide reduction process, and a bench-scale prototype for performance
validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.