* 2052581
* RAPID: Collecting critical data for advancing our understanding of wildfire impacts on soil characteristics and research on post-wildfire compound hazards
* GEO,EAR
* 11/15/2020,04/30/2022
* Amir AghaKouchak, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 04/30/2022
* USD 49,997.00

This project offers a unique opportunity to advance our fundamental
understanding of hydrologic and geomorphic processes following wildfire events.
The project will provide public access to perishable data with a wide range of
potential applications for stakeholders in many fields, including hydrology,
geomorphology, ecology, geotechnical engineering, and natural hazards
management. The team will collect a variety of data including: post-fire near-
surface soil moisture, electric conductivity, soil temperature and CO2 flux
after wildfire events in nearby burned and unburned areas; soil samples using
in-situ geotechnical sampling and tests to understand geotechnical
characteristics of burned and unburned soils (e.g., soil texture, hydraulic
properties, shear strength and compressibility); soil texture, land cover change
and vegetation change information from drone images and aerial photos. The
project will provide training to a graduate student in data collection. The lead
university is a minority serving institution. The principal investigators
frequently recruit minority undergraduate students. The data collected in this
project will be used for future undergraduate research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wildfires greatly change the land cover of
hydrologic basins, increasing the overland flow and debris movement, and
oftentimes decreasing the basin’s time of concentration. Wildfires can also
adversely impact geotechnical characteristics (e.g., index, mechanical,
hydraulic properties) of the near-surface soil in burned areas, which may result
in reduced soil stability and increased likelihood of post-wildfire landslides,
mud and debris flows, erosion, and excessive runoff. Floods and debris flows
pose a significant threat, especially when extreme precipitation falls over
burned areas (e.g., the 2018 debris flow in Montecito, California). This is an
example of a compound event in which two consecutive events lead to extreme
societal impacts. In this project, the investigators will collect perishable
post-fire data with a focus on changes in soil characteristics in burned areas.
This data could be useful for analyses on compound geohazards associated with
wildfires, including landslide and debris flow analysis and land-surface
dynamics. This award is co-funded by the Hydrologic Sciences and the
Geomorphology and Land-use Dynamics programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.