* 2052257
* SBIR Phase II: Information fusion-driven adaptive corridor-wide traffic signal re-timing
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Tingting Huang, ETALYC, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2023
* USD 979,633.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project focuses on an adaptive traffic signal timing solution. Cities and
municipalities worldwide spend over $4 billion annually to retime traffic
signals and yet often fail to adequately reduce congestion on roadways. The
consequences of mistimed traffic signal timing are: a) increasing productivity
losses due to congestion with the average American spending 97 hours stuck in
traffic every year, b) increasing accidents due to traffic, with one fatality
every 15 minutes on US roads, and c) increasing greenhouse emissions with a
third of all emissions caused by vehicles on the roads. This project will
support the development and commercialization of a web-based technology to
support traffic managers in cities and municipalities to better manage traffic
using artificial intelligence (AI) and big data analytics. In addition to
improving traffic flow and reducing congestion, the system will also
significantly reduce harmful emissions, leading to more environmentally friendly
city streets. The serviceable markets for this technology in the US and Europe,
which together constitute 60% of the global signal-timing market, represent a
$2.4 billion opportunity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project seeks to develop a proof-of-concept for a fully
adaptive traffic signal retiming solution that can robustly handle multiple
signal corridors for commercialization. The key intellectual merit of this
effort will be developing deep learning models that can run at scale and handle
sensor noise robustly. The reinforcement learning process will help the system
to adapt to changing traffic scenarios at different scales without the need for
manual interventions. Research objectives that must be overcome in Phase II are
focused on: 1) scaling the solution; 2) making the solution robust; and 3)
ensuring that the system is user ready. Achieving these objectives may help
ensure the product can successfully run on big-data architecture economically
deployed on the cloud. The solution will also provide a deeper understanding of
human-machine interaction. Overall, the proposed system may reduce
implementation time as well as capital and maintenance expenditures for signal
timing systems. These advantages will encourage cities around the US and
internationally to adopt such signal timing
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.