* 2052616
* Characterizing Ecological Transitions in Systems with Regularity
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Juan Bonachela, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 03/31/2024
* USD 209,566.00

Humans depend on ecological systems in many ways, from their ability to provide
water and food to their amenability for habitation. The response of an
ecological system to environmental changes can shape the future of the goods and
services associated with the ecosystem. Important examples include
desertification and changes from high to low productivity regimes in fisheries,
among others. Modeling the ecosystem state and predicting future shifts to other
states requires the identification of measurable quantities that represent the
state of the ecosystem. However, when the ecosystem shows spatial structure (for
example, vegetation aggregates separated by bare soil, typical of semi-arid
ecosystems), standard choices to represent the ecosystem state lead to erroneous
predictions, unable to capture features shown by these systems across space and
time. This project will combine concepts and techniques from mathematics and
statistical physics to provide a novel theoretical framework able to describe
reliably state shifts occurring in structured ecological systems. Such a
framework will enable theoretical tools to diagnose ecosystem health and
resilience as environmental conditions change and, therefore, facilitate
preparedness, such as conservation strategies, against ecologically and
economically costly shifts. Because aggregation occurs frequently in nature, the
results of this project will be applicable to a wide variety of systems of
socio-ecological importance (for instance, vegetation in ecosystems close to
desertification). The project includes training through research involvement for
junior researchers, to help develop the next generation of scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transitions between different states of a focal ecosystem
often can be described with a single order parameter (observable representing
the state of the system) and a single control parameter (factor whose change
triggers the transition). For a given value of the latter, the order parameter
enables the calculation of the stability landscape, a manifold that reveals key
information such as potential ecological states, their basins of attraction, and
the possibility of alternative stable states. When an ecosystem shows spatial
regularity, however, standard approaches yield misleading results: a system-
averaged order parameter neglects the underlying spatial patterns, and using the
spatially-explicit population density as order parameter produces a stability
landscape that erroneously detects the empty space between population aggregates
as signs of extinction (and possibility of alternative stable states) even for
healthy ecosystems. This project aims to offer the first framework able to
represent reliably, for any dynamical system that shows spatial regularity and
undergoes a phase transition, the key interactions between population dynamics,
formation of non-trivial spatial aggregates, and changes in resilience occurring
around the transition. The investigator will use existing theoretical models to
identify an associated transition and the main features affected by it and aims
to combine them in a single order parameter able to describe holistically the
transition. The project involves innovative combination and development of
concepts and tools associated with statistical physics and bifurcation theory
(e.g. stability and perturbative analyses, numerical renormalization, Fourier
transforms), typically used independently in the study of phase transitions or
pattern detection. The results of this project will improve predictions and
early warning signal tools for transitions in systems that show
regularity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.