* 2052658
* IUCRC Phase I: Oakland University: Center for Composite and Hybrid Materials Interfacing (CHMI)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Sayed Nassar, Oakland University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2026
* USD 310,000.00

The Center for Composite and Hybrid Materials Interfacing (CHMI) seeks to
generate knowledge and capabilities in joining, bonding, and maintenance of
composite and hybrid material structures by applying reliable, data-driven,
automated processes using advanced analytical, computational, experimental, and
digital techniques and tools. It is a partnership between Oakland University
(OU), Georgia Institute of Technology (GT) and University of Tennessee,
Knoxville (UTK). The significant advantages of lightweight composite and hybrid
materials for aerospace, automotive, infrastructure, and biomedical applications
come with scientific, technical, and economic challenges that must be addressed
for the U.S. to be a global manufacturing leader. The interfaces in these
materials systems are identified as a critical barrier due to fabrication costs
and inconsistent performance (especially in aggressive environments). The goal
of CHMI is to significantly reduce cost (≥50%), cycle time, and variation of
such engineering operations in ten years. The OU Site is home to state-of-the-
art facilities and expert researchers at its Fastening and Joining Research
Institute (FAJRI), which includes a wide range of equipment in its composite
joining labs, material properties and manufacturing processing lab, and
chemistry labs. The OU faculty have diverse expertise that spans material
joining, nondestructive testing, material characterization, artificial
intelligence, modeling/simulation, data analytics, advance manufacturing, and
validation testing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three partnering universities have
well-established, complementary expertise in lightweight composite and hybrid
materials. They will work together on four industry-inspired research thrust
areas: (1) Design, Modeling and Analysis, (2) Materials and Process Engineering,
(3) Testing and NDE, and (4) Secure Data and Digital Technologies. Each
university has emphasized different industry sectors (GT-Aerospace, OU-
Automotive/Ground Vehicle, UTK-Infrastructure and Biomedical), which ensures the
inclusion of university and industry perspectives across a wide range of U.S.
manufacturing. The CHMI IUCRC will develop a Convergent Research Development
Environment that will identify and conduct industry-inspired pre-competitive,
innovative research in the area of interfacing composites and hybrid materials.
The OU Site will focus on computation and design, processing/fabrication,
characterization and testing, non-destructive evaluation (NDE), and data
analytics. Specifically, research efforts will include: electromagnetic-
sensitive additives for reversible adhesion of hybrid material joints, volatile
organic compound failure analysis of autoclave-bonded panels, modeling of
predictive emission for adhesive hybrid material joints, machine learning and
knowledge-based models for threaded composite and hybrid material joint systems,
NDE methods using experimental and computational digital shearography for
composite and hybrid materials interfaces, and the development of other
breakthrough technologies that drive industry to mitigate risk and improve
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.