* 2052826
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the Role of Mantle Metasomatism and Melt-Rock Interaction During Evolution of Continental Lithosphere Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* G. Lang Farmer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 312,413.00

The oldest parts of tectonic plates on Earth are found in the interiors of
continents, usually far from plate boundaries. These so-called “cratonic”
portions of continental plates are thicker than average and remain stable for
billions of years, resisting internal deformation. Cratons are usually
surrounded by younger tectonic plate material, added on through the processes of
accretion and collision. However, there is geologic evidence that in some
locations the thick cratonic interior portion of continental plates has been
destabilized and removed (e.g., the North China Craton and the southwest U.S.).
A fundamental question is: why are some cratonic regions able to be
deformed/removed while others are stable for billions of years? More
specifically, what conditions are needed to weaken and prime the interior of a
continental tectonic plate for destabilization? To investigate this question,
this project will use southwest North America as a natural laboratory to explore
the role that magmas infiltrating through continental plates may play in
destabilizing cratons. The study area has an extensive Cenozoic volcanic history
that shows that a period of voluminous magma-infiltration (triggered by the
removal of subducting oceanic crust of the Farallon plate from the base of the
North American continent) preceded a dramatic destabilization of the interior
part of southwest North America, leading to thinning of the plate and
deformation characteristic of the present-day Basin and Range Province. A key
feature of this study is to combine information on the chemistry of the volcanic
rocks with laboratory experiments on magma moving through rock samples and
numerical models of the flow of magma inside a porous material. All of these
approaches are necessary to arrive at a process-oriented understanding of how
magma might (a) move through continental tectonic plates and (b) modify the
plate as it moves. Our goal is to test the hypothesis that magma-infiltration
may play an important role in the weakening and destabilization of the cratonic
interiors of continental plates. The team (two female and one male) represents
scientists at various career stages and forges a connection between two
important minority-serving institutions within the southwestern US.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Within the theory of plate tectonics, constraints for the timescales
of the dynamic process of continental lithospheric mantle weakening and removal
are generally lacking. By reassessing the relationship between age and
geochemical data, in particular isotopic and trace element abundances, the
researchers will reinterpret the relationship between volcanism and tectonism in
southwest North America. The work here will test the hypothesis that the key
processes that preconditioned the southwest North America lithosphere for
destabilization took place after arc-related magmatism, and before and during
the ignimbrite flare-up: namely, regional-scale hydration and metasomatism
associated with the amagmatic period of flat/shallow angle subduction of the
Farallon plate beneath SWNA. In this project, they test this hypothesis through
detailed space-time-composition analyses of volcanic rock geochemical data and
through two suites of high-pressure multianvil petrologic experiments. Both
efforts will inform numerical experiments designed to investigate the effects of
CLM/melt interaction and/or in situ melting on ascending melt compositions and
rheology of the CLM. Geochemical analysis will consist of data mining of the
NAVDAT database as well as new sample collection, of particular importance is a
critical gap in the available data set is represented by Laramide volcanic rocks
in the continental interior, specifically in southern New Mexico. The two suites
of multianvil experiments will investigate (1) the diffusion of trace elements
across the melt-rock interface and determine the relevant diffusion constants;
and (2) the role of metasomatized CLM in generating in situ melting at the melt-
rock interface. Numerical experiments will use the data combined from the
geochemical and multianvil datasets to build fluidized flow models for melt-rock
interactions that address both thermal and chemical disequilibrium conditions
building from 1D to 3D porous flow models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.