* 2052801
* Topology of Kaehler Manifolds, Surface Bundles, and Outer Automorphism Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Corey Bregman, University of Southern Maine
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2024
* USD 126,305.00

The main subject of this project is geometric group theory. One of the guiding
principles behind geometric group theory, as developed by Klein and more
recently Gromov, is that one can understand a geometric object by studying its
symmetries. The primary goal of this project is to utilize techniques from
geometric group theory as a bridge to simplify and solve problems in other
fields of mathematics. The first part of this project focuses on algebraic
varieties, which are geometric spaces defined by polynomial equations. Algebraic
varieties arise naturally in a wide-range of disciplines, including high-energy
physics and cryptography. Although these objects have been studied for
centuries, many of their geometric properties still remain unknown, and cannot
be uncovered using traditional means. The PI proposes novel geometric group
theory methods to develop restrictions on properties of algebraic varieties. The
second part of this project studies the symmetries of right-angled Artin groups,
which have important connections to low-dimensional topology, as well as
robotics, phylogenetic trees, and computer science. In addition, the PI will
advise undergraduate mathematics majors and mentor graduate students through
organizing seminars and other mathematical activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study of mapping class groups and the moduli space of curves lies at the
intersection of algebraic geometry, Riemannian geometry, and topology. The first
part of this project studies the topology of surface and torus bundles admitting
some extra structure such as a Kaehler metric, or which are formal in the sense
of rational homotopy theory. The PI proposes techniques from geometric group
theory and mapping class groups that can place restrictions on the fundamental
group and monodromy of such bundles, but also connect questions about the
geometry of complex projective surfaces to questions about mapping class groups.
The second part of this project studies the automorphism groups of right-angled
Artin groups (RAAGs), which comprise a large class of groups extending both free
and free abelian groups. There is a fruitful analogy between the study of
mapping class groups of surfaces, outer automorphism groups of free groups, and
lattices in semisimple Lie groups. The role played by Teichmuller space, Culler-
Vogtmann outer space, and symmetric spaces, respectively, is of fundamental
importance in proving many key results about these groups. The PI proposes an
analogous space for outer automorphisms of RAAGs, to provide a unified framework
for studying automorphisms of free and free abelian
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.