* 2052598
* EAR-PF: Green infrastructure scaling from local observations to regional applications as a coupled human-water system
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Cynthia Castro, Castro, Cynthia V
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 12/31/2023
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Cyndi V. Castro has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to study
issues of scale regarding nature-based solutions (NBSs) at the University of
Illinois Urbana-Champaign with mentoring from Professor Murugesu Sivapalan.
Traditionally, stormwater is dealt with through grey infrastructure, which
rapidly transports rainfall offsite. NBSs, on the other hand, use natural
materials to slow stormwater flow through onsite retention. As rainfall
conditions intensify, integrated NBSs become necessary throughout the urban
framework to alleviate overburdened drainage networks. NBSs have shown great
promise in site-specific applications, however, widespread use of such
technology has not occurred due to a lack of catchment-scale relationships. The
efficacy of NBS solutions is a complex function of local conditions (i.e.,
rainfall, flow travel times, land characteristics) that are not well understood.
The need to characterize scale relationships includes interactions between NBS
systems and society. Anthropogenic effects on catchments alter the hydrologic
response and are an important component in coupled human-water systems. This
study aims to better understand the influence and scalability of hydrological
and social phenomena in urban watersheds to fill an important knowledge gap and
to improve widespread implementation of NBS solutions. The work has broad
implications for the use of NBSs in urban settings and will work to involve the
youth of Houston, Texas, in the proposed research. The project also includes
plans to improve infrastructure for NBS in economically disadvantaged
neighborhoods and will engage with a wide variety of stakeholders who deal with
flooding and stormwater. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Castro proposes to
investigate the scaling laws associated with NBSs by combining traditional top-
down and bottom-up modeling approaches. Dr. Castro will engage with various
global climate adaptation leaders through an established academic-governmental
partnership to better understand the governing societal influences associated
with NBS processes. She will identify governing physical processes through data-
driven computational modeling and similarity analyses, including spatial
characteristics (watershed properties) and temporal variability (rainfall
duration, time of concentration). A top-down approach will be conducted to
understand the macro-scale governing processes through the use of bucket models.
The process controls on the overall water balance will be extracted from long-
term rainfall-runoff signatures and coarse-grained over decreasing scales.
Finally, Dr. Castro will investigate the shared behaviors between the bottom-up
deterministic models and the top-down bucket models, elucidating where the two
approaches overlap, thereby linking NBS processes across scales. By identifying
common social and hydrologic factors that are scalable, Dr. Castro seeks a novel
description of NBS processes for improved planning across spatial and temporal
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.