* 2052111
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Testing models for the Late Jurassic Nevadan Orogeny: Age, provenance, and structural evolution of the Galice and Mariposa basins, OR and CA
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Kathleen Surpless, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 08/31/2024
* USD 198,401.00

The proposed research will improve the understanding of the development of the
North American continental margin in southern Oregon and northern California
just prior to and during a critical and poorly understood period of
contractional deformation. During this time (the Latest Jurrassic), mountain
building closed the Galice and Mariposa sedimentary basins in the western
Klamath and Sierra mountains, respectively. Details of the basins’ sediment
sources, depositional ages, and extent of metamorphism and deformation may
provide the best geologic record just prior to and during the mountain-building
event. The project provides key educational benefits for students at the
undergraduate and graduate level, requiring integration of a range of
disciplinary knowledge and skills that cannot be duplicated in a classroom. The
project will recruit women and underrepresented minority students at graduate
and undergraduate levels, and these students will be full participants in the
research, not observers. The experiential learning through this research will
provide skill development and training that will translate directly to the STEM
workforce. In addition, field guides highlighting this research and key areas of
interest will be broadly disseminated through Forest Service districts and the
NSF Flyover Country® app, improving public scientific literacy. The ongoing
interest in gold mining and the mining history of the rocks that form the focus
of this research increase the likelihood of public
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Upper Jurassic Galice and Mariposa
Formations in the Klamath Mountains and western Sierran provinces have long been
considered fundamental to understanding the mid-Mesozoic history of the U.S.
Cordilleran continental margin. Two opposing tectonic models for the Late
Jurassic Nevadan orogeny variously interpret the tectonic setting and age of
Galice and Mariposa deposition. The first model invokes the genesis of the
Mariposa Formation in an intra-oceanic basin that progressively closed along
oppositely dipping subduction zones, while the age-equivalent Galice Formation
represents an inter-arc basin native to the western margin of North America. In
the second model, both formations occur within transtensional basins above an
east-dipping, long-lived subduction zone along the western North American
margin. Because these strata constitute the youngest rocks deformed during the
Late Jurassic Nevadan deformation, details of depositional age, sediment
provenance, and the kinematics and style of deformation are critical to
informing the proposed tectonic models and assessing their viability. This
comprehensive and integrated analysis of each of these basins that includes
petrofacies characterization, detrital zircon U-Pb age and Hf analysis, heavy
mineral analysis, interpretation of sedimentary structures, assessment of the
degree of metamorphism, and analysis of the timing and kinematics of
deformation, will provide a robust framework for modification and refinement of
the understanding of the Late Jurassic continental
margin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.