* 2052636
* Collaborative Research: MODULUS: Data-Driven Discovery for Mechanisms of Nuclear Dynamics and Scaling
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Alan Lindsay, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2024
* USD 362,559.00

This award supports research on the fundamental biological question of scaling –
how cells and organelles regulate size relative to the whole organism. The
nucleus is a particular organelle where scaling is tightly regulated and
aberrations are often hallmarks of disease. Consequently, a better understanding
of these fundamental mechanisms may lead to novel treatments. The Principal
Investigators (PIs) will iterate between wet-lab experiments and mathematical
modeling to uncover the principles underpinning scaling in the model system
Xenopus Laevis (frog). The PIs posit that the dynamics of nuclear growth and
ultimately the steady-state size of the organelle depend upon multiple,
interdependent processes including (i) nuclear pore complex (NPC) mediated
import of soluble proteins, (ii) osmotic/oncotic pressure differences, (iii)
microtubule-dependent transport of vesicular membrane building blocks, and (iv)
regulated exchange between the outer nuclear membrane and the contiguous
endoplasmic reticulum. Using parameter estimation and Bayesian model selection
criteria, The PIs will delineate the roles played by each of these processes.
The outcomes of this award will provide a framework for data driven discovery in
a vast range of biological problems. This award will enable the training of the
next generation of biophysical researchers who will be immersed in both
theoretical and experimental environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will
determine the mechanisms of nuclear scaling using the model system X. laevis
within an iterative experimental and modeling approach. On the experimental end,
the PIs will combine microfluidics, photolabile hydrogels, and cell-free
cytoplasmic extracts derived from X. laevis eggs. This platform enables
recapitulation of nuclear assembly and growth under controlled experimental
conditions in which variables such as cytoplasmic volume, cytoplasmic shape, and
cytoplasmic composition can be independently modulated. To complement this
experimental framework, the PIs will develop a hierarchy of mathematical models
ranging from analytically tractable (single nucleus, radially symmetric), to
computationally demanding (multiple interacting nuclei, complex cell geometry).
These models will take the form of free boundary partial differential equations
(reaction-advection-diffusion PDEs) and describe the transport of proteins by
unbiased diffusion, directed motion along microtubules and active fluid flow. To
incorporate surface details of the nuclear envelope, particularly the
arrangement and dynamics of NPCs during nuclear growth, macroscopic laws
describing rates of import and growth will be obtained using asymptotic analysis
and homogenization theory. Broader impacts arising from this award include 1)
cross disciplinary training of graduate students in both experimental and
modeling through rotations at U. Wyoming and Notre Dame 2) two international
workshops aimed at cementing connections between biological and mathematical
scientists and further dissemination of research methodologies and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being co-funded by the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB) through the Systems and Synthetic
Biology and the Cellular Dynamics and Function Cluster, and the MPS Division of
Mathematical Sciences (DMS) through the Mathematical Biology
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.