* 2052613
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Craft Specialization in Traditional Societies
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Neill Wallis, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2022
* USD 29,890.00

This doctoral dissertation study investigates how changing historical conditions
create different forms of craft specialization in nonhierarchical societies.
Archaeologists have intensively studied craft specialization because it
highlights the role of labor organization in broader social transformations.
Specialists, typically defined as skilled persons that provision demands beyond
their household, can be particularly critical in establishing interdependence
between communities. Specialists require support from other social units to make
their crafting economically viable, which binds participating communities into
obligations of reciprocity and exchange. Archaeologists and other social
scientists have thus typically expected specialization only among complex,
hierarchical societies (e.g. states) with centralized political economies that
can draw on pooled resources to support full-time craft production. However,
there is evidence to suggest that specialized pottery production may have
occurred in some nonhierarchical hunter-gatherer societies in the southeastern
United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What might create the need for
specialization in the absence of statehood or centralized governance? This
research addresses this question by investigating how specific historical
circumstances call for the emergence of different types of craft specialists.
The project focuses on two eras of critical social change in the pre-colonial
southeastern United States and specifically combines a novel method for
assessing potting skill with pottery sourcing techniques, such as Neutron
Activation Analysis, Laser Ablation-Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass
Spectrometry, X-ray diffraction, and ceramic petrography, to evaluate hypotheses
that help explain the emergence of specialized production under historical
conditions corresponding to each time frame. Radiocarbon assays associated with
pottery vessels will establish an objective chronology to assess major changes
in the social organization of mortuary pottery production through time. This
project uses religious specialization, skilled crafting linked to ritual
leadership, as a hypothesis to investigate how the breakdown in earlier period
civic-ceremonial centers potentially prompted greater reliance on ritual
specialists. This project also introduces identity-based specialization, the use
of specialized production to perpetuate identities, as a hypothesis to
investigate how specialization was linked to the emergence of social competition
and increasing settlement density. Participatory crafting, unskilled crafting by
a general population, will serve as an alternative hypothesis to test against
religious and identity-based specialization. By successfully grounding
specialization within the historical conditions of each time frame, this project
will generate a new form of knowledge about pottery production that urges social
scientists to revisit long-held assumptions about social organization, labor,
and exchange in nonhierarchical societies globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.