* 2052438
* Dynamic Molecular Switching for Environmentally Adaptive Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Gannon Jennings, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 06/30/2024
* USD 497,806.00

While surfaces generally have fixed compositions, the ability to design dynamic
surfaces that rapidly alter their composition when the environment is changed
can impact several areas, including prevention of surface contamination and
facilitation of adsorption/desorption. This project will combine experiments and
molecular simulations to design and characterize molecular films that rapidly
change their surface composition when the external environment is altered. This
change in composition will be accomplished by molecular surface groups that
display both “hydrophobic” and “hydrophilic” components. The hydrophobic
components will orient to dominate the surface when exposed to air or a nonpolar
solvent, whereas the hydrophilic components will orient to occupy the surface
when exposed to water. The investigators will use these films to study new self-
cleaning and thermoresponsive surfaces. Outreach for this project includes
offering a one-week intensive course on nanotechnology to gifted middle school
students and a molecular modeling cybercamp. Discoveries from this research will
provide fertile design examples for the elective courses taught by the
investigators, who are both award-winning teachers. The investigators will
continue to be strong mentors for undergraduate and graduate students, including
those from underrepresented backgrounds, to propel students toward careers in
science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will
combine experiments and molecular simulations to design and develop a class of
molecular films that are instantaneously adaptive to their environment. These
films will become energetically minimized when exposed to a new environment
through the orientation of multifunctional surface groups. In the first
objective, molecular simulations and experiments will be combined to design,
synthesize, and assemble a class of molecular adsorbates for preparation of
environmentally adaptive monolayer films. Computational screening using the
Molecular Simulation Design Framework (MoSDeF) will allow for rapid screening of
the identified parameter space; promising adsorbates will then be experimentally
synthesized and assembled. In the second objective, the most promising films
will be thoroughly investigated to maximize the magnitude of the response,
establish the mechanism of the interfacial switching, and further optimize the
molecular design. In the third objective, the developed design tools will be
used to construct pH- and thermo-responsive surfaces and self-cleaning
amphibious surfaces that can minimize adventitious contamination, shed oil, and
resist biofouling. Since the environmental adaptation described here is simply a
reorientation of a surface group, these systems would offer immediate response
to minimize interfacial free energy upon exposure to a new environment, unlike
commonly studied materials that rely on macromolecular motion and are restricted
to specific solvents or environments. The proposed materials and surfaces will
be designed based on a tight collaboration between molecular simulations and
experiments for targeted adaptation around known environmental cues, such as
continual transitions between liquid and air, solvent and water, different pH
values, or temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.