* 2052790
* EAR-PF: Investigating the effects of bedrock dip angle on knickpoint morphology and evolution via flume experimentation and numerical modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Kristin Chilton, Chilton, Kristin
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 09/30/2024
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Kristin Chilton has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
investigate how the orientation of rock fractures (cracks) in river beds
influences the ease with which that rock is eroded (worn away) by flowing over
waterfalls (also called knickpoints). Knickpoints are often zones of
concentrated erosion within rivers and this project will involve creatively
designed experiments that examine the role of cracks in controlling river
erosion into rock. The results of this study will allow scientists to better
predict how Earth’s surface will change over time, interpret climatic and
geologic histories from the landscapes we see today, and improve engineering
designs for the safety and longevity of important infrastructure. The work will
be carried out at Virginia Tech and West Virginia University in collaboration
with mentors, Dr. Kyle Strom and Dr. Charles Shobe, respectively. Dr. Chilton’s
project will also provide opportunities for undergraduate involvement in
academic research, support diversity in STEM fields through summer outreach
programs, and introduce a broader audience to Earth science topics via
educational videos and blog posts focused on river erosion processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to test how the
orientation of discontinuities (which can be fractures, joints, or bedding
planes) influences hydraulic plucking of bedrock blocks within knickpoints, and
therefore knickpoint morphology and evolution. This will be accomplished via a
series of flume experiments, which will use stacked porcelain tiles to simulate
layered sedimentary bedrock at various dip orientations, coupled with continuous
monitoring of knickpoint morphology, retreat rate, and plucking events. The
results of the flume experiments will then be integrated into numerical
landscape evolution models to expand implications to broader spatial and
temporal scales. This investigation will fill a critical gap in our
understanding of the fundamental controls on bedrock channel morphology and
fluvial incision processes, improve robustness of landscape evolution models by
incorporating specific bedrock characteristics, and help ensure appropriate
interpretation of knickpoints as indicators of climatic and uplift history by
characterizing a potential control on knickpoint form and
celerity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.