* 2052214
* SBIR Phase I:  Additive Manufacturing of Silicone Elastomers and Thermosets Using Freeform Reversible Embedding
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,01/31/2022
* Thomas Hinton, FLUIDFORM, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 01/31/2022
* USD 249,644.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to radically expand the types of polymers
that can be 3D printed. Thermosets such as silicones, epoxies, and urethanes are
used across manufacturing because they have excellent chemical, physical, and
mechanical properties, and they can be readily molded. The proposed technology
will enable 3D printing of existing industrial thermosets without modifications
using standard 3D printing technologies available in the market. The technology
addresses an unmet need for industries including consumer electronics,
automotive, aerospace, and medical device by enabling additive manufacturing of
qualified thermoset materials for new applications such as improving the fit and
comfort of wearable electronic devices, lightweighting mechanical components,
and integrating sensors into flexible medical devices. This effort directly
supports advancing national health and defense capabilities through new additive
manufacturing capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I is focused on 3D printing a wide range of previously
unprintable or difficult-to-print thermally-cured, thermoset materials. The
impact will be unlocking a method of 3D printing thermosets without geometric
limits while maintaining dimensional accuracy across features as small as 50 µm,
addressing unmet additive manufacturing needs within consumer electronics,
automotive, aerospace, and medical device industries. While there are current 3D
printers that can utilize photopolymerization to print specific resins, most
engineering thermosets (e.g. silicones, epoxies, and urethanes) remain
unprintable. This project will implement a scientific framework to understand
polymer-solvent interactions during freeform reversible embedding of suspended
hydrogels (FRESH) printing of thermoset inks within yield-stress support baths.
In this process, liquid thermoset inks are extruded within a support bath where
they are cured over time, making solubility, chemistry, and rheology critical
success factors. Platinum-cured silicone is proposed as the initial candidate
thermoset; the project will establish which block copolymers and solvents
possess the right combination of solubility parameters to self-assemble into
microgels that can be compacted to form the yield-stress support bath. FRESH
printing process parameters will be optimized to achieve critical dimensional
accuracy, resolution, fidelity, and mechanical properties of the printed
parts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.