* 2052956
* EAR-PF: Microplastics and Nanoplastics as Vectors for Inorganic Pollution: Examining the Effect of Environmental Systems Conditions on Degradation Pathway and Sorption Potential
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Lauren Pincus, Pincus, Lauren Nicole
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2023
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Lauren Pincus has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship at
Princeton University under the mentorship of Dr. Satish Myneni of Princeton
University and Dr. Peter Ryan of Middlebury College to investigate how
microplastics and nanoplastics bind toxic contaminants as they degrade in the
environment. Plastics are among the most widespread and persistent contaminants
globally; however, large knowledge gaps remain in regards to our understanding
of how plastics degrade in the environment and transport other pollutants that
may be bound to their surface. It is particularly important to understand the
chemistry of microplastics (100 nm - 5 mm) and nanoplastics (&lt; 100 nm) due to
their small size increasing their ability to be ingested by organisms, resulting
in biomagnification of any bound toxic contaminants up the food chain. Dr.
Pincus will investigate how commonly used plastics degrade in the environment
through both field and laboratory experiments. She will then examine the ability
of the aged microplastics/nanoplastics to attract contaminants of environmental
and societal concern such as arsenic and lead. This study will focus on
inorganic contaminants (e.g. toxic metals), as this is a less studied area than
organic pollutants (e.g pesticides). The ultimate goal of this research is to
develop a predictive understanding of how degraded microplastics/nanoplastics
contribute to the spread of toxic pollutants like lead and arsenic. Ultimately,
this knowledge can inform the design of future plastics that can degrade more
safely in the environment without transporting toxic metals. The results of this
research will be shared with the general public through a lecture series at
local businesses, non-profits, and community colleges on plastics in the
environment. Opportunities will also be provided for both undergraduates and
high school students to participate in this research project, with an emphasis
on working with and mentoring students from underrepresented (female, minority,
low-income) backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of this
research is to develop a predictive understanding of how microplastic (MP) and
nanoplastic (NP) degradation affects environmental fate of inorganic
contaminants. Specifically, this project aims to: 1. Determine how environmental
conditions affect the degradation pathway of MPs and NPs, 2. Investigate
differences in MP and NP sorption potential towards inorganic contaminants
throughout the degradation process, 3. Identify key functional groups that
control contaminant sorption by MPs and NPs, and 4. Elucidate the role of metal
(hydr)oxide precipitates and biofilm formation on adsorption of inorganic
contaminants by MPs and NPs. A combination of field and laboratory studies will
be used in order to isolate key environmental factors driving MP/NP weathering
mechanisms that increase their sorption capacity towards inorganic contaminants.
Ultimately this knowledge will enable design of plastics capable of safely
degrading in the environment without the unintended hazard of serving as vectors
for pollutant transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.