* 2052118
* STTR Phase I:  Blockchain ontology and services for monitoring and performing analytics on smart contracts
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2022,05/31/2023
* Donald Josey, GLOSSIFI INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 05/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this STTR project addresses a paradox
faced by ‘open web’ developers, users, and regulators: the use of centralized
platform-creator hosted web portals to interact with an evolving decentralized
finance (DeFi) application ecosystem. The proposed work will instrument a new
open web paradigm that will improve user accessibility and ability to compose
and perform data analysis on smart contracts. The approach will enable
improvement of web-service reliability and security while weeding out bad
actors. Improving the accessibility and analysis of smart contracts is
anticipated to help unlock further value and solutions across a range of
applications and new business opportunities that can benefit from dynamic
contracting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to build a
blockchain-adjacent metadata model that enhances the utility and security of
smart contracts for users and developers. The project will undertake the
practical challenge of reverse-engineering smart contracts to outline a metadata
model which will enhance discovery and security of services, creating a scaffold
for composable apps. The approach will organize blockchain abstractions through
code similarity analysis and program de-obfuscation by reverse engineering,
instrument compile-time creation and publish metadata models by developers, and
demonstrate how this data can be used to build a composable app user experience.
The project will deploy privacy-preserving targeted advertising frameworks using
deterministic services alongside the data from the metadata
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.