* 2052347
* I-Corps: Low-cost photothermal nanosensors for quantitative biomarker detection using a thermometer
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2021,01/31/2023
* XiuJun Li, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of new, low-cost, portable biomarker detection methods in response
to the growing market of biomolecular detectors for various applications such as
disease diagnosis and cancer biomarker detection at the point of care. For
example, prostate cancer is the second leading cause of cancer death in men in
the United States. It is estimated that 191,930 new cases and 33,330 deaths from
this disease will occur this year. However, the current technologies for
prostate cancer diagnosis are invasive, and require expensive instrumentation,
which significantly impairs their capacity for point-of-care (POC) detection in
low-resource settings such as physician’s offices or at a patient’s bedside. The
proposed photothermal nanobiosensor uses a thermometer for quantitative
biosensing. The nanobiosensor is rapid, low-cost, minimally invasive, and does
not require expensive equipment and trained personnel for data recording and
processing; This may enable prostate-specific antigen (PSA, a prostate cancer
biomarker) testing in small physician’s offices. The thermometer-based
nanobiosensor also may be used to detect a variety of other disease biomarkers
and biochemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of the thermometer-based nanosensor for point-of-care (POC)
detection of biomarkers such as the prostate-specific antigen (PSA). The
innovation is based on a biosensing method using a thermometer as the signal
reader. The thermometer-based nanobiosensor is not only rapid, low-cost, and
portable, but also minimizes instrumentation requirements. In addition, the
nanobiosensor offers comparable detection sensitivity to conventional
immunoassay methods. The proposed photothermal immunosensor may open up new
opportunities for affordable detection of disease
biomarkers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.