* 2052827
* IUCRC Phase I Caltech: Center to Stream Healthcare In Place (C2SHIP)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2026
* Yu-Chong Tai, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 04/30/2026
* USD 449,999.00

Hospitalization costs in the United States are among the world’s highest.
However, such costs do not reflect highest quality of care, particularly for
chronic health conditions. Immediate action is needed to shift from a model
relying on care in hospital settings, to a model in which patients manage their
health from home. The Center to Stream Healthcare In Place (C2SHIP) unites the
best minds in medicine and bioengineering with leaders in biomedical research
and industry, to develop and promote in-place care technologies. The University
of Arizona serves as the C2SHIP Lead Site with Partner Sites being University of
Southern California, Baylor College of Medicine, and California Institute of
Technology. C2SHIP will accelerate innovation through partnerships, multi-
specialty collaborations, resource sharing, and educating workforce to promote
self-care technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center’s trans-disciplinary
team will pursue research and development in new sensors, wearable technology,
system integration, intelligent data mining, and comprehensive data
visualization. Through “Digital Health”, patient data can be streamed to medical
professionals at remote locations, establishing a mobile hub for vulnerable
patients in their own home, and personalizing care coordination. C2SHIP will
focus on mitigating physiological, environmental, and psychological changes for
timely management and intervention. Caltech will focus on developing new
materials, devices, and artificial intelligence tools for data analysis and
visualization. Caltech will collaborate with other sites for the clinical
evaluation of the developed technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center will
accelerate knowledge and intellectual property transfer between academia and
industry through collaborative partnerships. This will promote rapid development
of new technologies, and transform health care delivery by enhancing the quality
of life of chronically-ill patients, while reducing health care costs and
preventing hospitalizations. Student engagement in the proposed research
projects will create opportunities with Center companies and organizations, and
provide multidisciplinary participation at C2SHIP conferences and workshops.
Caltech will recruit students and engage faculty across Divisions, e.g., in
engineering, chemistry and biology. Caltech promotes an inclusive environment,
allowing the Center to engage underrepresented individuals from diverse
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data produced from the projects will be housed
at C2SHIP Center’s shared servers using a password protected Box data sharing
folder. Box is a cloud computing business which provides file-sharing,
collaborating, and other tools for working with files that are uploaded to its
servers. Data will be maintained for five years. Caltech’s projects that collect
patient data will be approved by its IRB office prior to project onset. All data
will be deidentified, with no personal identifiers recorded or retained in any
form.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.