* 2052676
* Collaborative Research: Personalized Modeling of Alzheimer’s Disease
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Jeffrey Petrella, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2024
* USD 224,999.00

Alzheimer's disease (AD) affects more than 5 million people in the US. Although
the FDA recently granted approval for a disease-modifying therapy for AD,
questions remain regarding the efficacy of removing amyloid plaques for delaying
cognitive decline. The conflicting results of clinical trials of anti-amyloid
agents as well as the 99% failure rate of trials of other classes of AD
treatments are rooted in an incomplete understanding of the complex mechanisms
resulting in AD, and how the response to treatment may vary in the individual.
Personalized optimization of treatment of AD will likely play a central role in
future management and counseling of patients. Such treatment will be facilitated
by the growing availability of electronic AD brain data. Although to date there
are no clinical markers that can easily distinguish AD patients, nor predict AD
risk, mathematical modeling and computational techniques could be helpful for
constructing a personalized brain environment virtually to predict AD risk and
therapeutic response. This project aims to provide an AD personalized prediction
via validating a mathematical model on a multi-institutional dataset of AD
biomarkers. Personalized therapeutic simulation studies for AD patients will
also be performed via the validated mathematical model. Through their
involvement with this project, graduate and undergraduate students will receive
interdisciplinary training in both mathematical biology and AD
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this project is to develop
an operational understanding of AD using an integrated mathematical modeling
approach, based on clinical, omics, imaging, and other biomarker data to
accelerate drug discovery. The project will use publicly available data from the
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database to develop a
personalized multifactorial mathematical model of AD progression that identifies
patient-specific triggers, predicts disease trajectory, and simulates
therapeutic response. The investigators plan to accomplish the objective through
three specific aims: 1) Validate a newly developed mathematical model of AD
using patient data from the ADNI database; 2) Expand the AD model by integrating
spatial information available from multidimensional imaging biomarkers; 3)
Develop personalized therapeutic plans for AD patients via mathematical
modeling. At the completion of the project, the investigators expect to have a
personalizable, data-driven mathematical model that will yield future personal
biomarker trajectory predictions as well as model-optimized single or
combination therapeutic strategies. The resulting model should enhance the
ability to predict AD trajectory at an individual level and thereby accelerate
personalized treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being co-funded by
the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) Mathematical Biology and
Computational Mathematics programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.