* 2052004
* Collaborative Research: How does the deep critical zone (CZ) structure impact the hydrology and coupled carbon cycling of northern peatlands?
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Lee Slater, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 208,539.00

Northern peatlands are a unique type of wetland found in the northern United
States and a dominant landform at higher latitudes, including Canada, northern
Scandinavia and Russia. Industrial development has led to some peatlands being
drained or burned to promote agriculture, construction or use for fuel. Today,
peatlands are recognized as unique ecosystems that support a diverse range of
plants not found elsewhere. Furthermore, they are an important part of a global
carbon cycle trapping carbon dioxide in organic matter and storing approximately
33% of the total carbon found in soils. Peatlands release some of this carbon to
the atmosphere as methane, a potent greenhouse gas. Although the ecology of
peatlands is well studied, the geological controls on peatland development and
the percolation patterns of peatland water are not completely understood. In
Maine (USA), peatlands began forming about 10,000 years ago following the
retreat of the ice sheets and glaciers at the end of the last ice age. They
formed in depressions, often starting as lakes, within the landscape carved by
glaciers and draped with sediments. These landforms lie buried beneath peatlands
but may play a key role in regulating both the hydrology and release of methane
gasses into the atmosphere. This project will use subsurface geophysical sensing
methods to image this hidden post-glacial landscape in order to understand how
it regulates groundwater flow in peatlands and where/when methane emissions
occur. Hydrological observations and computer simulations of deeper groundwater
and peat porewater flow will be compared to direct measurements of methane gas
emissions from peatlands in the search for evidence that peatland hydrology and
carbon cycling are regulated by this hidden landscape. In addition to advancing
scientific understanding of the link between hydrologic processes in the deep
critical zone of northern peatlands and carbon fluxes to the atmosphere, this
project will bring unique elements of benefit to society. It will contribute to
the development of a diverse workforce with a strong engagement of
underrepresented students, support graduate and undergraduate students, and
build collaborative interactions with the forest management
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to evaluate how the
deep critical zone regulates coupled water-carbon processes across peatland
landforms at a regional scale. Geophysical imaging, hydrological observations
and computational modeling of groundwater flow and transport will be performed
across 10 peatlands to explore three hypotheses (abbreviated here): [1]
Unidentified esker (glacially derived sand and gravel) ridges lie buried beneath
numerous Maine peatlands; [2] These (or similar) permeable deposits
hydraulically connect peatland pore waters to the underlying groundwater
aquifer; and [3] This hydraulic connection results in hotspots of methane
release centered on buried permeable mineral deposits. Ground penetrating radar
and frequency domain electromagnetics will be used to illuminate the geological
framework beneath these peatlands and to locate buried esker deposits. Coring
and permeability tests will constrain flow and transport models calibrated on
[1] hydraulic heads recorded with pressure transducers connected to data
loggers, and [2] specific conductance measured in water samples. Ebullition
fluxes will be estimated at predicted methane hotspots using low maintenance
methods (gas traps, moisture probe arrays). Underrepresented minority students
from urban areas will engage in wilderness research experiences focusing on all
aspects of data acquisition. A collaboration with a forestry management company
secures access to privately owned peatlands for research. Informational
brochures describing peatland processes investigated in this project will be
developed targeting the local community and the State of
Maine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.