* 2052687
* Active Cortical Domains Coupled by Bulk Diffusion Framework for Modeling Spatiotemporal Phenomena in Cell Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Alexandra Jilkine, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2024
* USD 254,711.00

Cell growth and division requires cells to polarize by forming distinct
compartments with different molecular components. Faulty cell polarization
contributes to birth defects or diseases such as cancer. The PI will develop
stochastic and deterministic models to better understand how biochemical factors
in the cell interact and regulate each other for proper cell function. This
project will model the segregation of chemical reactions taking place on cell
membranes and in the interior of the cell. Such segregation is thought to give
rise to interesting dynamical phenomena, such as oscillations of the central
polarity regulator, Cdc42, and establishment of multiple polarity zones. The
effects of compartmentalization and geometry on the dynamics of polarization is
just beginning to be explored and may lead to novel biological insights of how
cell polarity is maintained in cells. The PIâ€™s long term educational goal is to
encourage female undergraduate and graduate students to pursue careers in STEM
fields, specifically in Applied Mathematics. Broader educational impacts will
involve organizing a workshop for undergraduate and graduate students at the
University of Notre Dame. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will focus on
establishment of polarity in fission yeast and budding yeast, two model
organisms for understanding how cells integrate polarity and spatial
coordination of growth. The current mathematical approach to modeling cell
polarity using reaction-diffusion equations does not take into effect the
spatial segregation of polarity molecules in the cell. The goal of this project
is to model cell signaling occurring during cell polarization by coupling bulk
diffusion to active surface-bound chemical species. The PI will apply this bulk-
surface PDEs framework to specific scientific aims: (1) Extend the deterministic
bulk-cytosol 1D model framework to a spatial stochastic one that describes the
inherent noise in the underlying biochemical system, and compare model findings
for increasing cell size and molecule number using compartment based SSA
approach, (2) Extend the 1D framework to higher dimensions, where cortical
domains are modeled as a thin patches to allow for lateral diffusion and the
cytosol is modeled as an enclosed volume, and consider effects of cell geometry
on intracellular signaling. The educational objectives of this proposal are: 1)
organize a workshop for undergraduate women encouraging them to pursue careers
in Applied Mathematics and other STEM fields, 2) participate in Women Leaders in
STEM program at Notre Dame, 3) develop new materials for graduate course on
Mathematical Cell Biology, which will be open to interdisciplinary students, 4)
lecture in existing national educational programs such as the q-bio Summer
School that introduces students from diverse disciplines such as mathematics,
physics, and computer science to modeling in biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is being co-funded by the MPS Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS)
through the Mathematical Biology Program and the BIO Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences (MCB) through the Cellular Dynamics and Function
Cluster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.