* 2052561
* Collaborative Research:  Improving estimates of Greenland’s freshwater flux:  Where do icebergs form and where do they melt?
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Ellyn Enderlin, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 297,977.00

Greenland is a large reservoir of fresh, frozen water that flows downhill until
it reaches the ocean. Some of this frozen reservoir melts at the surface and
directly enters the ocean. Some of the ice instead breaks off, making icebergs
that melt as they float around the ocean like ice cubes in a glass of water.
Where and when this freshwater enters the ocean can influence the ocean currents
that carry heat, salt, and vital nutrients for marine life. However, we cannot
tell if recent changes to the amount of Greenland ice that is melted and mixed
into the ocean are important because we don’t yet have accurate maps of where
exactly this freshwater enters the ocean. In this project, we will combine 1)
photos of Greenland’s coastline taken from satellites and 2) measurements of the
warm, salty, and fast coastal waters taken from ships and instruments in the
ocean. From these observations we will create new maps of how much Greenland
icebergs melted from 2010 to 2023. Our science team will develop outreach
activities that focus on iceberg melting and will work with an artist to educate
the public about the importance of iceberg melt and inspire them to think more
about the Earth’s fascinating icy features. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing
freshwater flux from the Greenland Ice Sheet influences ocean properties, with
potentially large consequences for circulation, marine ecosystems, and climate
at local-to-global scales. The severity of the downstream effects depends on:
the fingerprint of meltwater runoff from the ice-sheet surface, meltwater
produced where the ice sheet flows into the relatively warm and salty ocean, and
meltwater injected into the ocean by the gradual decay of icebergs. Variations
in freshwater produced by iceberg melt are poorly mapped and yet may be
incredibly important since icebergs can transport cold, fresh meltwater far from
the ice-sheet margins to remote ocean basins. In this project, we will combine
independent iceberg melt rate estimation methods using satellite and ocean
observations. We will investigate the drivers of iceberg melt and also quantify
potential errors and the uncertainty in each of our methods. We will pair the
iceberg melt rate estimates with observations of iceberg production from the
Greenland Ice Sheet to construct time series of iceberg freshwater flux from
2010 to 2023. The project will yield time series of iceberg meltwater flux maps
and determine how iceberg meltwater compares to other freshwater sources, such
as surface and subglacial meltwater runoff from the ice sheet. We will also
produce several novel datasets (e.g., spatially distributed iceberg size
distributions, melt rates, and freshwater flux time series) that will be
valuable for studies focused on ice sheet-ocean interactions. We will
incorporate data products produced by the project into the open-source
QGreenland geographic information system package as part of efforts to increase
data accessibility and use. The project also provides an opportunity for two
female early career scientists to strengthen their research programs, and we
will emphasize recruitment of underrepresented groups for junior personnel.
Finally, the project team will develop K–12 outreach activities that demonstrate
iceberg melting in a fish-tank fjord and will work with an artist who has
experience in creatively disseminating polar research to a broad range of
audiences; this will enable us to communicate our project findings more
effectively to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.