* 2052594
* EAR-PF The scale-dependent interplay between fault material strength, roughness and friction
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Valere Lambert, Lambert                 Valere         R
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 05/31/2023
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Valère Lambert has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
investigate the ways that rock strength, the shape of a fault’s surface, and
friction can affect the behavior of faults and thus hazards associated with
earthquakes. The majority of what is known about the mechanics of faults comes
from small-scale (&lt;1 meter) experiments but natural fault systems are much
larger (tens to thousands of meters). Because laboratory experiments and
numerical studies indicate that rock strength and friction measurements vary
with scale, application of laboratory experiment results to natural systems
requires careful consideration of how to adjust for differences between natural
and laboratory scales. This study aims to establish a framework for scaling up
by clarifying relationships among rock strength, the shape and roughness of the
fault surface, and friction at a variety of scales. Determining a framework for
appropriately-scaled descriptions of friction and rock strength has important
implications for earthquake science and engineering. The project will also
support research opportunities for undergraduate students as University of
California Santa Cruz, as well as development of educational earthquake
simulations and an outreach video series oriented towards the general public
addressing topics in earthquake physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Obtaining a better
understanding of the relationship between fault material strength and the
deformation of fault asperities at varying scales will contribute to our general
understanding of fault topography evolution and frictional behavior. This
project will assess the feasibility of using measurements of fault roughness as
the basis for bridging laboratory and natural scales and aims to develop
computational homogenization tools for determining macroscale material and
structural features from microscale fault properties. The project will directly
measure the scale-dependent material properties of natural fault samples in the
laboratory and explore how the aggregate behavior of microstructural features,
such as material heterogeneity and layering, maps into the yielding of surface
asperities at varying scales. The project will then explore what role scale-
dependent material strength plays in the evolution of fault roughness and the
apparent frictional behavior under shear motion. This work will examine if there
is an inherent link between scale-dependent material properties and structure,
both in the topography of the interface as well as material layering. If such a
relationship exists, this may form the basis to a scheme for inferring spatial
trends in rock strength and extrapolating frictional behavior to field scales
using extant measurements of fault roughness. Such an approach could have broad
applications in materials science, including implications of material layering
on frictional behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.