* 2052589
* EAR-PF: Environmental source apportionment and soil-household dust relationships of urban metal  pollutants across different regions and seasons
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Matthew Dietrich, Dietrich, Matthew
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 09/30/2022
* USD 100,079.00

An NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship has been granted to Dr. Matthew Dietrich to
conduct research and scientific outreach activities at Indiana Universityâ€“Purdue
University Indianapolis (IUPUI) under the mentorship of Professor Gabriel
Filippelli. Research will be focused on understanding the complex relationships
between heavy metal pollutants in urban soils and urban household dusts, with a
particular focus on lead (Pb). Pb is a toxic element that especially affects
children, leading to adverse health effects such as cognitive impairment.
Hundreds of thousands of children in the U.S. still have blood Pb concentrations
that harm their development, and this disproportionately affects children of
color. Research in understanding mobilization, transport, and the sourcing of Pb
and other heavy metals in urban environments is underdeveloped, particularly in
the U.S., and is essential for efficient intervention and addressing
environmental justice issues. Thus, through using community members in two
contrasting urban centers, Indianapolis, U.S. and Sydney, Australia, Dr.
Dietrich will analyze household dust and soil samples to better understand where
the heavy metal pollutants are coming from and how seasonal, climatic, and
geologic variability affects the transfer of pollutants in dusts and soils.
Innovative geochemical techniques such as copper (Cu), zinc (Zn), and Pb
isotopes will help with assigning proportions of specific pollutant source
contributions, while high resolution imaging such as scanning electron
microscopy (SEM) will help characterize pollutant particles in the dusts and
soils. Outreach and community involvement in this project is essential, as local
community members in each city will provide samples from their own households,
which not only improves sampling resolution, but will allow Dr. Dietrich to
directly communicate findings to the community members and the action steps they
can take if pollution is detected. Additionally, scientific education to both
community members supplying the samples and the greater community at large is an
essential part of this project. Specifically, partnerships with local inner-city
high schools in Indianapolis and undergraduate classes at IUPUI will help in
both dissemination of results and additional sampling. All data will eventually
be freely available at www.mapmyenvironment.com, providing the ideal platform
for accessible data for both research scientists and community members
alike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through using household dusts and soils from homes
in Indianapolis, U.S. and Sydney, Australia, this research will address whether
pollution source apportionment and soil-dust relationships at the household
scale can be agglomerated together to provide useful trends at the city scale. A
large sample set collected with the help of local community members offers a
unique opportunity to holistically utilize geochemical techniques to investigate
heavy metal pollution at scales typically not easily accessible for research.
The techniques utilized will be full geochemical characterization of urban
dusts/soils (e.g., mineralogy, percent organic carbon), and multiple metal
isotope (Pb, Zn and Cu) ratios/multivariate statistics (i.e., principal
component analysis) to differentiate between pollutant source endmembers (i.e.,
soils, house paint, vehicle wear, etc.) and the household dust to which children
and adults are routinely exposed. These techniques will help answer the research
questions: (1) why are some metals such as Cu and Zn (but not Pb) much higher in
dusts relative to soils, and do different geographic regions have differing
soil-household dust element correlations because of differing mineralogy,
climate, and other geochemical characteristics?, (2) do household dusts contain
different isotopic ratios and therefore pollutant sources in some seasons
compared to others?, and (3) is there regional household dust isotopic variation
between Sydney and Indianapolis that points to variation in geogenic background,
climate, or pollutant sources in an area? The novel approach of using multiple
metal isotopes for source apportionment with multivariate statistics over
different spatial and temporal scales provides a new and improved holistic
framework for better identifying the greatest threats to human heavy metal
exposure. Greater understanding of inorganic pollutant cycling in urban settings
will ultimately enable more efficient intervention methods and thus improved
support for pollution remediation, particularly in areas disproportionately
affected by pollution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.