* 2052714
* IUCRC Phase I Georgia Institute of Technology: Center for Composite and Hybrid Materials Interfacing (CHMI)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Chun Zhang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2026
* USD 340,000.00

The Center for Composite and Hybrid Materials Interfacing (CHMI) seeks to
generate knowledge and capabilities in joining, bonding, and maintenance of
composite and hybrid material structures by applying reliable, data-driven,
automated processes using advanced analytical, computational, experimental, and
digital techniques and tools. It is a partnership between Oakland University
(OU), Georgia Institute of Technology (GT) and University of Tennessee,
Knoxville (UTK). The significant advantages of lightweight composite and hybrid
materials for aerospace, automotive, infrastructure, and biomedical applications
come with scientific, technical, and economic challenges that must be addressed
for the U.S. to be a global manufacturing leader. The interfaces in these
materials systems are identified as a critical barrier due to fabrication costs
and inconsistent performance (especially in aggressive environments). The goal
of CHMI is to significantly reduce cost (≥50%), cycle time, and variation of
such engineering operations in ten years. The Georgia Tech (GT) Site has
research and educational programs related to composites and advanced materials
manufacturing, and industry partnerships with over 50 companies and government
organizations related to CHMI. The Site’s CHMI-related research is supported by
an interdisciplinary research team with expertise in material chemistry,
processing / synthesis, manufacturing, design/modeling, data analytics, and
testing that is paired with facilities for materials characterization,
processing/fabrication, NDE, testing, computation and design, and data
processing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three partnering universities have well-
established, complementary expertise in lightweight composite and hybrid
materials. They will work together on four industry-inspired research thrust
areas: (1) Design, Modeling and Analysis, (2) Materials and Process Engineering,
(3) Testing and NDE, and (4) Secure Data and Digital Technologies. Each
university has emphasized different industry sectors (GT-Aerospace, OU-
Automotive/Ground Vehicle, UTK-Infrastructure and Biomedical), which ensures the
inclusion of university and industry perspectives across a wide range of U.S.
manufacturing. The CHMI IUCRC will develop a Convergent Research Development
Environment that will identify and conduct industry-inspired pre-competitive,
innovative research in the area of interfacing composites and hybrid materials.
The GT Site will focus on the aerospace industry’s needs for accurate
computational prediction methods for the composite vehicle structures through
its research on computation and design, processing/fabrication, characterization
and testing, non-destructive evaluation (NDE), and data analytics. Specifically,
research efforts will include computational design methods for joining of
structures of composites/hybrid materials, modeling and characterization of
interfacial bonding, monitoring crack formation in bonded composites, NDE
techniques for CHMI applications, privacy-preserving predictive analytics for
structural monitoring and maintenance and the development of other breakthrough
technologies that drive industry to mitigate risk and improve
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.