* 2052951
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Efficient Plausible Deniability Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Radu Sion, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,728.00

Data privacy is essential in today’s computing-infused societal structures.
Encryption is usually the first line of defense against privacy violations.
However, upon compelled disclosure of encryption keys plaintexts are immediately
revealed to powerful adversaries. Oppressive regimes increasingly practice such
forced disclosure to actively censor and filter networks, routinely investigate
and imprison journalists and rights activists, and generally fight fiercely
against any compromising information being presented to the outside world. The
problem at the heart of this work is often a matter of life and death to
journalists, human rights activists, whistleblowers, and individual citizens
Existing systems that tries to address this problem, break down in the presence
of realistic adversaries that can access the storage media at multiple points in
time (“multi-snapshot” adversary). This work will design and build strongly
secure highly practical plausible deniable storage mechanisms that are robust
against a multi-snapshot adversary enabling users to plausibly deny the
possession of certain data even when the adversary has access to the user
storage devices and credentials. Research results from this project would be
incorporated into both undergraduate and graduate level courses and would help
train the next generation workforce in plausible deniability paradigm and
technology. Plausible deniability is vital for human rights activists,
whistleblowers in oppressive regimes, and citizens concerned about privacy as a
right, since it is perhaps the only remaining recourse to ensuring personal
privacy in a world of increasing control, oversight, and
censorship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will advance the foundational
understanding of plausible deniability across a broad swath of storage systems
and media. It will combine different technology, such as, faster access privacy
mechanisms, data encoding mechanisms using write-once memory, trusted execution
environments to harden deniability in the system stack and machine learning for
addressing cover traffic information, to provide a robust plausibly deniable
storage system. It will build multiple systems that will be released for public
use and integrated into mainstream operating systems. The work will also show
the wide-ranging implications of strongly secure plausible deniability
mechanisms by designing, building and demonstrating the world’s first “snoop-
proof” Signal encrypted smartphone messaging application thereby defeating
adversaries able to coerce users to reveal encryption
keys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.