* 2052633
* AGS-PRF: Resolving High-Resolution Paleoclimate Variability in Subarctic Canada across the Mid Pleistocene Transition and Interglacial Periods of the Last 1.5 Ma
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Cameron Batchelor, Batchelor, Cameron J
* Fellowship Award
* David Verardo
* 03/31/2024
* USD 190,000.00

Speleothem-based paleoclimate reconstructions provide some of the highest-
resolution terrestrial climate records. This proposal aims to characterize past
interglacial Pleistocene climate variability in mid-continental, subarctic
Canada using a rare collection of slow-growing subarctic speleothems. The
researcher will combine a set of analytical tools to these speleothems
including, novel geochronological techniques (U-Pb), micro-analytical technique
(secondary ion mass spectrometry, SIMS), and imaging (confocal fluorescent laser
microscopy, CFLM) to reconstruct high-latitude North American paleoclimate.
These new records will investigate whether high-latitude climates were more or
less variable during past interglacial periods that were even warmer than today,
such as the warmest interglacial period of the last 800 ka. The potential
results of this project will include resolving broad records of temperature
changes across different interglacial stages of the last 1.5 Million years, as
well as providing snapshots of high-frequency (sub-annual to sub-decadal)
hydroclimate variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts are
twofold: (1) professional development of the postdoctoral fellow, and (2)
community engagement. The postdoctoral researcher will gain first-hand
experience in novel geochronology methods to date speleothems records in one of
the only labs in the United States that is set up for U-Pb dating of
speleothems. Additionally, the postdoctoral fellow will gain mentoring
experience through direct work and interaction with undergraduate and graduate
students. The research finding of this project will be shared with local
communities in Northwest Territories (Canada) by setting up a two-way
collaborative network that will, 1) Expose and engage students and staff at
Aurora College (the only post-secondary institution within the Northwest
Territories) about active climate research projects at Northwest Territory
caves, and 2) Teach the postdoctoral fellow and project colleagues about the
impact Arctic warming has on local indigenous communities. As part of these
outreach efforts, educational and interactive display materials will be
distributed to local municipalities, specifically Aurora College. One of the
goals of this outreach plan will be to share what is learned from the people
living in the communities of the Northwest Territories to climate scientists at
Geoscience meetings (e.g. AGU) to better science communication initiatives and
relay the broader societal impact of climate science
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.