* 2052455
* New techniques for analyzing the long-term behavior of intracellular networks
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Eduardo Sontag, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2024
* USD 305,466.00

Living cells depend on delicate intracellular networks for their correct
functioning. These networks are composed of genes, messenger RNA, proteins,
metabolites, and other internal and external chemicals. Any alteration of these
networks can lead to pathologies in development, cell proliferation, and other
functions. The study of how networks change in time (dynamics) is the focus of a
sustained research effort by the mathematical biology community. Yet, many
fundamental questions remain open. The central goal of this research is to
advance our understanding and develop a theoretical and computational framework
for the structural analysis of global dynamical properties of intracellular
networks. The project will involve the participation of undergraduate, graduate,
and postdoctoral students from the mathematical, engineering, and physical
sciences. The results of this mathematical work will have scientific relevance
much beyond the molecular realm, because the same formalism can be used to model
phenomena at different levels of biological and ecological organization, from
cells to tissues to organisms to ecological systems and epidemics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop novel analytical and
computational approaches to characterize the behavior of highly nonlinear
biological systems. Motivated by a wide variety of applications, it will study
core elements of the larger networks that control fundamental cellular processes
such as transcription and translation, cell growth and division, migration, and
differentiation. These include processes such as gene regulation, protein post-
translational modifications by phosphorylation or methylation, kinetic
proofreading in T cell receptor activation, ribosome translation elongation
processes, and other regulatory and signaling pathways. Questions such as set
invariance (when do the dynamics preserve a "safe" set, not violating
physiological constraints?), stability (when does the system return to
homoeostasis values after, or even during persistent, perturbations?), and
robustness of qualitative behavior under parameter changes can be framed and
analyzed through a common mathematical language. Specifically, the work will
provide computationally explicit "certificates" that guarantee invariance,
stability, or robustness, expressed in the formalism of Biological Interaction
Networks (BINs), that allow for the verification of system properties just from
the stoichiometric structure, even in the face of substantial uncertainty
regarding parameters and even the exact form of the reaction kinetics. This
project will expand the class of networks that can be analyzed with the
technique, proving new theorems, finding more efficient constructions of
certificates, introducing additional tools, and analyzing the effect of inputs,
such as ligands in receptor systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.