* 2052565
* IUCRC Phase I IUPUI: Center for Environmental Sustainability through Insect Farming (CEIF)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Christine Picard, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2026
* USD 272,724.00

This Industry University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) for Environmental
Sustainability through Insect Farming (CEIF) represents a first of its kind
IUCRC to support the animal nutrition and human food industries that go beyond
conventional protein sources currently available. At current rates of population
growth, traditional agriculture will be under intense pressure to meet protein
demands. Insect farming can increase the food supply for both animals and
humans. In addition, sustainable and cost effective methods for remediating
agricultural waste while producing high value protein is essential to the long
term health of ecosystems and agriculture. Select insects can take waste, such
as that produced in agro-ecosystems or urban environments, and convert it into
protein and compost. Industry can utilize the knowledge created in the center to
further explore the use of insect protein, with suitable regulatory approvals,
as food for humans and animals. Thus, insect-farming and its innovations could
represent a circular economy, which reduces land and/or water use and reduces
greenhouse gas emissions. Insect farming may also relieve the stress imposed on
marine and agricultural resources to generate protein for food and animal feed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Environmental Sustainability through Insect
Farming (CEIF) will be comprised of three sites (Indiana University-Purdue
University Indianapolis [IUPUI], Texas A&amp;M AgriLife Research [TAMU], and
Mississippi State University [MSU]), with each site specializing in a specific
area of research. TAMU will serve as the lead site for the center. The sites
will work collaboratively to deliver Industry desired fundamental research into
the genetics/genomics of the insect systems, evaluating the heritability of
traits, and a determination of the genetic contribution to traits, allowing for
future optimization of mass production. Through this research, new knowledge and
technologies that fill critical scientific and industrial gaps that relate to
the insect farming as related to livestock and aquaculture production and for
insects for human consumption. Laboratory and field-based experiments will also
engage interdisciplinary expertise in microbiology, engineering, chemistry, food
nutrition, physiology, and vertebrate biology with cutting edge
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.