* 2052735
* IUCRC Phase III Colorado State University: Center for a Solar Powered Future (SPF2050)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Kurt Barth, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2026
* USD 536,000.00

Energy sustainability represents one of the grand challenges facing modern
society; Solar power provides an important source of renewable energy.
Photovoltaics (PV) or solar cells are solid-state, semiconductor-based devices
that convert sunlight directly to electricity and do not generate pollution,
emissions, or greenhouse gases during operation. The I/UCRC for Solar a Powered
Future is focuses on PV research. The center promotes science and advances
prosperity and welfare through the Center's ongoing research and education
programs. These programs are focused on bringing down PV system costs,
increasing PV system efficiencies, and enabling the widespread the use of PV
electricity. The Center's research vision is to enable the US and the world
achieve a zero-carbon footprint by 2050 using solar energy as a resource. There
are currently two research sites in the Center: Colorado State University (CSU)
and the University of Texas at Austin (UT Austin). The PV-training approach at
CSU is strongly team based: students from different disciplines including a
significant number of women and veterans, work closely with each other, with
engineers from industry, and, in many cases, with students at other
universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CSU site is focused on reducing the cost
of solar energy by advancing thin film PV device performance, performing state-
of-the-art materials characterization, streamlining manufacturing, performing
quantum simulation, and improving module reliability. A key goal of the CSU site
is to advance the state of the art by designing PV device structures with higher
efficiencies, advanced module package designs, and advanced materials and
materials characterization. A key research thrust is to demonstrate still higher
cell efficiencies. Quantum simulations will aid this research. Reducing module
manufacturing and materials costs while improving reliability and facilitating
deployment are additional areas of focus. These advances have been demonstrated
on pilot scale systems with a direct line of sight to industrial manufacturing.
The efforts will lead to lower LCOE (levelized cost of electricity) and help
facilitate the goal of 2-3 cents/kWhr. Overall, center has the potential to both
increase the impact of the multi-billion-dollar U.S. PV industry that is growing
rapidly and greatly expand the application of solar
electricity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.