* 2052245
* RUI: Antecedents of Servant Leadership Experiences for Underrepresented Students
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Laura Lakusta, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 474,079.00

This project will investigate the cognitive and developmental antecedents of
servant leadership. The benefits of leading by serving the needs of others are
well-known, especially in the context of organizational leadership. Yet, few
studies have investigated predictors of servant leadership and none have
investigated how leaders develop to think and behave in ways that create a cycle
of servant leadership. Motivated by state-of-the-art leadership and cognitive
psychology theories, this project will systematically investigate the
antecedents of servant leadership. The project integrates established measures
from organizational and cognitive psychology and tests how the following relate
to one’s practice as a servant leader: (1) Theory of Mind (i.e. one’s
understanding of the thoughts, emotions, and intentions of another), (2) ability
to recognize (i.e., perceive and categorize) the essential characteristics of
servant leadership, and (3) specific first-hand experience in serving and/or
leading. This project will examine the nature of experiences that influence
these factors. Specific aims include studying how Theory of Mind and leadership
recognition affect leadership development to advance knowledge about how such
cognitive and social processes interact and systematically capturing the
antecedents of servant leader development to inform the practice of
organizational servant leadership development, by clarifying how components of
cognition, and specific experiences, play a role in leadership emergence. The
proposed research is interdisciplinary, integrating cognitive and organizational
psychology, building a bridge between areas of psychology that have
traditionally been studied separately. This project promotes the involvement of
a diverse set of students from underrepresented groups. Undergraduate students
will be mentored through all aspects of the research by two faculty PIs (each
with a different area of expertise – I/O and Cognitive Psychology), as well as a
Faculty Associate (who has expertise in Human Development - character analysis,
positive youth development, longitudinal design, and pathway modeling), thus
offering students a unique exposure to interdisciplinary scientific research,
with the goal of instilling in them an appreciation for scientific discovery.
Data collection will involve a series of survey and other measures administered
longitudinally to participants in the Benne Leadership program both during and
after college graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded in whole or
in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public Law
117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.