* 2052443
* Collaborative Research: Morphodynamic simulations of coastal storms and overwash to characterize back-barrier lake stratigraphies
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Qin Chen, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 04/30/2024
* USD 353,666.00

Hurricanes constitute major hazards to coastal communities of the eastern United
States, generating strong winds and waves, coastal flooding, and erosion. These
storms often induce overwash, a process where water and sediments flow over
coastal barriers, erode the beach, and deposit sediments atop and behind the
barrier. Geoscientists often use deposits of overwash in coastal ponds to infer
when hurricanes occurred in the past, prior to written and satellite records of
hurricanes. These sedimentary records of past hurricane activity are useful for
constraining the probability of a hurricane making landfall on a stretch of
coastline, or for understanding changes in hurricane frequency in response to
past changes in climate, and are commonly integrated into hazard assessments.
However, these sedimentary records are limited to reconstructing the frequency
of past storms, while inferences into the magnitude or track of these events
remain preliminary. In this project, the investigators will harness recent
advances in computer simulations of coastal sediment transport to develop a new
approach for reconstructing storm strength and track from overwash deposits.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate field-based observations of
overwash from sediment cores with state-of-the-art simulations of observed and
simulated hurricanes to: (i) evaluate the influences of storm properties on
overwash deposition in back-barrier settings, (ii) diagnose the sensitivity of
depositional patterns to geomorphic change, and (iii) relate storm strength and
track to the properties of overwash deposits. This work will deliver
quantitative reconstructions of hurricane magnitude for southern New England — a
heavily-populated region that is vulnerable to tropical cyclones — extending the
historical record of hurricane activity in this region back centuries to provide
insight into strengths and tracks of prehistoric hurricanes that made landfall
in this region. The investigators anticipate that the integrative and scalable
approach developed here will be applicable to other coastlines in the United
States and abroad that are vulnerable to tropical and extratropical cyclones,
and will facilitate the critical challenge of predicting and mitigating against
coastal erosion and flooding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.