* 2052648
* Modeling, Assessing, and Comparing Treatment Protocols to Prevent and Control Antibiotic Resistance
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Shigui Ruan, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 07/31/2024
* USD 280,000.00

The emergence and spread of antimicrobial resistance are considered one of the
biggest threats to human health in the 21st century. Bacteria can develop
defense mechanisms against antibiotics, and the misuse and overuse of
antibiotics are accelerating this process; all antibiotics have lost
effectiveness against their targeted bacteria as of now. The evolutionary
mechanisms for bacteria developing resistance to antibiotics are multifactorial
and differ widely with the bacterial species, antibiotic classes and
generations, route of administration, and the specific antibiotic-bacteria
combination. This project will combine experimental data and mathematical models
to quantify and simulate treatment dynamics for specific antibiotic-bacteria
pairs. The primary objective is to seek optimal antibiotic use protocols on the
patient level and validate theoretical conclusions with experiments. The results
will improve current understanding of antibiotic use strategies and help design
an integrated plan for future antimicrobial stewardship programs. This project
will engage undergraduate and graduate students with interests in
interdisciplinary research from both the main and medicine campuses of the
University of Miami.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first goal of the project is to
develop models that reflect the resistance development mechanism for specific
antibiotic-bacteria combinations. In vitro experimental data will be generated
and linked with the models to estimate the bacterial growth and evolutionary
parameters under different antibiotic concentrations. Second, considering the
immune response and the periodical drug concentrations, within-host bacterial
dynamic models will be developed with periodic coefficients. The investigators
will study the nonlinear dynamics of these models and evaluate the effects of
four major antibiotic protocols: (i) mono-drug therapy, (ii) combination
therapy, (iii) sequential cycling therapy, and (iv) de-escalation therapy.
Third, the investigators will develop novel bacterial population models
formulated in terms of semilinear partial differential equations and structured
with respect to two physiological features: bacterial age and plasmid copies.
The analysis of these models will advance understanding of drug resistance
development at the cellular level and will establish new mathematical results on
partial differential equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.