* 2052844
* EAR-PF: Impact of flooding intensity on levee development and dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Eric Barefoot, Barefoot, Eric A
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 05/31/2024
* USD 174,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Eric Barefoot has been granted
an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry out research and education plans at
Indiana University. Dr. Barefoot will study flooding, a significant natural
hazard that threatens critical infrastructure and communities in the US and
across the world. Artificial embankments (or dikes) along river corridors are
often constructed to reduce flooding hazards and these engineering projects
often take advantage of natural levees on the floodplain. Levees form next to a
river channel when the river floods and sediment spreads out away from the
river. Because levee formation correlates poorly with river attributes, it
remains challenging to predict where and when levees will form. This project
seeks to test a new hypothesis: that the intensity of floods is a key control on
levee formation. By combining analysis of floodplains across the State of
Indiana with monitoring on the Lower Mississippi River, this project will
determine the importance of flood intensity for levee formation. Dr. Barefoot
will also identify processes by which sediment is transported on river
floodplains during floods. These research outcomes will be coupled with an
educational outreach plan that focuses on engaging public-school educators to
produce new curriculum focused on flood hazards and sustainability in Indiana.
Additionally, this project will bolster STEM engagement for LGBTQ+ undergraduate
students through local field-based research opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural levees form and develop during overbank flow, when
sediment-laden water decants from the river, and deposits adjacent to the
channel. The pattern of sediment deposition is controlled by water surface
gradients across the inundated floodplain. The orientation and mag- nitude of
water surface gradients are hypothesized to depend on flooding intensity;
operationally defined here as the coefficient of variation of discharge (CVQ).
However, the impact of flooding intensity on floodplain deposition is poorly
constrained because direct observations of co-evolving floodplain topography and
inundation hydraulics are scarce. This project will quantify the impact of
flooding intensity on floodplain inundation patterns and analyze how resulting
water surface gradients influence levee formation and development. This research
will combine repeat lidar datasets with field surveys and sedimentological
observations on floodplains in Indiana, USA, to compare levee morphology and
composition spanning a range of historical flooding intensities. To link
flooding intensity and sediment dispersal in a mechanistic framework, a
complementary case study will be conducted in an end-member locality typified by
low flooding intensity. In-situ measurements of water surface elevation and
velocity during annual overbank conditions in an engineered section of the
Mississippi River will be paired with repeat lidar topography surveys to couple
inundation hydraulics with topographic evolution. New insights from this project
will fill a critical research need because intensified flooding due to
contemporary climate change threatens sustainability of river corridors. The
scientific outcomes will inform land management strategies while also driving
fundamental advances in sedimentology and
geomorphology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.