* 2052770
* I-Corps: Infrared light-emitting nanoparticles for biological imaging
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2021,01/31/2022
* Vidya Ganapathy, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a cancer surveillance technology with a broad range of
applications from improved surgery guidance in patients to pre-clinical cancer
therapy prognostics. The proposed technology utilizes probes that may be
targeted to the cancers and illuminated using short-wave infrared (SWIR) light
emitted upon excitation, which allows researchers to see cancer lesions deeper
in tissue and with better resolution. This technology will address a major unmet
need in personalized medicine, where patients with difficult to treat cancers
have limited time to pursue the best treatment regimen. The solution relies on
harvesting, grafting and screening patient cancers using animal models to
rapidly identify the most effective, patient-specific treatment. The global
small animal imaging market is expected to grow by 6-8% to $3.6 billion by 2024
(“Preclinical Imaging Market Analysis” Grandview Research; 2016), while optical
imaging represents ~20% of the market. The proposed technology has the potential
to expand and disrupt some of the current optical imaging technologies within
this market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a cancer surveillance technology, a bundled disease and drug
screening platform of infrared light-emitting, cancer-targeted nanoprobes paired
with an imaging system for scanning live animals. The nanoprobes have a rare
earth nanoparticle core (Er3+, Ho3+, Tm3+) and are rendered biocompatible
through encapsulation in an albumin shell. When excited with near-infrared (NIR)
light, they emit short-wave infrared (SWIR) light that travels further through
blood and tissue than does light from other optical imaging modalities, thus
allowing imaging of tumors and other tissues deeper in the animal. The rare
earth-based nanoprobes have been shown to detect smaller deep-seated diseased
lesions in the animal and have been used to monitor multi-organ metastases
longitudinally. The proposed nanoprobes are engineered to emit at multiple
differentiated narrow bandwidth SWIR wavelengths, resulting in the unique
ability to multiplex for detection of multiple diagnostic markers. The proposed
technology has been shown to have significantly greater sensitivity for early
detection of cancers than the current standard for preclinical imaging
(bioluminescence (BLI) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)). In addition, the
technology has been used to track the response of different tumor subsets to
drugs, positioning it as one of the first methods for precise detection of
therapy response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.