* 2052947
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Microverification of Information-Flow Security for the Linux Operating System Kernel
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2025
* Jason Nieh, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 02/28/2025
* USD 1,167,034.00

Commodity operating system (OS) kernels form the backbone of today's computing
infrastructure. Despite their importance, these commodity OS kernels are
complicated, highly concurrent, and all it takes is a single weak link in the
code—one to leave a system vulnerable to hackers. Many of these vulnerabilities
are virtually impossible to detect via traditional testing. Even if a commodity
OS kernel can be written 99% correctly, a hacker can still sneak into that
particular 1% set-up where the system will not behave as expected. This project
is designing, implementing, and evaluating microverification, a new approach to
verify that a large, commodity, multiprocessor OS kernel is secure under all
circumstances without the need to prove the correctness of every part of the
system. This approach is being used with the Linux kernel, used in much of
today’s computing infrastructure. The project provides a foundation for future
innovations in building trustworthy system software and making tomorrow’s
computing infrastructure more secure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microverification
retrofits an existing commodity OS kernel into a small, trusted core and a
larger set of untrusted services, such that it is possible to verify the
information-flow security of the entire OS kernel by reasoning about the core
alone. This project is developing security-preserving layers to make
verification tractable by decomposing the core into a hierarchy of composable,
layered specifications. The core implementation can then be incrementally
verified to refine its high-level layered specification, such that security
guarantees can be proven over the core's top layer specification, preserved
across layers, and hold for the entire implementation of the retrofitted OS
kernel. Retrofitting and verification are being done on the Linux Kernel, whose
verification was previously considered intractable, demonstrating that
microverification techniques are capable of verifying existing large-scale
commodity OS kernels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.