* 2052302
* STTR Phase I:  Waste Torrefaction Technology
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,01/31/2023
* Ezra Bar Ziv, ZITECHNOLOGIES INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 01/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I
project is to address sustainability by conversing waste into a clean and
renewable resource. Waste incineration has been practiced for some time and
brings operational difficulties and high emissions. The proposed project
advances a technology to convert waste into a a solid fuel.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project advances a torrefaction solution for
industrial use. Torrefied waste is significantly low in hazardous components
(chlorine) and can be pulverized, enabling application as a solid renewable
fuel. However, waste is a feedstock that is extremely difficult to handle and
convey due to low density and large inconsistencies. The chlorine content of
waste can (i) cause severe corrosion and (ii) require strict emission control,
with significant increase in cost. Further, it cannot be used in pulverized fuel
boilers as it is not grindable. This project advances a small torrefaction
system (50 kg/hr) addressing these issues by developing: (1) a waste handling
unit that downsizes to 2 mm size with a unique feeding system that avoids
bridging; (2) a cramming unit that can handle hard to flow and low-density
materials; and (3) a cooling system for safety; and (4) a torrefaction-extrusion
reactor. This reactor does the following: (i) reduces the organic chlorine to
acceptable levels; (ii) decomposes long polymeric chains and makes the material
friable, thus grindable; (iii) homogenizes and downsizing the material due to
mechanical mixing; and (iv) uses an integrated compaction that reduces footprint
and improves the economics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.