* 2052585
* I-Corps:  Use of Zeolite as a Natural Algaecide
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Ivonne Santiago, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an innovation to reduce freshwater harmful algae blooms (FHABs)
resulting from nutrient pollution that threaten aquatic ecosystems and water
resources. Conservation of water resources has become a necessity all around the
world and the development of new techniques for obtaining and maintaining fresh
water is now needed. This innovation will strengthen the U.S. economy, protect
human and animal health, and help preserve our nation's freshwater bodies.
Furthermore, this technology has applications that increase environmental,
social, and economic aspects of sustainability locally, regionally, and
globally. Currently, efforts to control FHABs in lakes containing aquatic life
has been limited to mechanical cleansing or the use of chemical-based
algaecides. Eutrophication and FHABs are conservatively estimated to cost the
U.S. economy 2.2–4.6 billion dollars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of a copper-modified natural zeolite
(Cu-Z) as an algaecide, a chemical approach that avoids leaving a residual in
water and soil as the copper is immobilized within the zeolite matrix. Cu-Z also
provides the flexibility of implementing it in different configurations such as
filtration units or in-situ static or moving flotation devices. Batch test
experiments have been performed in which the efficacy of using Cu-Zeolite has
been tested using chlorophyll a as an indicator of algae in water. Also, samples
of water containing algae grown in a fish tank, commercially purchased algae,
and algae from a local lake have been tested by analyzing for fluorescence
levels before and after exposure to copper solutions and Cu-Zeolite. Preliminary
results have shown that the Cu-Zeolite may be as effective as a Copper solution
to inhibit algae growth. The use of Cu-Zeolite may provide a safer and cost-
effective alternative for preventing algae growth in drinking water storage
tanks, pools, and ponds. Additional studies are being conducted to ensure that
the copper residuals in water resulting from the use of the Cu-Zeolite as
algaecide are safe for aquatic life or drinking water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.