* 2053541
* Probing the Structures and Chemical Bonding of Size-Selected Boron and Metal-Boride Nanoclusters
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Lai-Sheng Wang, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 05/31/2024
* USD 700,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Lai-Sheng Wang of Brown
University and his students are using advanced spectroscopic techniques to study
tiny structures (nanoclusters) formed from boron atoms and metal borides, which
combine boron with metallic elements. Boron is next to carbon on the periodic
table, but having one-fewer electrons than carbon leads to boron being
characterized as an electron-deficient element. The electron deficiency of boron
results in distinctive chemical and physical properties for boron-containing
molecules and materials, and boron and metal boride nanoclusters display a rich
range of structural and chemical bonding characteristics. There are significant
experimental challenges to study these clusters, which exist only briefly before
reacting to form more stable species, and, thus, must be carefully prepared.
Professor Wang and his students are overcoming these challenges by developing
innovative experimental techniques to investigate the structures and bonding of
boron and metal-boride nanoclusters. The research not only provides fundamental
knowledge about the boron-boron and metal-boron chemical bonding, but also has
the potential to discover new boron and metal-boride nanomaterials valuable for
industrial applications. The students engaged in this research are gaining
critical thinking skills and valuable experience in advanced physical chemistry
techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on 1) structural evolution
of large boron clusters to lay the foundation for new boron nanostructures and
2) metal-boride clusters to probe the nature of the metal-boron chemical bonds.
These clusters are produced using a laser-vaporization cluster source and
investigated using two different types of home-built photoelectron spectroscopic
apparatuses. One apparatus involves a magnetic-bottle photoelectron analyzer and
is aimed to provide spectra with a wide range of photon energies. Well-resolved
photoelectron spectra provide electronic fingerprints, which are crucial to be
used to compare with theoretical calculations to elucidate the structures and
bonding of size-selected clusters. A cryogenically-cooled ion trap is being
developed to create cold boron clusters, which are essential to obtain well-
resolved photoelectron spectra for large clusters. The second apparatus involves
high-resolution photoelectron imaging, which is aimed to obtain vibrational
information. The broader impact of this work includes the discovery of novel
boron-based nanomaterials, which have potential technological applications and
societal benefits. This project is integrated with the teaching of physical
chemistry by Professor Wang, as well as providing training opportunities for
students and postdoctoral associates in the design and construction of advanced
experimental instrumentation and computational
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.