* 2053086
* EAR-PF: Morphological and ecological disparity of Spiriferida (Brachiopoda) at local, regional, and global scales
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Judith Sclafani, Sclafani, Judith A
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2023
* USD 174,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Dr. Judith Sclafani has been awarded an NSF EAR
Postdoctoral Fellowship to conduct research, professional development, and
outreach activities at the University of California Davis under the mentorship
of Dr. Sandra Carlson. Evaluating changing ecosystems during intervals of
climate perturbation in Earthâ€™s history can offer important clues to how
ecosystems might respond to anthropogenic climate change. This project will
focus on the recovery of shallow marine seafloor communities after the second
largest mass extinction (~440 million years ago) and investigate whether the
evolution of certain biological traits correlates with increased abundance and
survivorship with ecological communities. Results of this work will be
incorporated into high school Earth Science lessons developed in partnership
with the bilingual teacher education program at UC Davis. Shallow marine
ecosystems are important for maintaining ocean biodiversity and supporting the
economic and cultural services derived from nearshore environments. This means
that it is important to both better understand the complex ecological dynamics
at play and disseminate information to increase the diversity of scientists
addressing these problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this study
is to focus on the order Spiriferida, which was dominant in the middle-late
Paleozoic, to: 1) determine whether morphospace occupation is correlated with
environmental affinity from global occurrences, and 2) quantify abundance along
an environmental gradient from regional stratigraphy. This study will generate
substantial new specimen and field-based data about Spiriferida from both
continental/global and local/regional scales to examine if data, analyses, and
results obtained at smaller scales can be meaningfully extrapolated to trends at
larger spatial scales. Combining data from multiple spatial and taxonomic scales
is necessary to address ecological hierarchical scaling in the fossil record and
understand the fidelity between global Phanerozoic trends and local specimen and
field-based data. Studies of the relationship between local sections and global
hypotheses are needed to understand the macroecological and macroevolutionary
processes responsible for ocean ecosystem structure, stability, and
collapse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.