* 2053985
* RAPID: Disparities in Business and Nonprofit Impact and Recovery from Hurricane Harvey, COVID-19, and Hurricane Laura
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2022
* Rebekka Dudensing, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 11/30/2022
* USD 53,832.00

Reducing the effects of disasters on businesses and nonprofits is growing in
importance as disasters are more frequent. However, understanding of disaster
impacts and recovery across a variety of organizational types is still
relatively limited. For example, while disparities in recovery for organizations
owned by women, veterans, or racial minorities have been observed, the
underlying mechanisms are not well established. In addition, understanding of
how businesses and nonprofits recover from multiple and cascading impacts (such
as hurricanes followed by a pandemic followed by another hurricane) is also only
beginning to develop. This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project extends
preliminary research conducted following Hurricane Harvey to examine disaster
impacts, including cumulative impacts, and disparate recovery processes
associated with the current pandemic and additional coastal storms along the
Gulf Coast. Findings will have implications for improved strategies for
organizational survival and recovery, provide evidence that can be used for
coordinated outreach and educational programs to support organizational planning
and adaptation, and enable cross-case research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
integrates theory and findings from the disaster recovery literature with a
social vulnerability perspective. The research team will geographically and
conceptually expand beyond previous surveys and interviews of for-profit and
nonprofit organizations after Hurricane Harvey, collecting data on
organizational performance during COVID-19 and Hurricane Laura in Beaumont, TX,
Port Arthur, TX, and Lake Charles, LA. The study will test how social
vulnerability factors affect organizational impacts, survival, and recovery,
controlling for resources, organizational characteristics, damage, and adaptive
actions. It will also examine how disparities in organizational recovery
propagate through multiple events, controlling for resources, organizational
characteristics, damage, and adaptive actions. The team is uniquely poised to
collect data quickly as it has conducted pre-disaster survey and sample
verification in Beaumont and Port Arthur, tested survey methodology and best
practices for this region, and has administered a previous multi-hazard survey
that can be tailored for this context. This research team will work to gather
data quickly in order to minimize survivor bias (i.e., before some of the
vulnerable organizations fail and therefore are not represented in the study
sample). Results will be relevant to the literature on cumulative disaster
impacts and adaptation, social vulnerability, and organizational
continuity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.