* 2053348
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Trade and Entanglement in Precolonial Hokkaido: The Formation of the Okhotsk Culture
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Ben Fitzhugh, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 02/29/2024
* USD 51,301.00

This dissertation research examines the impact of trade and culture contact on
precolonial foraging societies on Rebun Island in Northern Hokkaido, Japan, and
contributes to broader understanding of maritime foraging adaptations in the
North Pacific. The proposed work explores the formation of Okhotsk culture, a
subarctic maritime-adapted society found along the coast of the Sea of Okhotsk
circa 400 to 1000 CE. The PIs hypothesize that the Okhotsk culture arose amidst
increased interactions between Epi-Jomon communities in Hokkaido and Susuya
communities on Sakhalin Island in the mid-first millennium CE. Okhotsk people
became key players in trade networks connecting Japan and mainland Asia, and
contributed to the formation of the Indigenous Ainu of Hokkaido, Sakhalin and
the Kuril Islands. Patterns in the circulation of non-local materials will shed
light on the degree of syncretism among once-distinct cultural traditions, while
pottery, burial practices, and household structures will provide data on
changing social identities. This research advances global understanding of
maritime adaptations and modes of interaction and exchange in the North Pacific,
with implications for archaeologists working in coastal and island contexts
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will employ two lines of evidence:
excavated pottery from the multicomponent site of Hamanaka 2 on Rebun Island,
Hokkaido, and the secondary analysis of published data. The Hamanaka 2 pottery
assemblages derive from cultural strata dating from the Epi-Jomon to the
historic Ainu. The proposed work will seriate pottery from sequential household
occupations and build an absolute chronology using thermoluminescence dating.
Geochemical analysis of pottery, via X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy and plasma-
mass spectrometry, will enable the PIs to differentiate clay sources and track
trade networks. Thin-section analysis of pottery will provide data on mineral
composition, grain size, and porosity. Finally, formal analysis of wall
thickness, shape and size will contribute data on production methods. In
addition to pottery analysis, the PIs will review archival data and published
reports on Epi-Jomon and Okhotsk archaeological sites from North Hokkaido,
focusing on burial practices and house structure in order to evaluate degree of
social differentiation and markers of social identity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.