* 2053383
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Leakage-free Isolated Execution: Architectures and Security Models
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Nael Abu-Ghazaleh, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 06/30/2025
* USD 505,418.00

Isolated execution is a hardware-supported security model used to protect
programs from compromised or untrusted systems such as on the cloud. This
project will develop next generation isolated execution systems that improve
state-of-the-art along three dimensions. This project will develop a formal
theoretical framework to study attacks and defenses and develop new solutions
against side channel attacks based on the concept of composable
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is organized into three thrusts.
First, defenses against side channel leakage in isolated execution environments
based on a new idea of composable resource-lets will be explored: these are
fine-grained resources that can be combined to create isolated resource
partitions for security. Second, the notion of isolated execution will be
extended beyond a CPU to cover a heterogeneous system. Finally, new formalisms
that allow reasoning about both vulnerabilities and defenses to reach strong
guarantees of security will be introduced. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Isolated
execution for CPUs is available in products and continues to receive commercial
and research interest. This project will substantially improve the security and
applicability of isolated execution systems by providing protection against side
channel attacks and by extending them beyond the CPU to operate in modern
heterogeneous systems. This project will provide research opportunities for
underrepresented students. New educational material on isolated execution and
heterogeneous system security will be developed and integrated into
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project repository (available at
https://github.com/seas-ucr/LFIE) will be maintained for at least 3 years beyond
the end of the grant. It will hold all software byproducts from the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.