* 2053160
* Empowering Informal Educators to Prepare Future Generations in Wireless Radio Communications with Mobile Resources
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Darrell Porcello, BSCS Science Learning
* Continuing Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,984,587.00

&lt;p&gt;Wireless radio communications, such as Wi-Fi, transmit public and
private data from one device to another, including cell phones, computers,
medical equipment, satellites, space rockets, and air traffic control. Despite
their critical role and prevalence, many people are unfamiliar with radio waves,
how they are generated and interact with their surroundings, and why they are
the basis of modern communication and navigation. This topic is not only
increasingly relevant to the technological lives of today&amp;#39;s youth and
public, it is critical to the National Science Foundation&amp;#39;s Industries
of the Future activities, particularly in advancing wireless education and
workforce development. In this project, STEM professionals from academia,
industry and informal education will join forces to design, evaluate, and launch
digital apps, a craft-based toolkit, activity guides, and mobile online
professional learning, all of which will be easily accessed and flexibly adapted
by informal educators to engage youth and the public about radio frequency
communications. Experiences will include embodied activities, such as physically
linking arms to create and explore longitudinal and transverse waves; mobile
experiences, such as augmented reality explorations of Wi-Fi signals or
collaborative signal jamming simulations; and technological exploration, such as
sending and receiving encrypted messages.&lt;/P&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;P&gt;BSCS
Science Learning, Georgia Tech, and the Children&amp;#39;s Creativity Museum
(CCM) with National Informal STEM Education Network (NISE Net) museum partners
will create pedagogical activity designs, digital apps, and a mobile online
professional learning platform. The project features a rigorous and multipronged
research and development approach that builds on prior learning sciences studies
to advance a learning design framework for nimble, mobile informal education,
while incorporating the best aspects of hands-on learning. This project is
testing two related hypotheses: 1) a mobile strategy can be effective for
supporting just-in-time informal education of a highly technical, scientific
topic, and 2) a mobile suite of resources, including professional learning, can
be used to teach informal educators, youth, and the general public about radio
frequency communications. Data sources include pre- and post- surveys,
interviews, and focus groups with a wide array of educators and
learners.&lt;/P&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;P&gt;A front-end study will identify gaps in
public understanding and perceptions specific to radio frequency communications,
and serve as a baseline for components of the summative research. Iterative
formative evaluation will incorporate participatory co-design processes with
youth and informal educators. These processes will support materials that are
age-appropriate and culturally responsive to not only youth, with an emphasis on
Latinx youth, but also informal educators and the broader public. Summative
evaluation will examine the impact of the mobile suite of resources on informal
educators&amp;#39; learning, facilitation confidence and intentions to continue
to incorporate the project resources into their practice. The preparation of
educators in supporting public understanding of highly technological STEM topics
can be an effective way for supporting just-in-time public engagement and
interests in related careers. Data from youth and museum visitors will examine
changes to interest, science self-efficacy, content knowledge, and STEM-related
career interest. If successful, this design approach may influence how mobile
resources are designed and organized effectively to impact future informal
education on similarly important technology-rich topics. All materials will be
released under Creative Commons licenses allowing for widespread sharing and
remixing; research and design findings will be published in academic, industry,
and practitioner journals.&lt;/P&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;P&gt;This project is co-
funded by two NSF programs: The Advancing Informal STEM Learning program, which
seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the
design and development of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes
providing multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM
learning experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM
learning in informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper
learning by participants. The Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of
practices, program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing
students&amp;#39; knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;/P&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;P&gt;This award reflects NSF&amp;#39;s
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation&amp;#39;s intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.&lt;/P&gt;