* 2053175
* I-Corps:  Pheromone-based tool for determining honey bee colony pest and disease resistance
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2023
* Kaira Wagoner, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a pheromone-based tool for improving honey bee health through
selective breeding and management techniques. By enabling rapid and inexpensive
identification of pest- and disease-resistant honey bee colonies, this tool has
cost and labor-saving potential for beekeepers and breeders, as it is likely to
minimize miticide use, and facilitate sustainable prevention and monitoring of
pest population buildup. Reduced use of miticides and improved pest and disease
resistance may result in healthier honey bees and improved crop and natural
ecosystem pollination. In addition, one compound used in the assay was recently
associated with ant unpacking, a behavior comparable to honey bee hygiene,
suggesting the potential for the development of related products for use in the
control of ant and termite pest species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of a pheromone-based assay to predict and
improve honey bee pest and disease resistance through hygienic behavior.
Hygienic behavior is the ability of honey bees to detect, uncap, and remove
unhealthy brood from the colony, and is an important mechanism of honey bee
social immunity. This novel assay utilizes synthetic pheromones naturally
produced by unhealthy honey bees to induce hygienic behavior. In the assay, a
small area of brood is treated with pheromones and returned to the colony for
two hours. Early field trials suggest that a colony’s hygienic response to the
assay (calculated as a percent of cells manipulated) provides a measure of the
colony’s natural pest and disease resistance. Specifically, a colony’s assay
response predicts future parasite infestation levels, parasite removal ability,
and winter survival, where high scoring colonies have fewer mites, demonstrate
better mite removal, and are more likely to survive winter. The proposed
research will employ behavioral, biochemical, breeding, and manufacturing
techniques to optimize prototype efficacy, safety, and delivery. The project
will reduce production costs, assess prototype performance across environmental
variables, and provide a proof-of-concept for heritability of parasite-
resistance traits identified by colony assay response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.