* 2053719
* RAPID: Understanding the unprecedented anchovy response to warm-water conditions in the California Current
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2022
* Michael Landry, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 10/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Like many species of small pelagic marine fish, recruitment and productivity of
Northern Anchovy fluctuate by orders of magnitude among years. When abundant,
the anchovy support a wide range of marine species, including marine mammals,
seabirds and a diverse group of marine fishes. Anchovy, which previously thrived
during periods of cool-water temperatures and strong coastal upwelling, are
currently booming with abundances far in excess of any historical record, even
though the California Current Ecosystem is experiencing an unprecedented marine
heat wave. This unexpected occurrence challenges the most basic understanding of
the mechanisms driving population dynamics in the species. This project is
investigating the effects of trophic relationships on population productivity by
capitalizing on the immediate research opportunity afforded by the novel, yet
ephemeral, state of a local marine heat wave. Findings from the work are being
used to develop a mechanistic model of coastal pelagic fish population dynamics
generally, and anchovy dynamics in particular. Funded field and lab work are
supporting opportunities for undergraduate training and research, and are
generating open-access data that serve the research and teaching/training
communities into the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID project augments
the scheduled Fall research cruises jointly run by the California Cooperative
Oceanic Fisheries Investigation and the California Current Ecosystem Long-Term
Ecological Research programs. Together, these programs conduct regional
oceanographic surveys that include anchovy spawning grounds and larval nursery
areas. The RAPID-augmented sampling is designed to test the emerging hypothesis
that anchovy populations are trophodynamically mediated at the larval stage,
whereby high recruitment results from increased trophic transfer efficiency from
the base of the food web. Larval diets and prey selection analyses are being
paired with amino acid compound-specific isotope analysis (Î´15N) of the larvae
and prey field to generate detailed information on larval trophic ecology.
Larval diets and plankton community structure are being related to available
data on upwelling and productivity to assess environmental and biological
drivers to trophic transfer efficiency. Collectively, these analyses are
revealing how food chain length is regulated at the larval level through prey
selection, at the prey level through community composition, and at the base of
the food chain via coastal upwelling and primary production. Furthermore, this
project is establishing whether the current trophic level of anchovy larvae is
equal to that of historic population booms and if this is the result of
favorable feeding conditions throughout their habitat. Findings from the study
are generating a mechanistic understanding of the trophic underpinnings of small
pelagic fish population productivity in coastal upwelling
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.