* 2053284
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Algebraic Topology, Graph Theory, and Multiscale Analysis for Learning Complex and Diverse Datasets
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Duc Nguyen, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 105,413.00

Despite the tremendous accomplishments of machine learning and deep learning in
the past decade, challenges remain for structurally complex and diverse data.
For example, a single data point in a database used for drug design might have
tens of thousands of internal degrees of freedom, and such a database may have
tens of thousands of such data points. This feature of structural complexity is
a major challenge to deep learning methods. Moreover, diverse data typically
originate from sparse sampling of a huge space, and this sparsity is due, in
particular, to the cost and time constraints in experimental data acquisition.
This project will address the challenges of complex and diverse datasets with
ideas that blend and integrate mathematical techniques from several subfields
including algebraic topology, spectral graph theory and multiscale analysis. The
methods developed will apply to data representation, advanced machine learning
methods, and deep learning algorithms, and will be implemented into software
packages available to the community. This project will train graduate and
undergraduate students and engage underrepresented groups in data science
research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will develop novel topology and
graph theory-based approaches to revolutionize the current practice in data
analysis and to deal with the challenge of structurally complex data and diverse
data. First, the investigators will develop persistent combinatorial graph
theory as a unified paradigm for simultaneous topological data analysis and
spectral data analysis. In particular, they will develop systematic, scalable,
accurate persistent combinatorial graph representations to extract rich
topological and spectral information. Secondly, the investigators will develop
multiscale graph models to create a family of nested submanifolds to handle the
diverse data originated from sparsely sampled data points in a huge space. These
methods will be integrated with advanced machine learning and deep learning
algorithms for complex and diverse datasets. Thirdly, the proposed methods will
be applied to a wide range of case studies in data science. User-friendly
software packages and online servers will be developed using parallel and GPU
architectures for researchers who are not formally trained in mathematics or
machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.