* 2053826
* CDS&amp;E: Catalytic Kinetics of Hydrocarbon Transformations from Dynamic Experimental Approaches Combined with on-line Machine Learning
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Antonios Armaou, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 571,784.00

Catalysts and catalytic chemical processes are essential for the manufacture of
products we use every day. The rational design of catalytic materials and
reactors requires determining the sequence of chemical transformations, and the
rates of individual steps, that convert raw materials to desired products. The
project develops computational approaches that integrate artificial intelligence
methods with systems engineering techniques to accelerate the discovery of
improved catalysts and catalytic processes. The developed approach will be
validated on well-studied systems, and training activities will facilitate
transfer of the approach to other academic and industrial catalysis
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Catalytic mechanism and kinetic parameter
identification traditionally involve acquiring steady-state reaction rates over
multiple experiments producing a limited amount of discrete data. Transient
reactor experiments can provide time-resolved data that are richer in
mechanistic information. Temporal dynamics of gas-phase concentrations or
temperatures perturb surface coverage(s), which will be probed by time-resolved
infrared spectroscopy and correlated with gas-phase concentrations measured by
mass spectrometry in an operando packed bed reactor-infrared spectrometer set-
up. System theoretic concepts will be repurposed to ensure structural
identifiability of the kinetic parameters given the reaction mechanism and
experimental apparatus. Artificial intelligence will explore the inputs search
space to ensure persistent excitation of the inlet reactor conditions that
induce a continuous data stream rich in mechanistic information. The proposed
effort will thus combine current nonlinear system identification methods and
state-of-the-art experimental apparatuses to derive an automated Design of
Experiments (DoE) procedure that informs mechanistic models of catalytic
processes with minimal experimentalist supervision. Validation will be performed
on previously studied ethylene hydrogenation and CO oxidation catalytic systems.
The outcome of this project will be a set of software and hardware tools, and an
integrated procedure to tailor inlet perturbations, that continuously excite the
dynamics of operando packed bed reactors to determine catalytic kinetic
parameters. This new transient approach will be useful, both in academic and
industrial applications, for the development of catalytic materials and
processes. This transient approach allows for rapid mechanism development,
comparison of intrinsic kinetics among catalytic materials, and estimation of
parameters useful for catalytic reactor system design. In addition to providing
this technique to the catalysis community, educational and outreach activities
are planned to provide research training to students from STEM underrepresented
groups and the catalysis community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.