* 2053336
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Triangulation Gauge
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Kevin Harding, OPTICAL METROLOGY SOLUTIONS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2023
* USD 255,981.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will enable a
critical tool for fast, high-performance measurement for precision parts
manufacturing. High-precision parts are typically checked during manufacturing
using fixed gauges based on 20-to-30-year-old technology costing several million
dollars a year in maintenance and can take 2-3 hours using contact methods, out
of a total of 20-24 hours of machine time. Improved measurements of parts in
process will lead to better manufacturing practices and higher-quality parts.
The proposed capability would reduce the time required for this step by a factor
of 8 to 10, making in-process measurement more economically viable as well as
improving machine utilization in a plant by as much as 20 percent, potentially
driving savings of over $100 million per year industry-wide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is the development
of new techniques needed to create a long-range, high-precision laser
triangulation gauge usable on a wide range of surfaces. Traditional laser
triangulation gauges have changed little in the past 40 years, providing a
reliable but limited point or profile measurement used widely in manufacturing
today. Current laser gauge range-to-resolution is around 2000 to 1, achieving
perhaps 4000 to 1 in special circumstances. A range-to-resolution capability of
50,000 to 1 would greatly expand the application potential of such gauges. The
proposed project reimagines the basic mechanisms in triangulation gauges to
separate the measurement process from the noise inherent in laser-based systems.
Rather than imaging a laser spot from the part surface, the method will use a
direct angular measurement of the light. This objective will be realized by
adapting phase measurement methods not used in triangulation gauges today. The
anticipated result will be a gauge with micron-level resolution over distance
ranges of 300 millimeters and over variations in surface finish and texture.
This capability will fill a critical void in measurement tool capability for
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.