* 2053048
* EAR-PF: Transport and Fate of Riverine Organic Carbon in Grassland Ecosystems
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Sarah Johnston, Johnston, Sarah Ellen
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 06/30/2023
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Sarah Ellen Johnston has been granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out research and education activities related to grassland ecosystems at
the University of Lethbridge and Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University. Grassland ecosystems are particularly abundant in North America and,
with over 90% converted to human use globally, are among the most disturbed
systems on Earth. Rivers flowing through grasslands undergo dramatic changes in
chemistry and ecosystem functioning when the landscape is altered by human
activities. This project examines a river system in southern Alberta, Canada,
which passes through ecosystems that are unaltered, as well as those that have
been altered by humans. Using water chemistry and modelling of river systems,
Dr. Johnston will investigate the ways that climate and human activities, such
as agricultural modifications, may affect the cycling of carbon in the water
system. The work will provide information about how water chemistry, in
particular organic carbon, changes as the river moves from forested, mountainous
terrain in the river headwaters to agricultural and urban grassland downstream.
Findings from this research will characterize human effects on river system
functioning over short (weeks to months) and long (years to decades) timescales.
The resulting data will be compared and scaled to similar systems across North
America to better understand the vulnerability of grassland river systems to
human activities. This research will be paired with outreach to the local
community to educate youth about water resources in this region, and to train
local undergraduate students in the field and laboratory. Additionally, the work
proposed here will build on existing community connections, partnering with the
regional watershed council and the Niitsitapi (Blackfoot) Nation to share the
resulting science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will define how grassland
river systems cycle carbon using a nested watershed approach that integrates
data from hydrologic modelling, chemical techniques, remote sensing, and long-
term monitoring data to characterize dissolved organic matter (DOM) across a
range of temporal (weekly to decadal) and spatial scales (headwater streams to a
large river). The fate of DOM exported from these systems, assessed using
microbial incubation techniques, depends on the chemical composition of source
materials and environmental conditions such as water residence time. Using a
combination of technical approaches across broad spatial and temporal scales
will delineate sources, fluxes, and fates of DOM throughout the study region.
Ultimately, this study seeks to define the impacts of land use and climate
oscillations across short and long-term datasets throughout the South
Saskatchewan River Basin, a model grassland watershed. The results of this study
will help develop a framework to evaluate the ramifications of integrative
effects of land use and climatic variability for important ecosystem services
provided by grassland river systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.