* 2053424
* I-Corps:  Machine Learning-Based Diagnosis of Retinal Images with the Aim of Vision Loss Prevention
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Amir Tofighi Zavareh, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to end
preventable blindness by increasing access to early diagnostic testing.
Utilizing a novel imaging technology and a proven machine learning algorithm,
the device allows for point of care diagnosis in a primary care setting at less
than half the current cost. By empowering frontline physicians to provide
vision-saving eye exams without the need of an eye care specialist, the proposed
technology may fundamentally change the current retinal exam landscape,
resulting in more efficient and accessible diagnostic testing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps Project will yield a portable Artificial
Intelligence (AI)-based retinal imaging system consisting of two major
components: (1) a hand held ophthalmic device to capture images of the patient's
retina, and (2) a machine learning algorithm to classify images of the retina.
The hardware solution provides high-resolution images of the retina. The
infrared lighting is invisible to the human eye and eliminates the need for
pupil dilation as is widely used in the state-of-art fundus imaging currently
conducted by medical personnel. The current trained convolutional neural network
yields an accuracy of 97% which is on par with the diagnostic accuracy of
trained ophthalmologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.