* 2053117
* State-Resolved Spectroscopy and Dynamics of Chemical Transients
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* David Nesbitt, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 04/30/2024
* USD 673,674.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanisms A
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor David Nesbitt of the
University of Colorado uses sophisticated laser spectroscopy and molecular beam
techniques to probe reactive chemical intermediate species at the gas-liquid
interface. The curious paradox of chemistry is that the chemical intermediates
of greatest relevance are necessarily present in vanishingly low concentrations
and therefore require higher and higher sensitivity detection methods to
observe. Nowhere are these sensitivity needs more pronounced than at the gas-
liquid interface, whereby an ultrathin layer (10-7 cm) serves as the “doorway”
between molecules in the gas phase and deep inside the bulk liquid. The proposed
research is directed towards systematic exploration of such interfaces,
exploiting high resolution laser spectroscopy and molecular beam tools to
“bounce” molecules from liquids and probing the chemical composition,
vibrational, rotational, speeds, and directions in which the product scatters
from the surface. Prof. Nesbitt is continuing his 31st-33rd years as director of
the CU Wizards Science Outreach program, which entails organizing 10 demo-filled
science presentations each academic year (from September to June) for children
in lower and middle school, in areas of science ranging from Black Holes to the
Physics of Cooking to the What's Behind Climate Change? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
particular, the proposed studies are exploiting supersonic expansions of simple
molecules (e.g., DCl, HCl, CO, CO2, OCS, NO) moving at up to 2000 m/s (2-10x
faster than the speed of sound) colliding with simple liquids (e.g., water,
salty water, glycerin, hydrocarbon oils, molten salts, and even molten gold at
1100 C!). Nesbitt’s students are utilizing high resolution laser spectroscopy to
explore how cold molecular projectiles “warm up to” and even significantly
exceed the temperature of the bulk liquid. These results turn out to depend
sensitively on and therefore quantitatively probe the nature of this thin
interfacial layer (e.g., is it “rough” vs “smooth”, “soft” vs “hard”, “acidic”
or “basic”, or “water-hating” (hydrophobic) vs. “water-loving” (hydrophilic),
etc.), thereby providing detailed insights into the collision dynamics and
chemistry of molecules at interfaces. This is relevant to how, for example,
molecules such as O2 and CO2 cross through the lungs, dissolve into the blood
stream, and eventually enter/leave the cells in any living organism. The gas-
liquid interface is arguably the least well understood phase of matter and yet
represents the sole “portal” through which gas molecules can dissolve into (or
be expelled out of) a liquid. The gas-liquid interface thus represents a new
scientific frontier about which remarkably little is known, but which
nevertheless has impacts in areas as disparate as pulmonary medicine, ocean
surface layer chemistry, atmospheric aerosol chemistry, ozone hole formation,
and global climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.