* 2053416
* Planning Grant for Hurricane Island Field Research Station
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Phoebe Jekielek, Hurricane Island Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 25,000.00

This award will support the successful planning and development of the Hurricane
Island Field Research Station, by cultivating and collecting information, ideas,
and advice from research and higher education leaders with extensive field
station experience. Hurricane Island is a growing science and education
organization, and the Hurricane Island Field Research Station will be uniquely
positioned to conduct research and provide educational opportunities with
meaningful impacts on communities near and far. As the only offshore research
station in the ecologically significant Penobscot Bay, the station will offer:
unique access to water and land environments for research and educational
purposes; a base of operations offering room and board, laboratory, and
classroom facilities; a core group of year-round staff and seasonal research
staff; a 3.2-acre aquaculture farm for research and education purposes; a model
for sustainable station campuses and systems; and unique broader impact
collaborations resulting from the educational programs taking place on
Hurricane. With a fundamental commitment to providing access and education for
underrepresented groups and creating an inclusive community, the station expands
access for broad audiences to participate in the Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) fields. Identifying new areas for community-
driven research, deepening partnerships for long-term monitoring efforts, and
developing a data-sharing plan, will greatly expand Hurricane's impact to
support public education and research regarding important ecological issues in
Maine's coastal communities and beyond. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
the proposed planning study is to work with stakeholders to develop a long-range
strategic plan for the newly constructed Hurricane Island Field Research Station
on Hurricane Island in Penobscot Bay, Maine. Funds will be used to bring
together stakeholders consisting of an external advisory committee, research
faculty, K-16 educators and students, local community members, and key Hurricane
Island staff members for two workshops. The goals are to: identify community-
driven research questions; develop a 5-year marketing and recruitment plan to
meet targets for use of the facility; and develop a plan for data acquisition,
management, and sharing. The workshops will be geared toward Hurricane Island's
strategic priorities, including greater engagement between scientists and a
variety of groups historically underrepresented in the STEM fields. The Field
Research Station will continue to expand Hurricane's undergraduate and graduate
programming as a host site for field projects and courses and increase research
and educational capacity for existing partnerships. The capacity building
associated with the Field Research Station will amplify current work in
addressing community-driven questions through applied research and enhance
collaborations by connecting scientists and students. For more information about
the Hurricane Island Field Research Station, visit
www.hurricaneisland.net/science-research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.