* 2053371
* The evolution of retinoic acid signaling in animals: functional insights from a mollusc embryo
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* J. David Lambert, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 650,000.00

Retinoic acid is a biologically active version of Vitamin A that acts as a
signal between cells and is crucial for human development. Retinoic acid
signaling was thought to be a unique characteristic of the vertebrates. Recently
however, the genes that control retinoic acid signaling have been found in
multiple invertebrate genomes, but it is not clear what retinoic acid signaling
is doing in these animals. This project takes advantage of recently discovered
roles of retinoic acid signaling in a snail embryo. This group has found that
experimental manipulations of several different components of retinoic acid
signaling impacted the same structures in the developing embryo, indicating that
these different components are working together in a pathway as they do in
vertebrates. This project is expected to generate the most comprehensive
understanding of retinoic acid signaling outside of vertebrates, and change our
understanding of how this pathway arose in evolution. This project will also
contribute to the training of undergraduate and graduate level scientists,
outreach to local K-12 students, and an open-source teaching resource for
undergraduate courses in developmental biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
characterize the components and roles of the retinoic acid (RA) pathway in the
embryo of the gastropod Tritia (aka Ilyanassa), the research team will first use
the knowledge of RA effects from preliminary data to carry out a functional
screen of 17 additional putative RA pathway component genes, then further test
genes with the expected phenotypes for functional interactions with known
components. In parallel, they will measure levels of endogenous RA isomers
across developmental stages. In a second set of experiments, they will
specifically test the effect of RA disruption on the development of the nervous
system, a key role of the pathway in vertebrates. A role in neurogenesis has
some support from other invertebrates, so this will be an important contribution
to that comparative work. These experiments will further the understanding of
the roles of RA, and integrate these results with the nascent comparative RA
literature. In a final set of experiments, they will test several specific
models for the mechanisms of RA function, including whether the system responds
to different ligand dosages with different transcription
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.