* 2053741
* Scalable Assessment of Urban Earthquake Resilience: A Novel Model-informed Deep Learning Paradigm
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Mehrdad Sasani, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 10/31/2024
* USD 413,904.00

Resilience refers to a system’s ability to efficiently absorb stresses without
significant disruption to its functioning. Communities are earthquake resilient
if by mitigation and pre-disaster preparation, they achieve the adaptive
capacity for maintaining important community functions and recover rapidly
following disasters. Community resilience depends on the performance of building
clusters (a set of buildings that serve a common function such as housing) and
the supporting infrastructure systems. Reliable assessment of the resilience of
building clusters is required for quantifying urban functionality and recovery
after an earthquake. A fundamental challenge in evaluating earthquake resilience
is how to reliably and efficiently estimate probability of damage/failure of
buildings with scalability to the urban level for a given earthquake severity.
To address this challenge and bridge the existing knowledge gap, this Disaster
Resilience Research Grants (DRRG) project will enable assessment of earthquake
resilience for large-scale urban building clusters via developing a
fundamentally novel and scalable AI-empowered model. The outcome of this project
can be used to evaluate earthquake resilience of building clusters in large-
scale urban areas. This paradigm facilitates decision making for seismic risk
mitigation, informs planning for post disaster response and recovery, and helps
improve future building design. Furthermore, in collaboration with a high school
physics teacher and following classroom implementation, a mini-unit will be
developed on “What does earthquake resilience mean to my community?” which will
be available to other science teachers across the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to reliably estimate the seismic demand
on a large number of buildings in an urban area under earthquake scenarios,
using recorded ground motions (GMs), there is a need for: (a) realistically
estimating a GM severity measure (spectral acceleration in this project)
variation for buildings with different periods, at different locations and on
different soil classes; (b) proper and optimal selection of GM time-histories;
and (c) a detailed structural model of buildings for use in numerical
simulations. However, it is prohibitively expensive to conduct detailed modeling
of a large number of buildings and carrying out nonlinear time history analyses
of such models under a large set of GMs probabilistically representing different
scenarios. Our project will address this fundamental issue and allow for
scalability through the development and implementation of a series of novel AI-
empowered algorithms and methods. The overarching goal of this project is to
enable the assessment of earthquake resilience for large-scale urban building
clusters, through developing a fundamentally novel and scalable model-informed
deep learning framework. This will be achieved by: (1) developing a Bayesian
deep learning approach to model the variation of spectral acceleration over
different periods of vibration, locations, and soil classes, given an earthquake
scenario; (2) creating a new unsupervised deep autoencoder-classifier algorithm
for ground motion clustering and selection; (3) establishing an innovative
model-informed symbolic deep learning method for metamodeling of detailed
nonlinear structural models; (4) determining metamodel-enabled fragility
functions for representative building models to assess earthquake resilience,
accounting for multiple failure criteria and multiple performance objectives;
and (5) demonstrating the researched framework for representative buildings in
the San Francisco Bay Area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.