* 2053857
* Collaborative research: Wind erodibility of salt-affected soils
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Paolo D'Odorico, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2024
* USD 220,287.00

The accumulation of salts and accelerated soil erosion are two major soil
degradation issues affecting agriculture around the world, particularly in
regions with high evaporative demand, shallow water tables or in those irrigated
with water rich in dissolved solids. The effect of salinization on soil
erodibility by wind and the associated dust emissions remain poorly understood.
These processes are responsible for numerous impacts on human health, soil
productivity, ecosystem dynamics, and climate over large areas of the United
States and the world. The proposed research will investigate how soil salinity
and sodicity affect soil susceptibility to wind erosion and the associated dust
emissions. With successful completion of this research, better understanding of
the interactions between land use practices contributing to soil
salinity/sodicity and wind erosion susceptibility will enable better prediction
of wind erosion and improved management of lands susceptible to degradation. The
proposed research also seeks to integrate education and research through
opportunities in undergraduate and graduate education, active recruitment of
students from underrepresented groups, and outreach to K-12
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal investigates a new fundamental
soil and geomorphic process (i.e., salt-induced enhancement of soil erodibility)
and provides a new mechanistic framework for its explanation. The proposed
research will use a combination of experimental and theoretical analyses to
investigate the effect of soil salinity and sodicity on interparticle bonding
forces and, consequently, soil erodibility by wind. Wind tunnel tests will be
used to evaluate soil erodibility under a wide range of soil salt
concentrations, soil textures, and moisture scenarios both in the lab and in the
field. Laboratory experiments will directly and indirectly measure the changes
in interparticle bonding forces associated with such scenarios. A theoretical
framework will be developed to explain the observed changes in soil erodibility
by accounting for the changes in interparticle bonding forces in salt-affected
soils.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.