* 2053279
* RTML: Large: Collaborative: Harmonizing Predictive Algorithms and Mixed-Signal/Precision Circuits via Computation-Data Access Exchange and Adaptive Dataflows
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Zhangyang Wang, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 248,511.00

Recent advances in machine learning are fueling a growing demand for intelligent
Internet of Things (IoT), i.e., edge network applications. Many of them, such as
autonomous vehicles, robots, and healthcare wearables, require real-time and in-
situ learning to be perceived as truly intelligent. However, the limited
computing and energy resources available at the edge device (e.g., mobile
devices, sensors) stand at odds with the massive and growing cost of state-of-
the-art machine learning training, posing a grand challenge for real-time
machine learning (RTML) at the edge. This goal of this project is to foster a
systematic breakthrough in achieving efficient online training of state-of-the-
art machine learning algorithms in pervasive resource-constrained platforms and
applications. An order of magnitude advance in RTML would enable numerous edge
devices to proactively interpret and learn from new data, improve their own
performance using what they have learned, and adapt to dynamic environments, all
in real time. Success in this project will enable truly intelligent edge devices
to penetrate all walks of life and thus generate significant impacts on
societies and economies. This project will lead to new courses and open-
education resources that can attract diverse groups of students and eventually
deliver a platform for inclusion and innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project addresses the RTML grand challenge using a three-pronged 'co-design'
approach that seamlessly integrates algorithm, architecture, and circuit-level
innovations. Specifically, at the algorithm level, an efficient training
framework for RTML, for which trained models are also natively efficient for
inference, will be established. Aggressive time and energy reductions can be
achieved, at first by improving general training techniques, and then by
focusing particularly on online learning and adaptation. At the architecture
level, the project will first target reducing the high cost of data movement by
trading it for lower-cost computation, and then generate optimal dataflows and
hardware architectures to maximize the joint benefits of algorithms and
hardware. At the circuit level, the project will leverage adaptive low-precision
algorithms and architectures to design ultra-energy-efficient mixed-signal
compute fabrics. Statistical computing techniques will be incorporated to
demonstrate efficient, scalable, and robust machine learning chips. Finally, at
the system level, an integration effort will be included to aid the realization
of realistic system goals and to evaluate the innovations of the three core
thrusts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.