* 2053489
* Addressing Input Model Uncertainty in Stochastic Simulation: From Quantification to Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Enlu Zhou, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 99,739.00

Simulation and optimization techniques are often used to evaluate system
performance and facilitate decision making in complex and stochastic systems.
This project aims to quantify the risk associated with simulation modeling and
analysis, and to design robust and risk-aware strategies for decision making
based on simulation. Because of the generality of the proposed approaches, the
resulting techniques will have broad applicability in a wide array of industry
and science sectors. Through collaborations with researchers in industry, the
developed algorithms will be tested on and applied to problems in the
application area of sharing economy. This project will also provide training
opportunities for underrepresented groups through recruiting and outreach
activities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Stochastic simulation is often used for
performance analysis and decision making in complex systems. The input to the
simulations is a collection of distributions based on data, and uncertainty in
the input brings significant risk to decision making. The goal of this project
is to develop theory and methods that quantify the risk associated with input
uncertainty, support decision making systems that are robust to the risk
associated with the input uncertainty, and handle streaming data which arrive
sequentially in time. The project consists of three major research thrusts
including a) online quantification of input model uncertainty developed with
convergence guarantees for both parametric and non-parametric input models, b)
simulation optimization under input model uncertainty within a new framework of
Bayesian risk optimization which aims to balance optimizing the expected
performance and hedging against the input model risk, and c) ranking and
selection under input model uncertainty for which new algorithms will be
developed with convergence rate results; these will take into account the trade-
off between reducing the input uncertainty via collecting more data and reducing
the simulation uncertainty by running more simulation
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.