* 2053204
* The effect of suspended particles on Rayleigh-Bénard buoyant thermal convection
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Andrea Prosperetti, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2024
* USD 243,798.00

Flows with suspended particles are widespread in natural and technological
systems such as fluidized beds, solar collectors, chemical processing, rain
formation, magmas with suspended crystals and many others. However, their
computational study has been limited by the inherent complexity of the
simulations required. In particular, little is known about heat transfer in
particulate flows. The present project addresses a canonical problem in this
broad class, namely the effect of suspended particles on buoyant Rayleigh-Bénard
thermal convection, the flow in a fluid layer heated from below and cooled from
above. The particle-free version of this problem has been the subject of
extensive studies due to its centrality in many branches of physics and
engineering, but the effect of particles has barely been scratched. The work
proposed here seeks to answer fundamental questions by identifying the
significant flow regimes in particulate natural convection and quantifying the
heat transfer modifications that particles introduce. This research will
influence turbulence and heat transfer models used in common industrial or
geophysical simulations, including those of the atmosphere, the oceans, the
earth core and climate. It also has the potential to help the development of
renewal energy sources, such as those based on solar collectors and hydrogen
production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To advance our knowledge of particulate heat
transfer, the proposed work will make use of models of increasing realism and
complexity. A simplified linear analysis of Rayleigh-Bénard stability will
provide an orientation on the effect of basic control parameters such as the
particle-to-fluid density and heat capacity ratios, the fluid Prandtl number,
and the mass and thermal loading. The point-particle model will be used to
elucidate the regions of parameter space where heat transfer can be expected to
be substantially modified in the turbulent regime. The culmination of the
project consists in fully resolved particulate simulations using the numerical
method Physalis, implemented in a highly-optimized multi-GPU code, which is able
to resolve flows with many thousands of suspended particles. In this way the
particle-fluid momentum and heat exchanges can be calculated from first
principles avoiding the ad hoc parametrization necessary with the point-particle
model. These simulations will be focused on situations of particular interest
uncovered by the simplified models and will permit a much more detailed and
deeper understanding of the physics involved in effects such as heat transfer
enhancement and particle clustering, among others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.