* 2053287
* CAREER: Chemistry Perspectives to Design Novel Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Weiwei Xie, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 77,589.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superconductivity, though first discovered more
than a century ago, is still plagued by questions and challenges.
Superconductors have zero electrical resistance and strongly repel magnetic
fields when electricity flows through them and therefore have applications for
uses such as grids that can transmit power without energy loss, ultra-fast
levitating trains that ride frictionless magnets instead of rails, and quantum
computing devices. There is a demand for innovative approaches to the design and
synthesis of new superconducting materials. This project, supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program within the Division of Materials Research
and the Established Program to Support Competitive Research (EPSCoR), combines
experimental investigation and theoretical assessment to reveal fundamental
chemical principles to design new superconducting materials. The scientific
significance of the research is to open a new chemical perspective towards
superconductivity that focuses on the role of pairs of atoms of particular
elements to accelerate the search for new superconductors. The proposed outreach
activities and educational plan emphasize solid-state materials-related outreach
activities including the development of dually communication-intensive certified
and service-learning certified undergraduate courses and a vibrant research
program for women and underrepresented minority students in the state of
Louisiana. These activities will expand the research capability of the state and
foster the training of next-generation materials
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses chemical strategies to probe the
role of two new critical charge-transfer pairs of elements (Pd-P and Pt-P) in
superconductivity. The PI and her group use methods for solid-state materials
discovery and physical properties characterization, targeting families of
compounds selected in order to be able to probe the role of breaking or forming
bonds between these specific pairs of elements. Together with the experimental
effort, theoretical determination of electronic structures and electron-phonon
coupling provide feedback toward further synthetic efforts. This approach
advances knowledge about a comprehensive set of properties: structural
influences on electronic and magnetic structures, electron-electron and
electron-phonon correlations, magnetism, spin-orbit coupling effects, and their
interplay in superconductors. The educational plan will focus on developing and
establishing service-learning pedagogies for solid-state materials in the state
of Louisiana. This gives university students experiential opportunities to learn
in real-world contexts and develop skills of community engagement while
providing outreach demonstrations relating to superconductivity and other
properties to K-12 schools. This project is supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program within the Division of Materials Research and the
Established Program to Support Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.