* 2053889
* A Deep Dive into Electron-Neutral Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Caroline Jarrold, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 05/31/2024
* USD 542,321.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Caroline Chick Jarrold and
her students at Indiana University are studying interactions between electrons
and neutral molecules using several sophisticated experimental techniques that
are based on the absorption and emission of light by the chemical compounds
being studied. Electron-neutral interactions drive many important chemical and
physical processes, yet they are difficult to explore experimentally. From a
practical standpoint, controlling electrons is challenging because they are
thousands of times lighter than atoms, which themselves are tiny particles,
while at the same time, the electric charge carried by the electron makes it
vulnerable to deflection by the earthâ€™s magnetic field, among other weak
influencing forces present in laboratory settings. Professor Jarrold overcomes
these hurdles by preparing the free electrons in a controlled way, which is to
target negatively charged molecules with a laser pulse that removes an electron
with a known amount of energy, and in the desired proximity of a neutral target
molecule. The array of molecules selected for study are chosen to sample a broad
range of properties that affect their interactions with electrons.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments involve the novel use of photoelectrons as
a tool for probing valence-bound, non-valence-bound, and temporary anion states
of molecules and bimolecular complexes, with an emphasis on preparing and
probing systems that do not neatly fall into any of these three categories. This
project addresses several hypotheses involving the description of electron-
driven chemistry, the increasingly complex landscape for electron-bimolecular
interactions, and the rules that govern non-valence-bound anion lifetimes.
Probing these systems experimentally with energy-selected electrons is achieved
by detachment of anionic precursors, which provides a route to mapping the
energy-dependence of electron-neutral interactions, some of which initiate
electron-driven chemistry. Additional studies include fluorescence lifetime and
dispersed fluorescence measurements on non-valence-bound excited states of
anions. Interpretation of data collected on these complex and often transient
species is supported by calculations conducted by collaborator Professor Thomas
Sommerfeld of Southeastern Louisiana University, who has expertise in the
theoretical treatment of non-valence states of anions. The broader impacts
include a more complete picture of electron-driven chemical and physical
processes, which is a prerequisite for controlling these processes. In addition,
participants in this project receive well-rounded graduate or postdoctoral
training in a range of techniques in chemical physics, coupled with ample
professional development opportunities, in the laboratory of a PI with a deep
commitment to diversity and equity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.