* 2053470
* Dynamical Systems Diagnostics for Intelligent Machine Tools
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Brian Mann, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 358,095.00

This grant will support research that will contribute to new knowledge related
to a manufacturing process, promoting both the progress of science and advancing
national prosperity. Subtractive manufacturing processes make three-dimensional
parts and objects by removing material in small layers. Machining is one of the
more pervasive subtractive processes and includes material removal methods known
as milling, drilling, broaching, and turning. Each of these machining processes
uses a cutting tool to remove material layers from a bulk material and to leave
behind a desired three-dimensional part. These material removal processes are
also one of the most widely used approaches to create metal, wood, and plastic
parts for the automotive, aerospace, medical device industries. However, the
accuracy, surface quality, and productivity of all machining processes are
limited by the vibrations caused in the cutting process. Although recent
advances have unveiled the fundamentals physics behind these barriers for
machining processes, there still exist a large gap between what is possible in
the best academic lab and in a production setting. This project seeks to develop
diagnostic tools that will enable manufacturers to take advantage of the latest
academic knowledge for vibration problems, such as stability limitations,
surface finish, and surface location error. Therefore, the results of this grant
will benefit the U.S. economy and society. This research involves and impacts
several disciplines which include dynamical systems and control, manufacturing,
machine learning, and data science. It is expected that this research, along
with the complementary educational efforts, will help train the future workforce
and broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tool vibrations impose severe limitations on industrial
capability, such as reduced accuracy, a poor surface finish, and increased costs
which are linked to instability. Although past research has uncovered the
fundamental mechanism that leads to instability, it is still nearly impossible
for the U.S. industrial base to apply this knowledge due to the need for
repetitive, costly, and manually intensive modal tests and separate cutting
force tests. This research will develop two data-driven approaches that will
enable the U.S. industrial base to integrate machining dynamics with modern
cyber-infrastructure. More specifically, the first research objective develops a
new approach to automate the identification of the physical parameters required
by predictive machining dynamics models and analysis tools. This will enable
modern cyber infrastructure to optimize cutting process parameters and thus
allow better decision to be made that now include the limitations imposed by
vibrations. The second research objective develops a data-driven approach to
discover the governing equations of systems that include time delays. It is
expected that this framework will provide a more comprehensive understanding of
the important physical mechanisms to include in machining dynamics models; this
method could also generate models that modern cyber infrastructure could use to
obtain optimal cutting process parameters or monitor the cutting process to
diagnose problems from model parameter changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.