* 2053858
* CDS&amp;E: Collaborative Research: Surrogates and Reduced Order Modeling for High Dimensional Coupled Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Susan Minkoff, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 99,999.00

Increasingly, mathematical modeling of complex scientific systems plays a
crucial role both in understanding and in making predictions about these
systems. To understand the effects of different model assumptions and parameter
values, one might need millions of computational simulations to fully probe a
system's behavior. This computational burden is compounded by the fact that many
complex systems are modeled not by just one computational model or algorithm,
but rather by sets of sub-models and codes that need to interact with each
other. This project aims to develop efficient and flexible approximations to
such coupled computational models, to take the computational bottleneck out of
the mathematical modeling-based scientific discovery process. The research will
focus on a prototype coupled model of fluid flow and mechanical deformation that
can be adapted to model both hydraulic fracturing and cartilage biomechanics.
Students will be involved and trained in interdisciplinary aspects of the
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational simulation of systems of scientific
and practical interest often requires coupling two or more mathematical models
of physical phenomena. Such simulations typically depend on many input
parameters, while validation of the models is constrained by limited available
data. Numerical simulators of coupled mathematical models use approaches of full
or loose coupling. Full coupling involves solving a single set of equations
simultaneously, but due to computational complexity, feasible run times often
necessitate simplified physics models. Conversely, loose coupling connects
independent codes simulating distinct physical processes; it is often infeasible
to run even loosely coupled simulations the large number of times required to
perform uncertainty quantification. This project aims to develop methodology for
Gaussian process emulation of high-dimensional coupled simulators and thus
enable uncertainty quantification for challenging yet ubiquitous multi-physics
models; the approaches will involve surrogate or reduced-order models of the
governing model equations to allow quick approximation of the full physical
simulator at different inputs. The efforts will entail developing (i) new ideas
for dimension reduction, (ii) a novel method to emulate space-time fields, and
(iii) an analysis of errors owing to both dimension reduction and
emulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.