* 2053194
* I-Corps: Preventing Rolling Veins During IV Insertion
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Guy German, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corp project will result in
the ability to decrease vein movement during venipuncture. In situations in
which a patient requires intravenous (IV) fluids, this device could reduce the
time it takes to successfully insert a needle by stabilizing the vein for a
faster insertion time. This device has a reduced cost in comparison to vein
tracking systems which could save hospitals money. This technology also has the
potential to reduce the number of specialty staff needed for needle insertion
and may reduce the human and financial burdens associated with venipuncture
complications, including hematomas, injury, wounds, anxiety, hypertension, and
infections, especially for at-risk patients, such as those who are elderly,
diabetic, or immunocompromised. There are currently over 6,000 hospitals in the
US alone. All hospitals perform venipuncture through intravenous therapy
insertions or taking blood samples, with over 230 million IVs placed every year.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project focuses on constructing a method for
stabilizing veins during the venipuncture procedure. The technology is a single-
use plastic device that is placed on the forearm of a patient by a medical
professional. A slight pressure is applied on the device into and up the arm in
order to isolate and elevate the vein in preparation for needle insertion. The
device aims to immobilize the vein to reduce the complications associated with
the phenomena known as "rolling veins" in which the vein moves and can result in
an unsuccessful needle insertion. A model vein was created in order to test the
movement of the vein both with and without the device. The testing showed that
the device decreased the maximum displacement of the vein by 84% in comparison
to tested vein displacement without the device. The maximum displacement of the
vein with the device was calculated to be 0.20 mm while the maximum displacement
of the vein without the device was calculated to be 1.26
mm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.