* 2053240
* RAPID:  Unprecedented Hypoxia in Cape Cod Bay
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2020,08/31/2023
* Wayne Geyer, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 163,255.00

This is rapid response study of oxygen dynamics in southern Cape Cod Bay (CCB)
in order to better understand the physical processes that are contributing to an
unprecedented second consecutive summer of extensive bottom hypoxia.
Comprehensive measurements will be made during the critical months of September
and October, in order to resolve the important spatial and temporal scales
needed to better understand the frontal dynamics of this region, which are
hypothesized to play a key role in controlling bottom oxygen concentration.
Hypoxia in coastal waters is typically associated with either large
anthropogenic nutrient inputs or strong and persistent upwelling. Southern CCB
has neither, yet extensive hypoxic bottom waters have developed for the second
consecutive summer. This developing hypoxia event provides a unique opportunity
to examine the physical and biogeochemical processes responsible for this novel
hypoxia&lt;br/&gt;regime. Concentration of organic carbon in a localized area
that also receives less oxygen input because of reduced mixing is expected to be
the causal mechanism. Results from this research will be communicated to both
the Massachusetts Department of Marine Fisheries and the Massachusetts
Lobstermenâ€™s Association. This research will help foster collaborations with
these groups with the goal of assessing whether hypoxia is likely to persist in
the coming year and become more severe as regional surface waters warm. Results
from this research will help develop mitigation strategies to minimize economic
losses and harm to the lobster fishery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is hypothesized
that in CCB, and other systems without persistent strong upwelling or large
anthropogenic nutrient inputs, the production of organic carbon is insufficient
to drive widespread hypoxia during the summer, but localized hypoxia can occur
when convergent transport concentrates organic carbon in sufficient quantities
to deplete bottom oxygen levels. In CCB, hypoxia is expected to develop in
association with a strong bottom density front that occurs where the seasonal
pycnocline intersects the seafloor. At this location, strong thermal
stratification immediately adjacent to the seabed suppresses turbulence,
preventing ventilation via vertical mixing and the front accumulates organic
material that enhances respiration at this location. In order to maintain this
bottom front during summer conditions, frequent relaxation/downwelling winds are
needed. The mechanism of oxygen depleting associated with a bottom front is
fundamentally different from what drives hypoxia in more commonly studied
upwelling regions. However, it may be important in other environments with
strong thermal stratification and variable wind forcing. This interdisciplinary
research will resolve the mechanisms that drive hypoxia in CCB and provide
insight into why low oxygen conditions appear to be occurring more frequently in
this economically important region. The team will 1) conduct ship-based sampling
roughly every 5 days to resolve the full three-dimensional distribution of
temperature, salinity, dissolved oxygen, chlorophyll fluorescence and turbidity
and how these variables respond to wind forcing; 2) deploy 3 bottom landers that
span the hypoxic region on a N-S transect to continuously record bottom
temperature, salinity and DO and water column circulation; and 3) conduct
numerical simulations of the region using a coupled hydrodynamic-biogeochemical
model to better understand the basic processes that result in low bottom
oxygen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.