* 2053373
* LEAP-HI: Re-Engineering for Adaptable Lives and Businesses
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2025
* Cynthia Chen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 10/31/2025
* USD 2,015,911.00

Maximizing efficiency has been the driving force for economic growth and
industrial expansion in modern societies. It is also a defining attribute of the
smart and sustainable cities movement. However, maximizing efficiency often
results in systems that are unable to adapt to external disruptions, as
demonstrated in the wake of many disasters, including COVID-19. While there have
been calls for increasing redundancy, adding redundancies in systems design
increases costs and resource demands. What is needed is an adaptable societal
system that can operate in a variety of configurations in response to a wide
range of disruptions, thereby displaying both efficiency and resilience. This
Leading Engineering for America's Prosperity, Health, and Infrastructure (LEAP-
HI) project supports fundamental research to generate the knowledge, mechanisms,
and tools needed to design an adaptable society in which businesses and
transportation systems can readily switch between alternative operating
modalities, and people are informed and can adapt to system changes without
undue hardship. The research methods and results will contribute to the US
economy and prosperity and the public well-being and health. Two case studies
addressing the vibrancy of small to mid-scale food systems in Seattle and
Phoenix will focus on challenges encountered by marginalized communities that
include disproportionately large shares of frontline workers in food
establishments and public transit users. The project will engage students at
both sites, and a studio class that integrates research and education will help
train a new generation of students in engineering and planning for increased
adaptability to disruptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop
systematic ways to reconfigure urban spaces for a variety of uses, design
mechanisms that provide business owners and transit operators with a set of
options and decision support tools capable of accounting for future
uncertainties, and model how information flows through a system so that people
can adapt to external disruptions. Equally important, the project integrates
people, businesses, and transit into a system of systems, thus enabling a better
understanding of how society can adapt to different disruptions. The whole
decision support system will be tested in both Seattle and Phoenix. This
research will advance knowledge at the intersection of different disciplinary
areas including urban planning, controls and optimization, human behaviors, and
transportation systems analysis. Specific scientific advances include the
development of multi-stage optimization under uncertainty, modeling human
adaptive behaviors for which the choice dimensions are no longer mutually
exclusive, and modeling the co-evolution of multiple systems in the event of a
disruption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.