* 2053033
* EAR-PF: What is the role of metasomatic alteration in subduction zone episodic tremor and slip?
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* William Hoover, Hoover, William Floyd
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2023
* USD 174,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. William Hoover has been
awarded an NSF EAR postdoctoral fellowship to carry out research and educational
plans at the University of Washington alongside mentor Dr. Cailey Condit. Dr.
Hoover will investigate the role of water-rock reaction in producing the
enigmatic seismic phenomena known as episodic tremor and slip (ETS) that can
precede large, damaging earthquakes, particularly along subduction zone faults.
This study will focus on rocks from Catalina Island (Southern California)
exhumed from depths characteristic of ETS in modern subduction zones (e.g.,
Cascadia in Washington and Oregon). Integrated macro- and micro-scale structural
and geochemical analysis will reveal how rock alteration by fluid flow yields
deformation behavior characteristic of ETS. This work will provide important
direct observations of rocks from ETS source regions and inform modern
subduction zone monitoring and seismic research. During field work on Catalina
Island, Dr. Hoover will teach a field course to students from Hispanic-serving
institution Cal State Channel Islands and mentor capstone research projects. He
will also develop and present educational activities as part of the University
of Washington Rockin’ Out K-12 outreach program. Lastly, this research will be
carried out on land of the Gabrielino-Tongva Tribe and he will return tangible
benefits of the research through outreach events held for the tribe.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rheological modeling of ETS suggests that it may be hosted
within metasomatic talc and chlorite schists, and Dr. Hoover will test this
hypothesis using the exhumed rock record. He will identify geologic equivalents
of the structures and fluid-rich conditions inferred from geophysical studies of
ETS source regions through field mapping of the Catalina Schist (CA). He will
connect outcrop-scale deformation partitioning to metasomatic changes with bulk
major and trace element and Sr and Li isotope geochemistry. Using spatially-
resolved micro-scale chemical and structural analysis with electron microbeam
techniques, he will determine deformation mechanisms and connect them to
compositional changes across all scales. These observations will be placed in
the temporal context of the seismic cycle through bulk Li and intra-crystalline
diffusion chronometry. Using this multi-scale approach Dr. Hoover will document
how metasomatism controls deformation partitioning and mechanisms at the
conditions of ETS in modern subduction zones. These results will inform future
geophysical, theoretical and experimental studies of subduction zone
seismicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.