* 2053689
* RUI: Characterization and Modeling of Space Weather Geomagnetic Fluctuations
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* James Wanliss, Presbyterian College
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 12/31/2023
* USD 225,521.00

Society relies upon technologies such as power distribution systems and
constellations of communications satellites for daily functioning. These
technologies are susceptible to the effects of magnetic storms and other severe
space weather. This project will study what factors lead to space weather in an
effort to better predict impacts. Additionally, the work will involve
undergraduate students from under-represented groups in STEM in research at a
primarily undergraduate institution. Additionally, an Artist in Residence
program will be developed to increase general science literacy and to make links
between space science and art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The science objective is to
determine nonlinear metrics that specify the dynamical state of the
magnetosphere prior to the onset of, and during, extreme space weather. The
research will investigate and statistically characterize, model, and forecast
the spatiotemporal fluctuations of the ground magnetic field using advanced
mathematical techniques. The central hypothesis is that space weather associated
spatiotemporal fluctuations of the geomagnetic field follow the statistics of
intermittency-induced criticality. Data will be used from arrays of ground-based
magnetometers from high-to-equatorial latitudes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.