* 2053493
* Information-Based Complexity Analysis and Optimal Methods for Saddle-Point Structured Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Yangyang Xu, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 05/31/2024
* USD 249,972.00

With the increasing volumes of data involved in modern-day research, it is
important to build new mathematical and statistical tools that are applicable to
huge-scale datasets and do not require large computation time. Optimization
algorithms are an important computational tool for data analysis in various
disciplines, and many modern applications require these optimization algorithms
to handle very large-scale, highly nonlinear, and non-smooth problems. These
features bring great challenges to computing solutions in a scalable and
efficient way. This project aims at addressing the computational difficulties in
optimization algorithms that arise from large-scale data analysis problems.
Undergraduate and graduate students will be trained and involved in this
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the big data era, scalability is one most
important factor in designing computational algorithms. This feature motivates
the recent rapid development of first-order methods. This project focuses on the
development and the understanding of fundamental limits of novel first-order
algorithms for solving saddle-point structured optimization problems.
Specifically, the project aims at advancing saddle-point structured non-smooth
optimization techniques applicable to large-scale data analysis problems. With
problem-specific information on structure that a first-order method can acquire,
information-based complexity analysis will be conducted to reveal the intrinsic
difficulty of the specified class of problems, and numerical approaches will be
designed. Deterministic first-order methods, randomized and greedy block
gradient methods, stochastic first-order methods, and their asynchronous
parallel versions adequate for multi-core machines or clusters will be
developed. For each class of proposed methods lower complexity bounds will be
established, and optimal numerical algorithms will be designed to reach these
bounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.