* 2053754
* GOALI: Short-wave infrared polarization sensitive focal plane array
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Stanley Pau, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 05/31/2024
* USD 368,166.00

Compared with visible light, short wave infrared (SWIR) light can penetrate
deeper into obscuring layers, such as haze, fog, smoke and tissue. Water vapor,
fog, and materials such as silicon are transparent in SWIR, and SWIR is
invisible to the human eye. Objects that appear similar or even identical in the
visible spectrum can be easily identified in SWIR. This research seeks to
demonstrate a novel SWIR polarization sensitive imaging sensor that has
applications in medical imaging, remote sensing, surveillance, 3D imaging and
industrial metrology. The project supports the research and training of
undergraduate and graduate students in the multidisciplinary areas of optical
sciences, electrical engineering, chemistry, and materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;This GOALI project supports the
research and development of a novel class of polarization-sensitive focal plane
arrays (FPAs) that operate in the SWIR. The proposed research leverages the
interdisciplinary expertise of thin-film fabrication and imaging polarimetry at
the University of Arizona (UA) and semiconductor packaging and industrial
metrology at 4D Technology, an Onto Innovation Business located in Tucson,
Arizona. The goals of this project are (1) the advancement of fundamental
design, know-how and fabrication process of multilayer SWIR optical filters, (2)
the construction of a new polarization sensitive focal plane arrays in the SWIR,
and (3) the demonstration of a through-wafer imaging system for automated
semiconductor defect inspection and metrology applications. The intellectual
significance of this work lies in advancing the development of an innovative and
important sensor that currently does not exist in addition to creating a novel
design and fabrication process for SWIR optical filter and coating to extend the
state-of-the-art. This type of sensor will enable novel and complex instruments
with applications that are difficult and impossible to perform using visible
light. Specifically, the team will develop a new material and processing
approach to realize arbitrary nonlinear polarization (circular and elliptical)
filters in the 1 to 2 micron wavelength range. Uniquely, the proposed division-
of-focal plane polarimeter will be single shot, insensitive to vibration, and
compact. In the long-term, the broader impacts include: (1) leveraging the GOALI
results to advance applications in real products; and (ii) strengthening the
knowledge base used to create new course material for undergraduate and graduate
teaching within the UA College of Optical Sciences, and externally through an
existing distance-learning program. Graduate and undergraduate students will
carry out a significant portion of this work to gain invaluable technical and
teamwork skills merging industry and academic perspectives through device
fabrication and instrument testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.