* 2053619
* Quantitative Measurement of Wildfire Behavior in the Field: Leveraging Remote Sensing for Reproducible Observation and Improved Understanding
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Mario Miguel Valero, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 07/31/2024
* USD 393,086.00

The increasing social, ecological and economic impact of wildfires in multiple
regions of the world, including the western United States, has spurred research
into fire behavior principles in order to better understand, predict and
mitigate the undesired effects of wildland fire. This research has resulted in
the development of a number of fire models intended to support global resilience
to wildfire. Additionally, extensive experimental campaigns have been conducted
to acquire observations that can be used for model development and validation.
While laboratory studies are useful to understand the fundamentals of fire
behavior, the complexity of physical and chemical phenomena involved in fire
dynamics further requires extensive observation in the field to corroborate and
extrapolate laboratory findings. However, measuring wildfire behavior in the
field involves significant challenges and the amount of quantitative data about
wildfire behavior acquired in the field is still scarce. When such data is
collected, fire behavior is usually characterized by broad spatial and temporal
average values, which prevents the detailed study of fire response to
vegetation, terrain and weather. This data void hinders the development of
models and simulators that would allow predicting the evolution of an active
fire as well as its effects on the environment. To overcome this limitation,
this project will leverage modern sensor technology and state-of-the-art data
processing algorithms to automate the acquisition of detailed fire behavior
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to develop
remote sensing tools and techniques to facilitate the automated and quantitative
measurement of wildfire behavior in the field. Firstly, a portable and
affordable system will be built using commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) sensors.
The remote sensing system will be designed for versatility so that it can be
operated from a variety of platforms, including unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs).
Secondly, scientific software will be developed to derive temporally and
spatially explicit fire behavior metrics, such as Rate of Spread (ROS), Fire
Radiative Power (FRP), fire Residence Time (RT) and flame and front geometry,
from the raw sensor data. Special attention will be paid to image direct
georeferencing and the fusion of data acquired at different times and from
different observation points. Thirdly, a data visualization platform will be
designed based on a Geographic Information System (GIS) to support the analysis
of fire behavior data in conjunction with information about plume dynamics,
vegetation, terrain, and weather. Finally, the monitoring system, the data
analysis software and the data visualization platform will be deployed in two
field experiments. The outcomes of this project will fill a critical gap in data
availability and are bound to support fire behavior studies and fire model
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.