* 2053152
* CRII: SaTC: Bottom-up psychosocial interventions for interpersonal privacy preservation in social media
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Mary Amon, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 03/31/2024
* USD 190,600.00

People's privacy is violated on popular social media sites every day, with users
sharing sensitive photos and information about other people on a massive scale.
Many current interventions for reducing the spread of private information on
social media are limited to addressing privacy violations that have already
occurred, and interventions are typically initiated by corporations. This
project studies the effectiveness of story- and fact-based intervention
strategies that can be deployed to users and used by them to promote privacy on
social media. The approach attempts to by change users’ attitudes and reduce
their sharing of others’ personal photos and information. This project supports
safe online behavior by testing ways to increase privacy awareness and improve
online decision-making, preventing interpersonal privacy violations on social
media. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emotional and personal narratives are demonstrated
sources of influence in health promotion and disease prevention. Such narratives
may be important to preventing privacy violations within highly interconnected
social networks, where individuals may be both influenced by narratives and, in
turn, participate in influencing others within their network. Employing a mixed-
method experimental approach, the project identifies users’ attitudes towards
social media intervention strategies. The project establishes the efficacy of
user-oriented privacy intervention strategies in altering young people’s privacy
attitudes and behavior, leveraging strategies modeled after successes from other
disciplines that vary in modality (text, video, or interactive format) and type
(fact-based or narrative appeals). The project also examines the extent to which
communication mechanisms on social media platforms (i.e., online comments) are
viable entry points for users to participate in privacy preservation. Overall,
the project contributes to the overarching goal of cultivating user-based
interpersonal privacy preservation on social media to preserve the social and
economic benefits of the web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.