* 2053016
* EAR-PF: The optimization of SPC-POU filter and its application of well water treatment within Indigenous lands.
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Ranalda Tsosie, Tsosie, Ranalda L
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 07/31/2023
* USD 174,000.00

An NSF EAR Postdoctoral fellowship was awarded to Dr. Ranalda Tsosie to carry
out a research, teaching and professional development experience at Montana
State University under the mentorship of Dr. Ellen Lauchnor and Dr. Mari Eggers.
The PI will engage with three communities to address arsenic contamination
issues. Two of these communities are located on Indigenous lands, the Navajo and
Crow reservations, and the third community is in a rural community in the state
of Montana. The proposed research will focus on the ongoing private well arsenic
contamination issues in households in Montana and the contamination issues of
unregulated water sources located on the Navajo reservation. Specifically, the
proposed use-inspired research will determine the species of arsenic and test
cost effective and commercially available arsenic removal filters. A second
objective is to optimize the design of a current prototype of silica polyamine
composite based point of use filter (SPC-POU) developed by Dr. Tsosie during her
dissertation research at the University of Montana. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will advance the knowledge of arsenic remediation and develop an
innovative method of &lt;br/&gt;addressing arsenic contamination. Arsenic has
been studied extensively and much effort has gone into developing more cost-
effective methods of remediation. Despite all these efforts, many households
throughout the U.S. continue to face issues with arsenic exceedance in their
drinking water. This research aims to tackle these issues by working with these
households in Montana that do not have access to a publicly monitored water
supply. In addition, on the Navajo reservation there are some households that do
not have running water in their homes and must rely on unregulated water sources
for their household water needs. It is communities/households like these, that
this research will be the most impactful.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Division of Earth Sciences and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.