* 2053085
* ER-PF: Using Distributed Acoustic Sensing for Tremor Detection and Site Characterization in Cascadia to Evaluate Earthquake Hazard
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Manuel Mendoza, Mendoza, Manuel Matthew
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 05/31/2024
* USD 174,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Manuel Mendoza has been
granted an EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry out research and education plans
at University of Colorado Boulder and Colorado School of Mines. Dr. Mendoza
plans to develop a new technique for earthquake monitoring called distributed
acoustic sensing (DAS). DAS uses dark (unlit/unused) existing telecommunication
fiber optic cables and turns them into an instrument that acts as a network
capable of detecting tiny or distant seismic (earthquake) events. In the Pacific
Northwest of the US where two tectonic plates converge, the conditions are right
for large earthquakes which could result in other hazards such as tsunamis.
Therefore, large-scale and continuous seismic monitoring is needed to evaluate
the impending risks. In this project, Dr. Mendoza will work alongside Professors
Anne Sheehan and Dr. Ge Jin to test and demonstrate DAS performance capabilities
by carrying out a DAS experiment in Northwestern Washington. Specifically, the
work will investigate seismic events known as “tremor” and determine how local
geologic conditions vary along the fiber cable. Dr. Mendoza’s work will advance
understanding of earthquakes, how the ground shakes in response to them, and
consequent seismic hazards. The proposed study will provide opportunities for
DAS to be applied at larger scales alongside existing seismic networks to
perform multi and interdisciplinary research and monitoring of Earth processes.
The project will also allow Dr. Mendoza to teach and mentor students from
underrepresented groups, including as a mentor on the Diversity, Inclusion, and
Access committee at the Colorado School of Mines and as a summer internship
mentor at University of Colorado Boulder. Other activities associated with this
project include designing and leading a local DAS experiment for a geophysics
course and supervising the professional and educational development of an
undergraduate student who will conduct original research with the DAS data. At
both campuses, the PI will engage in outreach activities aimed at increasing
public scientific literacy and broadening participation in the S.T.E.M
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Distributed acoustic sensing (DAS) using fiber-
optics to measure deformation (strain) caused by seismic perturbations in the
Earth has, in recent years, proved to be a highly applicable and promising tool
in seismology. This is owed to its ability to be configured as a seismic array
with an aperture on the order of tens of kilometers, meter-level sensor (i.e.
channel) spacing, and performance comparable to that of conventional broadband
seismometers. This implies that DAS arrays can blanket a large area while not
suffering from spatial aliasing when sampling the seismic wavefield – unlike
traditional networks – and provide new information in high fidelity that often
goes missed. A single DAS experiment can therefore be used to simultaneously
investigate a variety of Earth processes occurring across different spatial and
temporal scales. Here, the investigators will conduct the first known DAS
experiment in Cascadia using fiber from an existing telecommunication cable, to
monitor tremor and characterize site conditions for the purpose of evaluating
seismic hazard. Specifically, the PI will pursue three primary scientific goals:
(1) Use DAS to detect and locate tremor in Cascadia; (2) characterize its
spatiotemporal behavior and infer its contribution to stressing the up-dip
locked portion of the plate interface; and (3) determine meter-level variation
in site conditions along the DAS array. These goals will be addressed by
employing seismic array-based techniques such as beamforming and beam back-
projection to capture tremor, as well as ambient noise interferometry techniques
to estimate shear wave velocities of the top 30 meters (Vs30). The results
obtained from this study will be compared to other observations performed using
different instruments and methods, to demonstrate the efficacy of DAS in
improving earthquake and ground shaking models in Cascadia and assess its
implications for future experiments in a variety of tectonic
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.