* 2053009
* EAR-PF: Experimental study of the dynamics of frozen, cohesive river banks: bridging pore-scale properties with channel-scale dynamics.
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Kieran Dunne, Dunne, Kieran Bernard Jiamin
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Kieran Dunne has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to study
the effects of widespread thawing in the Arctic on changes in frozen riverbank
erosion and on the release of greenhouse gasses and heavy metals. The work will
take place under the mentorship of Dr. Michael Lamb at California Institute of
Technology. Accelerating climate change in the Arctic is leading to the
widespread thawing of permafrost (ice and soil that typically remains frozen
throughout the year). The loss of permafrost results in weakening of riverbanks,
river channel migration and speeds up the release of greenhouse gasses and heavy
metals. These environmental issues combined with changes in the shape of rivers
have led to the displacement of communities in the Arctic. This project seeks to
characterize the ways that the composition of permafrost riverbank impacts the
rate of riverbank erosion and river channel migration in the Arctic. The work
includes a series of experiments to determine the properties that control
erosion and river migration, contributing to a framework for improved management
of river systems in polar regions and a better understanding of the global
carbon cycle. The project also includes education and outreach activities that
incorporate preexisting California Institute of Technology programs for high
school and undergraduate students. Dr. Dunne also plans to develop and
distribute online educational modules on river processes hosted on
SedEdu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Huge regions of land in the Arctic
through which rivers incise are comprised of permafrost. The presence of pore
ice in permafrost substrates has been shown to have a profound effect on the
erodibility bank material as pore ice greatly increases the yield strength of
frozen soil relative to unfrozen soil. As a result, the erosion rates of
permafrost soils are highly sensitive to climate-driven changes to both local
hydrological and atmospheric temperature conditions. This study seeks to develop
a mechanistic understanding of the effects of permafrost composition and water
temperature on the erosion rate of frozen riverbanks. A suite of experiments
will be performed to determine the effects of cohesive sediment on the
thermomechanical and geotechnical properties of permafrost substrates that
govern the rate of riverbank erosion in Arctic regions. This experimental
approach will be coupled with analysis of high-resolution satellite imagery of
natural, permafrost rivers in the Arctic to determine how rates of channel bank
erosion and lateral migration changes throughout the year in response to the
governing mechanisms explored in the lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.