* 2053668
* Collaborative Research: Inference and Uncertainty Quantification for High Dimensional Systems in Remote Sensing: Methods, Computation, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Emily Kang, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 103,469.00

Complex mathematical models are ubiquitous in physical, atmospheric, biological,
and engineering sciences. These models, often called simulators, are used to
describe complicated interactions among many variables and processes in the
systems and are sometimes accompanied by massive data. The process of extracting
information and knowledge from the simulators and observational data can be
called an inverse problem. However, solving inverse problems and quantifying the
uncertainty is challenging. This project addresses these challenges with novel
methods, efficient algorithms, and software tools to enable fast simulations and
inverse problem solutions. A particular application in this project is inverse
problems in remote sensing. This research project integrates the advancements in
statistics, applied mathematics, data science, and remote sensing. It will
provide ways to assess the quality and uncertainty of remote sensing data
products to address scientific hypotheses. The PIs will apply and evaluate these
new methods in the context of inverse problems in remote sensing for carbon
monitoring, but these methods can also be used for data-intensive inverse
problems in many other areas including climatology, geophysics, and medical
imaging. This project will directly train student researchers and will develop
educational materials. The project findings will be shared via journal
publications and conference presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative research project will contribute to significant advances in
statistical modeling, uncertainty quantification, and efficient scalable methods
to solve large-scale inverse problems associated with high-dimensional systems.
The PIs will establish new methods to build statistical emulators with
computational efficiency and statistical guarantees. The scalability is achieved
by joint dimension reduction for both the input and output spaces, while
theoretical approximation properties of the resulting emulators will be derived.
The resulting emulators will facilitate large-scale simulation-based uncertainty
quantification experiments for remote sensing data. This framework of
statistical emulation will also be integrated into the algorithms to infer
inverse problem solutions to enable faster computation. With a particular focus
on high-dimensional systems encountered in remote sensing, the methods developed
will lead to a new paradigm of statistical methods for complex inference
problems and uncertainty quantification in remote sensing and transform the
current practice of remote sensing retrieval. Open-source software for the
proposed new approaches will be made available to a wide community of scientists
and engineers. By partnering with collaborators in remote sensing, the methods
developed in this project will be of practical utility for researchers in
various applications including carbon monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.