* 2053046
* Research: Advancing Engineers’ Ability to Recognize, Strategize About, and Act On Concerns Related to Public Welfare
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Erin Cech, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 04/30/2024
* USD 350,000.00

Engineers’ attention to the impact of technology on public safety, health, and
welfare has never been more imperative. Recent reports of algorithmic bias,
drone-based surveillance, and emissions falsification (among other issues)
underscore the potential harms of the socio-technical systems in which engineers
may play a part. Through surveys and interviews, we will develop and test a
multilevel theoretical framework for understanding engineers’ concerns for
public welfare and for examining cultural, institutional, and identity factors
that shape these concerns. We will develop a research-informed graduate seminar
that will provide a model for engineering programs at other institutions to
enhance professional responsibility training among their students. Having a
better understanding of how engineering professionals and students recognize
their public welfare responsibilities will help engineering educators and
leaders revise training efforts and accountability infrastructures to equip
engineers to more effectively uphold their professional responsibilities. The
project will also contribute to the knowledge base on engineering workforce
onboarding and training, and will serve as a benchmark for research on
engineers’ understanding of their public welfare
responsibilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will examine possible factors that
impact engineers’ concern for public welfare across three levels: professional
cultural ideologies, institutional contexts (engineering education, engineering
workplaces, and professional societies), and professional identities. We will
use this multilevel framework to address several primary research questions: (1)
to what extent do engineering professionals and students recognize, strategize
about, and act on concerns for public welfare as part of their professional
responsibilities? (2) What cultural, institutional, and identity factors promote
or undermine these outcomes? (3) To what extent can a research-informed seminar
teach students to recognize public welfare responsibilities and to understand
strategies for intervention? We will investigate these questions with a
representative survey of US engineers (N=500) and a longitudinal interview study
following a cohort of electrical and computer engineering master’s students into
the workforce (N=60). Using insights from these data, a novel “Public Welfare
Responsibility and Intervention Training” (PubWRIT) graduate seminar will be
designed (and assessed) to train engineers to recognize and understand how to
respond when they encounter situations where they perceive the health and safety
of the public to be at risk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.