* 2053023
* EAR-PF: Does eruption trigger mechanism ultimately control eruption style at arc volcanoes?
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Rebecca deGraffenried, deGraffenried, Rebecca
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 05/31/2024
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Rebecca deGraffenried has been granted an EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
carry out research and education plans at the Arizona State University. Dr.
deGraffenried’s project is designed to to understand the underlying factors that
dictate how explosive a volcanic eruption will be in order to accurately
forecast volcanic hazards when a volcano shows signs of activity. Recent work
shows that the specific reason a magma begins traveling to the surface (the
“eruption trigger”) influences how explosive the eventual eruption will be,
although it is unclear why this is true. Both the eruption trigger and rate at
which magma rises to the surface (magma ascent rate) are thought to be related
to the amount of internal pressure in a given magma body. Therefore, this
project aims to test whether different eruption triggers produce different magma
ascent rate and will determine the ascent rates and trigger mechanisms from a
range of eruption styles at Mt. St. Helens and Mt. Hood, two high threat
volcanoes in the United States. Not only will this study shed light on an
underlying process that controls eruption style, but it will also advance
knowledge about the behavior and hazards of two very active volcanoes that
threaten communities in the Pacific Northwest. The work has implications for
volcanic risk and hazard assessment and will train an undergraduate in research
methods. Additionally, Dr. deGraffenried will partner with Arizona State
University’s “Ask an Earth and Space Scientist” to communicate with the broader
community about the results of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project
is a petrologic investigation of two volcanoes in the Cascades volcanic arc.
Subduction zone volcanoes in particular are hazardous to communities due to the
range of magma compositions and eruption styles possible. Therefore,
understanding the factors that influence volcanic eruption style is particularly
critical for these volcanoes. Mt. St. Helens and Mt. Hood are both poised to
threaten communities in the event of eruption, though they have vastly different
eruptive histories. This study will utilize diffusion modeling of Fe-Mg
concentration gradients in orthopyroxene to determine the timescale of ascent
from storage to the surface. Additionally, eruption trigger mechanism for each
eruption of interest will be determined by crystal/melt equilibrium,
thermobarometers, and hygrometers. Altogether, these data will provide insights
into a range of eruption styles and magma compositions represented by the two
volcanoes of interest and elucidate a previously unexplored connection between
eruption initiation and eruption outcome. The results of these studies could be
useful in hazard forecasts as geophysical monitoring data can be used to
identify certain eruption triggers. As a part of the broader impacts of this
study, Dr. deGraffenried will contribute articles on volcanic processes to the
“Ask an Earth and Space Scientist” series on the Arizona State University School
of Earth and Space Exploration website. This series is geared towards K-12
students and answers questions these students have about how the Earth
works.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.