* 2053364
* Collaborative Research: Assessment of Building Resiliency in Tornadoes Considering Transient Internal Pressure Effects
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Hannah Blum, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 10/31/2024
* USD 212,344.00

Buildings that serve as essential facilities to communities must remain
operational after natural disasters, including tornadoes, to provide vital
services and reduce recovery time. A frequent cause for building failures in
tornadoes has been the sudden occurrence of large openings in the building
envelope, such as when overhead vehicular doors are breached due to debris
impact. These sudden breaches create sudden changes in the internal pressure of
the building which, in turn, yield additional structural effects. But there has
not been much research on these sorts of pressure changes to date. This Disaster
Resilience Research Grants (DRRG) project will quantify transient internal
pressures and the effects of changes in order to improve assessment of likely
building performance in tornadoes. Findings will contribute significantly to the
development of codes and standards for tornado-resistant building design,
including critical infrastructures and other types of buildings. In addition,
the data from the research will be curated in the Data Depot repository of the
Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) for open access to
inform other research on tornadic loading of buildings. Through dedicated
special research symposia on disaster resilience in structural engineering with
academics and professionals, the project will enhance partnerships between
academia and industry. A mentoring program will support undergraduate students
who identify as members of underrepresented groups in structural engineering,
and educational outreach activities will improve community tornado hazard
awareness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the study is to improve the
understanding of internal pressure of buildings due to sudden occurrences of
large openings in the building envelope to enable the accurate assessment of
building performance in tornadoes. Our central hypothesis is that transient
internal pressure caused by sudden occurrences of large openings in the building
envelope is significant and affects the building system differently than when
the building is enclosed or has preexisting large openings. A robust
computational model validated with testing in a tornado simulator will be
developed and output from this model will help enable the design of buildings
that are more resilient to tornado events. The research will be carried out by
achieving three specific aims. Firstly, transient internal pressure resulting
from a sudden failure in the building envelope will be quantified based on
experiments in a tornado simulator, and the results will be used to validate
computational models. Secondly, the validated computational model will be
utilized to study the effects of dominant opening sizes and failure modes on the
system strength and resiliency, incorporating inherent system uncertainties.
Thirdly, this work will produce fragility functions and recommendations to guide
engineers on how to optimize resources to achieve tornado resilient
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.