* 2053207
* I-Corps: Extracellular matrix materials for use in creating tissue scaffolding to regenerate tissues
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2021,05/31/2023
* WILLIAM MONDY, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a healing gel used to support tissue growth in wounds for people
with diabetes and foot ulcers, as well as other wound-healing applications. The
current market solution for foot ulcers in diabetics is a gel that has low
success rates as the body breaks down the gel's proteins extremely fast. The
proposed technology differs from the current solution in that it doesn't rely on
proteins for wound healing, and thus the product doesn't get consumed by the
body at such a rapid rate. Foot ulcers are a problem for 25% of the 34.2 million
diabetics living in the United States. With the current option on the market, 25
percent of the ulcers become chronically infected, with 25 percent of those
patients needing amputations. Even with amputation, 50 percent of amputees, 1.05
million people, die each year in the US from gangrene acquired with foot ulcers.
A Market Research Report by BCC on Organ and Tissue Transplantation and
Alternatives shows this innovation fits a global market reaching nearly $90.6
billion by 2020.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a novel biomaterial created using extracellular matrix materials
isolated from ctenophores, which have highly regenerative properties. A material
fabricated by laser to match a tissue's authentic architecture serves to guide
cells to regenerate tissues into their original structure. The software controls
cell growth and differentiation in the framework of a tissue's authentic
extracellular matrix architecture within one of three novel bioreactor systems
using peripheral devices that create environmental conditions promoting tissue
regeneration. The inventions include two standalone systems used to hold and
support bio-printed and/or laser-fabricated tissue constructs. The proposed
technology produces molecular scaffolding for tissue regeneration using novel
growth factor materials isolated from the extracellular matrix of ancestral
tissues from ctenophore incorporated into molecular scaffolding to guide tissue
regeneration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.