* 2053315
* STTR Phase II:  A novel retinal imaging device
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Samantha Scott, JuneBrain, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,233,577.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to help advance the health and welfare of
individuals living with retinal and neurological disease. This includes multiple
sclerosis (MS)—a debilitating autoimmune disease affecting nearly 1 million
people in the United States. A fully automated, wearable, and low-cost retinal
imaging device will be developed for use in both clinical and home settings that
detects changes in the retina, allowing patients and their physicians to more
routinely track treatment efficacy and ocular side effects. Early detection and
treatment of MS is crucial to reducing the risk of disease progression and
disability. Current practice relies on infrequent neurological and radiological
exams to assess changes in disease activity and treatment efficacy. However,
there is currently no way to monitor MS in real time between these visits.
Research relating retinal pathology to MS processes in the brain demonstrate
that retinal imaging can provide early detection of disease events, offering an
alternative monitoring pathway. This device will thus help reduce patient
healthcare costs associated with increasing disability, and positively impact
the research and care of other retinal diseases, including age-related macular
degeneration (AMD) and idiopathic intracranial hypertension
(IIH).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
II project will yield a novel retinal imaging device that uses optical coherence
tomography (OCT) to assess retinal pathology. While OCT is a widely-used
modality for imaging the retina, the proposed device differentiates itself from
current technologies in that it is specifically designed for unsupervised use by
patients at home. This includes a ruggedized and ergonomic design suited for
those who suffer from low vision, low mobility, and other symptoms that make
frequent trips to a clinic difficult. Patients will use the device briefly as
often as prescribed by their doctor, during which time retinal images will be
automatically acquired, analyzed, and sent to a physician for remote review. As
such, it will further increase engagement between patients and physicians by
making patients more proactively involved in their disease management. For this
project, the following objectives are planned: 1) Complete development of a
clinical-grade beta prototype that is suitable for use in clinical and home
settings, 2) Develop a software pipeline for automated image analysis and
report, and 3) Conduct a usability study in a cohort of AMD patients with
varying degrees of vision loss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.