* 2053302
* CSBR: Natural History: Relocation and critical upgrades to storage, curation, and digital access to the Margaret H. Fulford Herbarium at the University of Cincinnati
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* David Lentz, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 524,176.00

This project will provide critical upgrades to the Margaret H. Fulford Herbarium
at the University of Cincinnati, including a move of the collection into a new
facility. The herbarium of approximately 118,500 specimens collected in the
1820s through 2021 represents a regional vascular flora and a world-class
collection of mosses and liverworts. The herbarium also houses Dr. Margaret
Fulford’s personal library, which includes many rare volumes, unpublished field
and laboratory notebooks, and over 100 binders of original, mostly unpublished
original technical illustrations. Recently, the University of Cincinnati
renovated a new space for the herbarium in an adjacent building that houses the
Department of Biological Sciences. The new herbarium space will dramatically
improve the security and longevity of the collection, and provides additional
capacity for research, education, specimen imaging and databasing, and
continuing public engagement. Two ongoing education programs will be enhanced
and will include a collaborative specimen imaging project involving
developmentally disabled students, and a local 5th-8th grade “STEM Girls”
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year project will support moving the
herbarium into the new and vastly upgraded space by providing a compactor system
and modern herbarium cabinets. The current storage conditions are very poor,
resulting from frequent water leaks and several catastrophic flooding events,
which have caused severe damage to most of the cabinets. These circumstances
have left the collection vulnerable to further damage from water, humidity,
insect infestations, etc. The herbarium also has specimens that are currently
stored on open shelves and are effectively unavailable to researchers or the
general public. In addition, ca. 12,000 bryophyte specimens will be curated,
imaged, and databased. These specimens, collected by notable bryophyte
specialists Margaret Fulford and Jerry Snider, will be made accessible to
researchers and the general public through the herbarium databases and
iDigBio.org. Finally, Fulford’s ca. 3,500 technically detailed illustrations
will be scanned and made accessible. Thus, this project will facilitate the
herbarium’s ongoing commitment to open the museum doors to the world by creating
a modern, user-friendly facility and sharing its invaluable collection of
specimens and illustrations through online, publicly accessible
portals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.