* 2053971
* CDS&amp;E: Deep Spring: a Neural Network-based Approach to Design of Slender Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Vwani Roychowdhury, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Reha Uzsoy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 789,999.00

Slender structures are vital to our lives – from columns and beams that support
buildings, to airplane wings and blood vessels. By understanding how they
respond to strain and the factors that give rise to bending and buckling,
engineers can design safer and more efficient systems with applications in
robotics, civil engineering, and medical treatment. Many systems with slender
structures exhibit complex behavior that is non-linear and counter intuitive.
This Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering (CDS&amp;E) project
combines machine learning and physics-based modeling to better understand their
behavior and how to harness it to provide new capabilities. The findings will
enable new structures such as soft robots with new forms of motion and control
for medical procedures or search and rescue activities. The knowledge gained may
also enable the design of products such as stretchable electronics for health
care, bio sensing and a broad range of consumer and industrial products. The
project will develop a website and software repository to share the simulation
tools with the research community. Educational materials including instructional
videos will be developed for graduate courses and K-12
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable the design of new
materials and structures like soft kirigami composites and compressive buckling-
induced micro-sized 3D architecture materials. The researchers will advance
numerical modeling of systems with slender structures through a combination of
machine learning and discrete differential geometry, using “nonlinear springs”
represented by neural networks to simulate the systems. The enhanced
computational speed of this approach will aid in the design and optimization of
engineering systems such as deployable structures and soft robots. Developing
predictive models for slender structures and metamaterials is challenging
because of the inherent instabilities and many possible configurations. If
successful, this development would be the first of its kind in the mechanics
research community and would provide the twin capability to predict complex
structural responses and design structures with an inverse problem solver. While
the target proof-of-concept examples relate to slender structures and
metamaterials, the computational methods would be generalizable to a broad class
of material-structure systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.