* 2053149
* An Electronic-Sensing &amp; Magnetic-Modulation (ESMM) Biosensor for Phagocytosis Quantification for Personalized Stratification in Pathogenic Infections
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Umer Hassan, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 03/31/2024
* USD 360,000.00

The objective of the proposed research is a biosensor platform to quantify the
innate ability of human blood cells to combat pathogens (a phenomenon known as
phagocytosis). Knowing phagocytic activity of blood cells is critical to
determine the effectiveness of our immune system (body’s natural defense) to
kill the pathogens potentially leading to stratify the high-risk individuals.
Current clinical instruments are inadequate to perform phagocytosis monitoring
in a rapid, automated way and requires extensive staff training, manual sample
processing, long wait times, and huge cost per test. To address this unmet need,
this project will design and fabricate a biosensor capable of quantifying
phagocytosis requiring only a drop of blood. The project is at the nexus of
micro-nano sensing, biomedical engineering, bioelectronics, microfluidics,
machine learning and disease diagnostics. In proposed microfluidic biosensor,
blood cells will interact with the functionalized microbeads (mimicking
pathogens) and perform the phagocytosis. Different magnetic field configurations
within microfluidic device will modulate the cells fluidic behavior accordingly
which will in turn be identified and quantified using micro electrodes built on
chip. The proposed biosensor will advance biomedical and device research and
will have great potential to benefit human healthcare. This project will train
undergraduate and graduate students in the fields of bioelectronics,
microfluidics, and machine learning. The project will also enable the
integration of proposed research into PI’s educational efforts. Further, PI’s
outreach activities will include engaging K-12 students, the local health-care
industry, and the general public through educational lectures and making them
available online for broad dissemination of knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal will enable the development of a next generation in-vitro diagnostic
platform equipped with Electronic-Sensing &amp; Magnetic-Modulation (ESMM)
modules integrated in a microfluidic chip to quantify the human blood cells
ability to kill pathogens. The heterogeneity of the immune system activation in
response to pathogenic infections is critical to strategize the correct clinical
response to treat the patients. Quantifying blood cells natural ability to kill
pathogens i.e., phagocytosis is critical to demonstrate the effectiveness of
individual’s response in combating pathogens. Further, the ability to engineer/
modulate the phagocytic activity will tremendously improve the therapeutic
outcomes for the infected patients. This project aims to develop a novel
personalized biosensor capable of not only quantifying the phagocytic ability
but also will determine appropriate therapeutics to improve phagocytes ability
to kill the pathogens. The biosensor is equipped with microfluidics,
microelectrodes for electronic sensing, and quadrupole magnetic configuration to
modulate the blood cells behavior on-chip. Blood cells will interact with
antibody conjugated magnetic particles and will perform phagocytosis on-chip.
Furthermore, the proposed biosensor will be equipped with real-time data
analysis using machine learning to improve the sensor performance. The proposed
sensor will enable stratification of immune response of infected patients
requiring only a drop of whole blood with a rapid time to result (TOR). Sensors
will be benchmarked with patient clinical samples. Sensor will have the
capability to be used at the point-of-care at multiple health-care
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.