* 2053115
* Collaborative Research: Examining the Vulnerability and Recovery of Small Farms to Natural Hazards and the Impact to Rural Community Resilience
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Steven Klose, Texas A&M AgriLife Extension Service
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 10/31/2024
* USD 115,213.00

This Disaster Resilience Research Grant (DRRG) project contributes to the
advancement of national health, prosperity and welfare by creating new knowledge
on disaster recovery for the agricultural industry. Despite the criticality of
agriculture to U.S. and global food production, the lack of economic diversity
and prevalence of agriculture in many rural areas, particularly in the central
US, is theorized to be a major contributor to low disaster resilience.
Resilience is a complex function of socio-economic dimensions and the built
environment; and the population, economics, and physical infrastructure that
comprise agricultural regions are distinct from the urban and suburban areas
that are the common focus of most disaster and community resilience studies.
This research generates a fundamental understanding of the resilience of farms
and agriculture-prevalent rural communities in the face of severe windstorms,
which will be of broad benefit to society and to national resilience. The
research team will identify, evaluate, and recommend actions to enhance
resilience of farms. To maximize the impact of these findings, the team will
partner with the Extension Disaster Education Network for outreach and
technology transfer. Implementation of these mitigation measures can transform
the disaster resilience of rural and agricultural regions, safeguarding the
lives of citizens, regional and national economies, and global food production.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this research is to enhance the
resilience of rural communities to natural hazards, which requires state-of-the-
art research on the infrastructure that support farm operations, the recovery
processes of individual farms, and the interaction of individual farms within
the regional agricultural economy. As a first step towards enhancing rural
resilience, the interdisciplinary team will conduct a three-year research
project carefully tracking resilience from hazards to structures to farms to
communities. The project is characterized by two primary goals. The first goal
is to generate a fundamental understanding of the vulnerability and recovery of
farms following windstorms through longitudinal reconnaissance of impacted
agricultural communities, surveys of impacted farmers, correlation of hazard
intensity with infrastructure response, and the examination of the linkages
between recovery of individual infrastructure with farm-level recovery. The
second goal is to develop and validate a risk-informed resilience assessment
framework comprised of a farm-level resilience factors and community-level
economic analyses to support decisions on business continuity and infrastructure
investment for farms and the broader agriculture-prevalent rural
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.