* 2053848
* Computable Mathematics Measured by Enumeration Degrees
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Joseph Miller, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2024
* USD 420,000.00

Mathematical logic and computability arose from the need to develop stable and
trustworthy foundations for mathematics, provide clear criteria for what
constitutes a proof, what basic axioms give sufficient power to express the rest
of mathematics, and what constitutes an algorithm or a computable function. The
origins of the fields trace back to David Hilbert's program from the 1900's and
to the work by GÃ¶del, Church, and Turing that proved several aspects of this
program impossible: there are problems in elementary number theory that do not
have computable solutions. Since then, incomputable problems have been
identified in many different subfields of mathematics. Most famously, the
solution sets to some Diophantine equations and the word problem for some
finitely presented groups are incomputable. Computability theory proposes
frameworks to study the relative algorithmic complexity of such problems. This
project proposes an in-depth investigation of two related frameworks in
computability theory, and the complex structures that they give rise to. The
project presents a diverse array of research avenues, suitable for all levels of
experience. Soskova and Miller intend to continue their collaboration with
undergraduate, graduate, and postgraduate students and facilitate the quick
immersion of young researchers into this area through two textbooks: a beginner
level Computability Theory textbook and a more specialized advanced textbook on
the precise topic studied within this project. They also maintain a visual
online database that allows the quick identification of open problems. The
project will support women's engagement in the field through a mentorship
program organized by Soskova within the CiE Women in Computability focus group.
Soskova and Miller will continue to support the Logic Community by organizing
scientific meetings and through their editorial work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
computability theory, the Turing degrees are used to measure the effective
content of sets of natural numbers. This measure can be extended to capture the
effective content of other objects in mathematics, such as the real numbers. In
other cases, Turing reducibility is not sufficient. For example, Miller proved
that it is not possible to assign a Turing degree to every continuous function
on the unit interval. In that and many other cases, an extension of Turing
reducibility, enumeration reducibility, turns out to provide a better framework
for effective mathematics. In 1967, Rogers posed a list of problems that
strongly influenced the development of computability theory. One of these
problems asks whether the partial orders of the Turing degrees and the
enumeration degrees are rigid structures, i.e., have no nontrivial
automorphisms. Slaman and Woodin proved that the rigidity of the Turing degrees
is equivalent to a complete characterization of its definable relations and to
its biinterpretability with second order arithmetic. Building on this, Soskova
proved that the same equivalence holds for the enumeration degrees. Miller and
Soskova (with collaborators) answered another problem from the list: there is a
first order definable copy of the Turing degrees inside the enumeration degrees.
This established a link between the rigidity problems for the two structures; if
the Turing degrees are rigid then so are the enumeration degrees. The rigidity
of the enumeration degrees, while still open, could turn out to be more
approachable. Definability within the enumeration degrees has already proved
more approachable. The goal of this project is to expand our understanding of
the structure of the enumeration degrees and its nontrivial connections to
effective mathematics, with a focus on computable topology. We would like to
accumulate new methods investigate combinatorial properties of the structure,
and isolate special classes of degrees that determine the logical character of
the structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.