* 2053726
* The Role of the Epigenetic Mechanism, DNA Methylation, in the Tolerance and Resistance of Antarctic Pteropods to Ocean Acidification and Warming
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Gretchen Hofmann, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 03/31/2024
* USD 308,547.00

Part 1: Non-technical description:&lt;br/&gt; With support from the Office of
Polar Programs, this project will evaluate how an important part of the food web
in the coastal ocean of Antarctica will respond to climate change. The focal
study organism in the plankton is a shelled mollusk, the Antarctic pteropod,
Limacina helicina antarctica, an Southern Ocean organism that this known to
respond to climate driven changes in ocean acidification and ocean warming.
Ocean acidification, the lowering of ocean pH via the absorption of atmospheric
carbon dioxide in the surface of the ocean, is a change in the ocean that is
expected to cross deleterious thresholds of pH within decades. This study will
improve understanding of how pteropods will respond, which will provide insight
into predicting the resilience of the Antarctic marine ecosystem during future
changes, one of the planetâ€™s last marine wildernesses. The project will use
tools of molecular biology to examine specifically how gene expression is
modulated in the pteropods, and further, how the changes and regulation of genes
act to resist the stress of low pH and high temperature. In addition, this
project supports the training of Ph.D. graduate students and advances the goal
of inclusive excellence in STEM and in marine sciences, in particular. The
students involved in this project are from groups traditionally under-
represented in marine science including first-generation college students.
Overall, the project contributes to the development of the U.S. work force and
contributes to diversity and inclusive excellence in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical description: &lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this project is to investigate the molecular response of the
Antarctic thecosome pteropod, Limacina helicina antarctica to ocean
acidification (OA) and ocean warming. The project will investigate changes in
the epigenome of juvenile L. h. antarctica, by assessing the dynamics of DNA
methylation in response to three scenarios of environmental conditions that were
simulated in laboratory mesocosm CO2 experiments: (1) present-day pCO2
conditions for summer and winter, (2) future ocean acidification expected within
10-15 years, and (3) a multiple stressor experiment to investigate synergistic
interaction of OA and high temperature stress. Recent lab-based mesocosm
experiment research showed significant changes in the dynamics of global DNA
methylation in the pteropod genome, along with variation in gene expression in
response to abiotic changes. Thus, it is clear that juvenile L. h. antarctica
are capable of mounting a substantial epigenetic response to ocean
acidification. However, it is not known how DNA methylation, as an epigenetic
process, is modulating changes in the transcriptome. In order to address this
gap in the epigenetic knowledge regarding pteropods, the project will use next-
generation sequencing approaches (e.g., RNA sequencing and reduced
representation bisulfite sequencing) to integrate changes in methylation status
with changes in gene expression in juvenile pteropods. Overall, this
investigation is an important step in exploring environmental transcriptomics
and phenotypic plasticity of an ecologically important member of Southern Ocean
macrozoooplankton in response to anthropogenic climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.