* 2053498
* CAREER: Synergy-based Human Machine Interfaces
* CSE,IIS
* 08/22/2020,08/31/2024
* Ramana Vinjamuri, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2024
* USD 513,611.00

With a brain controlled exoskeleton, an individual with spinal cord injury
performed a symbolic-kickoff of for the World Cup in Brazil in 2014. Human-
machine interfaces have not only become popular technologies but have become the
hope of many individuals for restoring their lost limb function. Decades of
research went into making the interface between the human and the machine
seamless, but scientists were unable to effectively address the inherent
challenges, namely, complexity, adaptability and variability. To overcome the
above challenges, it is critical to computationally understand and
quantitatively characterize how humans control their senses and motor abilities.
Biomimetically inspired models can help to understand this process, and can
enable efficient control of the machine. The human hand has many dimensions and
is an ideal testbed to understand sensorimotor control while interacting with
computers and other machines. Hence the goal of this project is to design and
develop biomimetic models that control the human hand and extend these models to
the control of multidimensional machines. The societal impacts of the proposed
project will be the development of new designs of artificial limbs for
individuals with disabilities that are as close to natural in their functions.
The educational and outreach impacts of the project will create opportunities
for students and working engineers to learn the importance of human machine
interfaces. The project will facilitate mentored international research and
educational opportunities for students. The hands-on modules developed as an
outflow of the proposed research will ignite interest in science and technology
among students at all levels, particularly women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The means by which the central nervous system
effortlessly controls the high dimensional human hand is still an unsolved
mystery. To address this high dimensional control problem, many bioinspired
motor control models have been proposed, one of which is based on synergies.
According to this model, instead of controlling individual motor units, central
nervous system simplifies the control using coordinated control of groups of
motor units called synergies. However, there are several unanswered questions
today. Where are synergies present? What is their role in motor control and
motor learning? To answer these fundamental questions, this project takes a
holistic and comprehensive approach. It combines the concepts of human motor
control, computational neuroscience, machine learning and validation with
noninvasive human experiments. The research objectives of this project are: to
model the generation of synergies in human hand movements and validate the model
with noninvasive human experiments using computational models,
electroencephalography and transcranial magnetic stimulation, to model the
behavior and the role of synergies in motor learning and to apply these
synergies in multidimensional machine control and machine-assisted
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.