* 2053567
* LEAP-HI: Manufacturing of Silicon-based Hybrid Organic-Inorganic Quantum Building Blocks
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Lorenzo Mangolini, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2026
* USD 2,000,000.00

Quantum computing promises to address our growing need for faster and more
energy efficient information processing technologies. Today quantum computers
rely on materials and structures that need to be both extremely pure and
operated at cryogenic temperatures, a limitation referred to as “the tyranny of
low temperature”. These constraints put into question the scalability of quantum
computers and, in turn, their potential to manage the sheer magnitude of
information generated by modern-day society. This Leading Engineering for
America's Prosperity, Health, and Infrastructure (LEAP-HI) project will
investigate alternative materials and structures that have the potential to
store and optically access quantum information at room temperature. The
structures are based on small semiconductor (inorganic) nanoparticles integrated
with carefully designed organic molecules. The main outcomes of this project
will be (a) a set of design guidelines for these hybrid organic-inorganic
structures that optimize the optical and electronic coupling between the two
components, and (b) the development of strategies for their manufacturing that,
while being novel, are also inherently scalable to large production volumes.
Achieving these goals will allow establishing the hybrid organic-inorganic
structures as the fundamental building block of the next generation of quantum
computers. A broad array of activities including outreach to community colleges,
internship into the principal investigator’s laboratories and outreach to the
public in collaboration with local museums will be integrated into the research
plan. These activities will target students at all levels (from grade school to
community colleges), with particular attention towards students from
underrepresented groups and the goal of encouraging them to pursue advanced
degrees in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is centered on silicon
quantum dots as the inorganic component of the researched structure. This choice
is motivated by their advantageous properties in terms of abundance and
sustainability, and by the fact that their processing science is still in its
infancy, making this field ripe for critical contributions. The project aims at
achieving an unprecedented control over the optoelectronic coupling between
silicon quantum dots and surrounding organic semiconducting matrices. This will
be realized by grafting transmitter organic molecules onto the surface of the
silicon particles, therefore tuning the interfacial chemistry and the bi-
directional energy transfer between the two system components. Novel gas-phase
processing schemes will be developed to produce silicon quantum dots and
immediately graft their surfaces with multi-functional organic groups, providing
a rapid and scalable approach to the production of the hybrid structures.
Ultrafast spectroscopy will be used to elucidate the role played by interfacial
chemistry on the functionality of the hybrid organic-inorganic structures.
Atomistic modelling will provide theoretical foundation and guidance to this
investigation. The investigators are uniquely qualified to undertake this
project, as they bring together expertise in the synthesis of silicon quantum
dots, the design of organic-inorganic interfaces, the photo-physical
characterization of hybrid systems and the ab-initio modelling of interfacial
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.