* 2053697
* Tensor and Subspace Learning Methods with Applications to Medical Imaging
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Xin Zhang, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 180,000.00

Medical imaging techniques have become increasingly important for both clinical
and research studies. For example, cone beam computed tomography has a major
role in diagnosis and treatment planning in dentistry, and functional magnetic
resonance imaging is routinely used to help researchers characterize brain
activity. More efficient and powerful statistical techniques are needed to
analyze medical imaging for diagnosis and prediction of diseases and other
disorders. Through this project, new statistical theory, methods, and algorithms
will be developed for the analysis of large complex data such as medical imaging
data sets. The research is expected to provide new theoretical insights and
practical methodologies that advance multivariate statistics while
simultaneously responding to the growing needs and challenges of medical imaging
data analysis. Results of the research in this project will be disseminated
through collaborations with neuroscientists and biomedical engineers, as well as
substantial graduate student training and outreach activities. Open source and
user-friendly software will also be produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultra-high
dimensionality, tensor structure, and high correlations are embedded in modern
scientific and engineering data. Estimation and inferential techniques become
inefficient or even inconsistent if they ignore high correlations among
variables, heterogeneity caused by additional covariates, or intrinsic
structural information. To address these challenges, statistically rigorous and
computationally efficient learning methods will be developed. A key idea is to
construct and estimate targeted subspaces that exclude the noise and irrelevant
information in the data set. The research project is expected to make
significant contributions on two fronts: computational and theoretical
foundations for envelope subspace estimation in high dimensions, and efficient
tensorial parameter estimation in regression and classification
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.