* 2053358
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Urban Resilience to Pluvial Floods Using Reduced-Order Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Daniel Wright, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 01/31/2025
* USD 149,755.00

Flooding is exacerbated in urban landscapes, where intense rainfall combines
with high levels of impervious land cover to produce flooding in areas not
immediately adjacent to rivers and their traditionally defined floodplains.
Recent events across the nation have demonstrated that this type of flooding
(termed ‘pluvial’) adversely affects urban resilience and is a major contributor
to overall flood damage and fatalities. Despite the increasing recognition of
its importance, pluvial flooding remains poorly understood because of the
failure of conventional rainfall predictions and inundation assessment methods
to assess the likelihood and severity of its occurrence, and the extreme
computational cost of more sophisticated models that could otherwise help
address this knowledge gap. By focusing on extreme summer precipitation and
flooding in densely populated urban areas, this Disaster Resilience Research
Grants (DRRG) project will address the precursors to and the occurrence of
flooding hazard phenomena, as well as the uncertainty associated with its
prediction. By enabling quantification of the likelihood of a flood hazard
outside of riverine floodplains, this research will inform disaster management
planning at scales of engineering practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
hypothesizes that (i) modern techniques in probabilistic analysis can simplify
the representation of extreme rainfall processes that produce pluvial floods;
that (ii) both surface drainage network and flow hydrodynamic features within an
urban landscape determine the formation of floods outside of riverine areas; and
that (iii) flood “surrogate” modeling combined with high-fidelity, first-
principles modeling is indispensable for computational discovery in flood
science and the development of practical tools to enhance the resilience of
urban environments to pluvial flooding. The specific objectives of this research
are (1) to demonstrate the potential for flood prediction using state-of-the-
science rainfall and land surface data and hybrid modeling approaches; (2) to
address the project hypotheses through a combination of state-of-the-science
data, modeling, and uncertainty quantification methods; and (3) to distribute
developed tools through open-source software packages. Project activities will
focus on a case study urban watershed in a suburban area of Detroit identified
by regional stakeholders as one key area to understand the formation and
management of stormwater.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is co-funded by
NSF-NIST Disaster Resilience Research Grants and NSF's Hydrologic Sciences
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.