* 2053671
* An investigation of bi-directional flame-acoustic interactions during thermoacoustic instabilities
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Abhishek Saha, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 04/30/2024
* USD 304,256.00

Gas turbines used for power generation and propulsion can experience large
pressure fluctuations as a result of thermoacoustic instabilities. These
instabilities arise from the interaction of sound and heat release within the
engine combustion chamber and represent a major challenge for safe and reliable
operation of the engine. The frequent occurrence of thermoacoustic instabilities
can limit the performance and the lifetime of gas turbine combustors,
particularly when running under conditions designed to reduce emissions and fuel
consumption. However, due to complex processes including chemical reactions,
turbulent flow, heat release, and acoustic, a detailed simulation of
thermoacoustic instabilities remains challenging and computationally expensive.
The proposed project aims to develop a simpler mathematical model that can
predict and capture the transition from stable to unstable behavior in
combustors. Experiments will be carried out to assess the model's performance
and to provide benchmark data for validating models developed by other
researchers. The outcome of the study will enable engine designers to predict
and mitigate thermoacoustic instabilities and improve reliability and
performance. As a broader impact of the work, undergraduate and graduate
students, particularly from underrepresented minority groups, will gain
experience in using advanced experimental and modeling
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program proposes to develop a synchronization-
based framework to design low order models capable of capturing the dynamic
transitional behaviors in turbulent combustors during thermoacoustic
instabilities. The study, which synergistically includes modeling and
experimental components, will facilitate the development of improved predictive
tools to provide better control strategies in mitigating prevalent
thermoacoustic instabilities. In modeling, the primary objective is to introduce
a system of two mutually coupled oscillators, representing the flame and
acoustics, to capture the bi-directional nature of the feedback in
thermoacoustic instability. Such a model will capture three dynamical states,
periodic, intermittent, and chaotic, observed in practical systems, hence
overcome the shortcoming of unidirectionally coupled models, such as FTFs and
FDFs. Furthermore, the program will develop experimental strategies, where the
two-way coupled systems can be simulated by perturbing a flame with acoustic
forcing whose frequency and amplitude are modulated based on the ensuing flame
dynamics. The experiments will enable us to observe the differences in local and
global flame dynamics when perturbed with coupled or de-coupled acoustic forcing
and to gather data for model validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.