* 2053267
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Cryodesalination System
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,01/31/2023
* Norbert Buchsbaum, CryoDesalination, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 01/31/2023
* USD 255,997.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project allows energy efficiencies and novel methods of fresh
water production. The high cost of conventional methods prevent construction of
new desalination (converting salt water) and wastewater clean-up facilities. The
proposed project lowers the high capital and operating costs of producing fresh
water. The proposed process is a platform technology with applications ranging
from seawater desalination to purification of waste streams from a variety of
industries, including petroleum, mining, fertilizer, and coal. The units can
range in size from small mobile units on skids to massive high-volume
infrastructure plants enabling economies of scale and construction of large
plants, potentially at one-tenth the costs of present-day desalination plants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to prove and quantify
the effectiveness of two major innovations: the crystallizer that controls
crystal size and the ice-brine separation process which separates ice crystals
from residual brine without mechanical equipment. The crystallizer R&amp;D
includes calibrating and measuring internal circulation; charting internal
circulation as a function of ice crystallization rate and pressure; studying ice
formation and ice crystal salinity (purity) as a function of ice crystallization
rate, internal circulation, pressure, residence time, and brine concentration
(temperature); determining the effect of pressure and operating ranges to avoid
hydrate formation; determining how hydrate formation is related to feed and/or
reject brine concentrations; and determining the effect of varying residence
time. The ice slurry R&amp;D includes investigating the maximum ice
concentration in slurries that can be pumped without difficulty within the range
of 15 â€“ 25% ice concentration; and the effect of various temperatures on the
flow characteristics of these slurries. Cryosol investigations include
determining and graphing at what point and to what extent viscosity diluents are
needed to maintain good slurry flow within the range of temperatures from 32F to
the eutectic; and the identification and properties of effective non-toxic
viscosity diluents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.