* 2053370
* Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E: Learning Convective Heat Transfer from Mass Transfer Visualization
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Peter Kang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 202,557.00

Understanding convective heat transfer is crucial in designing efficient heat
exchangers, thermodynamic systems, biochemical fluid transport systems, and
geothermal reservoirs. However, directly measuring temperature fields in
unsteady and geometrically complex convection systems is often challenging. This
project will develop machine learning based heat and mass transfer analogy
functions that can approximate the temperature fields in convection systems from
observed concentration fields. From simple to complicated flow passages and
various flow regimes, this research will investigate the impact of dataset size
and quality on learned functions. The educational goal of this project is to
cultivate student interest in studying machine learning and advanced flow
systems. This project will develop unique hands-on activities for K-12 students
and provide research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students on
how to use machine learning for intriguing applications and ways to visualize
convection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Machine learning-based heat and mass analogy
functions will enable spatiotemporally-resolved thermal characterization of
thermofluidic devices where direct temperature measurements are extremely
challenging. Until recently, heat and mass analogy functions are expressed in
mathematical forms mostly derived from simple convection systems. This research
aims to overcome the limitations of traditional analogy functions by leveraging
the inference ability of machine learning models. Particularly, this project
will study how the machine learning models can be used to infer the temperature
field from a mass concentration field for laminar mixed convections. Heat and
mass transfer analogy has been observed in systems with laminar mixed
convection, but the derivation of analogy functions has been challenging due to
the unstable and spatially inhomogeneous nature of the flows. Furthermore, this
research will elucidate the requirements of datasets, e.g., size and resolution
of thermofluidic field information, as well as the capabilities and limitations
of the machine learning approach when studying complex thermofluidic
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.