* 2053248
* Transport in Turbulent Boundary Layers over Permeable Beds: Pore-resolved Direct Simulations and Macroscale Continuum Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Sourabh Apte, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 350,376.00

Transient storage, characterized by retention and transport of solutes such as
chemicals and pollutants, organic matter, dissolved oxygen, nutrients, and heat
across the stream-gravel interface, is one of the most critical concepts in
stream ecology with enormous societal value in predicting source of fresh
drinking water, nutrient cycling, and sustaining diverse aquatic ecosystems.
Lack of an accurate modeling approach that accounts for complex flow physics of
turbulence over a permeable bed and coupled transport across the sediment-water
interface is one of the key challenges in practical scale modeling of natural
aqueous systems. Typical grain-to-globe prediction models of solute transport
are sequential in nature and neglect the direct coupling between turbulent
stream flow over a permeable bed and groundwater flow within the bed. It is
hypothesized that turbulence at the sediment-water interface can significantly
alter the transient storage and solute retention times within the gravel beds.
Specifically, the structure and dynamics of turbulence over a porous bed can be
very different than that over an impermeable, rough wall. Quantifying the
upwelling and downwelling events at the stream-bed interface and their
modulation by the free-stream turbulence, as well as penetration depth of
turbulence structures within the porous bed is critical for the development of
macroscale, continuum-based modeling of solute transport. This interdisciplinary
research will train two PhD students on direct and large-eddy simulations,
volume-averaging techniques, and multiscale analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental numerical experiments are proposed on
turbulent boundary layers over permeable gravel beds representative of stream or
river flows. Pore-resolved, direct numerical simulations (DNS), using a solver
based on the fictitious domain method developed by the PI, of turbulent flow
over stationary, porous beds will be conducted for representative flows in
natural streams or rivers. The turbulent flow physics for a range of
permeability Reynolds numbers for mono and polydispersed, randomly packed gravel
beds will be investigated and contrasted against that over rough, impermeable
wall with similar topology. The detailed, spatiotemporal pressure and velocity
fluctuation data at the interface will be used to develop and validate
macroscale, continuum models with variable porosity for large-eddy simulation
(LES). The proposed research has the potential to transform the current state-
of-the art reach-scale modeling approaches for solute transport used in river
management. The pore-resolved DNS data will be used to design a learning module
for a graduate level course on `Turbulence Modeling' with a priori and a
posteriori analyses of the continuum LES model. This learning module will be
freely disseminated on the PI's research site. The DNS data and macroscale
models on turbulence over porous beds will also be valuable for a wide range of
fields, such as, noise control in aircraft trailing edges, heat and mass
transfer in chemical and nuclear reactors, arterial blood flow and transport in
endothelial walls, vegetation canopies; among others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.