* 2053560
* CDS&amp;E: Harnessing Graphical Processing Units (GPUs) to Accelerate the Computational Efficiency of Air Quality Modeling Systems for Four-Dimensional Air Pollution Predictions
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Bryan Wong, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 456,463.00

Air pollution is a national and global problem with significant adverse impacts
on human health and wellbeing. Air quality model simulations are essential for
understanding historical pollution episodes and predicting future air quality
trends. However, air quality model simulations can be computationally expensive
due to slow processing speeds for case studies simulated over a large area
(e.g., a regional air basin) at high spatial resolutions. The goal of this
research is to explore the use of graphical processing units (GPUs) to
accelerate computationally intensive routines/modules of the Community
Multiscale Air Quality (CMAQ) model, an open-source chemical transport model
employed nationwide by EPA and state agencies to assess air quality for
regulatory decision making. To advance this goal, the Principal Investigators
(PIs) of this project propose to carry out an integrated computational modeling
and simulation program structured to simulate ozone formation in the California
South Coast Air Basin (SCAB) and evaluate the meteorological drivers of ozone
formation in the SCAB where recent ozone concentrations have rebounded to 1994
levels after decades of decline. The successful completion of this project will
benefit society through the development and deployment of faster and more
computationally efficient models/software to support regulatory air quality
monitoring. Further benefits to society will be achieved through student
education and training including the mentoring of two doctoral
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Regulatory air quality modeling and simulations
require high-resolution numerical solutions of the model governing partial
differential equations (PDEs) over large spatial domains. Because graphical
processing units (GPU) can carry out floating point operations at higher speeds
than central processing units (CPUs) at comparable costs, they could provide
significant computational speed enhancements and savings for solving systems of
high-dimensional PDEs. In this project, the PIs propose to investigate the
utilization of GPUs to accelerate numerically intensive routines/modules of the
Community Multiscale Air Quality (CMAQ) model used by EPA and state agencies to
assess air quality for regulatory decision making. CMAQ governing equations are
solved using a process splitting approach where process modules are executed in
series. This approach facilitates the improvement of simulation times for
bottleneck modules by migrating them to GPUs. To advance the overarching goal of
the project, the PIs propose to initially focus on the development and hardware
implementation of the GPU enhanced gas phase chemical solver (GPCS) of the CMAQ
model. Specific tasks for this effort will include 1) the acceleration of the
CMAQ GPCS through parallelization and vectorization of the governing equations,
2) precision and sensitivity tests, 3) evaluations of the impact of GPU
parallelization on GPCS reaction rates, and 4) validation and applications of
the new CMAQ-GPU model using case studies based on available air quality
datasets. The successful completion of the proposed research could lead to a
faster and more computationally efficient CMAQ model/software to support
predictive simulations of air quality (e.g., ozone and particulate formations)
under future climate scenarios and meteorological conditions from extreme
weather events (e.g., heat waves and wildfires) that are expected to exacerbate
air pollution nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly funded by
the Environmental Engineering and the Computational and Data-enabled Science and
Engineering (CDS&amp;E) programs of the NSF/ENG/CBET
Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.