* 2053337
* RAPID: Resprouting and resilience:  The role of nonstructural carbon reserves in fostering the longevity of coast redwood
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2022
* George Koch, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 11/30/2022
* USD 199,912.00

Coast redwood trees are among the largest living organisms on Earth. For
generations, this iconic species has been treasured by the public and served as
a flagship for conservation. Intriguingly, redwoods can live for thousands of
years in ecosystems that are prone to fire. The redwood’s ability to resprout,
or activate dormant buds beneath the bark and grow new stems, branches, and
leaves, is an adaptation that enhances survival following fire. Just as humans
store fat as an energy reserve, trees store sugars and starch as reserves that
provide the carbon and energy needed for resprouting. This project will use
carbon dating methods to estimate how long these carbohydrates have been held in
reserve. In other species, decade-old reserves have been identified in 100-year-
old trees, but in ancient redwoods the reserves could be much older. Research
will be conducted at Big Basin Redwoods State Park, near Santa Cruz, CA, where
trees are up to 2500 years old and 100 meters (330 ft) tall. On August 19, 2020,
the CZU Lightning Complex Fire burned through the Park, presenting a unique
opportunity to look at resprouting in very large, old trees. The project will
communicate the fascinating science of redwood trees to the public, to whom
these trees have universal appeal. Specific activities will include radio and
video stories developed in collaboration with Northern Arizona University media
specialists and an in-person outreach event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wildfire is a
common occurrence in California, and fire chronologies indicate that many coast
redwood (Sequoia sempervirens) groves experience fire every 10-25 years.
However, fires of the size and severity that occurred during 2020 are
unprecedented. The principal question this project addresses is, “How old are
the nonstructural carbon [NSC] reserves used to support resprouting in fire-
damaged redwood?” A previously-developed conceptual model hypothesizes links
between tree vigor and the size and turnover time of stored NSC reserves. This
model predicts that the tallest, dominant, and most vigorous trees will have
large reserves of young NSC (recent photosynthate, removed from the atmosphere
within the last year), whereas less vigorous trees will have smaller and older
NSC reserves. How old NSC reserves are in long-lived trees is unknown. This
project will collect epicormic sprouts and stem wood cores from fire-damaged
trees in Big Basin Redwoods State Park, and determine the age of NSC in those
samples (time since removal from the atmosphere) by measuring its 14C signature
on the new MICADAS (Mini Carbon Dating System) AMS (Accelerator Mass
Spectrometer) at Northern Arizona University. This project will be the first to
investigate NSC in redwood and the first to use 14C methods to estimate the age
of NSC reserves that are being drawn on to support redwood resprouting. This
work has the potential to transform understanding of the biology of this unique
and long-lived species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.