* 2053280
* Unravelling the Role of Subglacial Channels in Ice Stream Evolution
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2021,10/31/2021
* Britney Schmidt, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 10/31/2021
* USD 1,239,283.00

This project, part of an international collaboration with scientists from New
Zealand, will conduct in situ exploration of an active subglacial channel in
Antarctica. It will deploy the Icefin robotic vehicle through a borehole in the
Kamb Ice Stream in West Antarctica to provide new three-dimensional context on
the processes occurring at the base of the ice stream where it meets the ocean
and goes afloat. Kamb Ice Stream transitioned from active to stagnant roughly
160 years ago. With the new perspectives offered by Icefin, the international
collaboration aims to integrate remote sensing, geophysical, and oceanographic
data to improve understanding of how subglacial channels mediate the exchange
between the ice and hydrology of the grounded glacier upstream with the ice-
shelf and sub-ice-shelf ocean circulation under the downstream floating section.
The team aims to gain new perspectives on the dynamics of ice streams to
constrain projections of future behavior in a warming
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The uniquely capable underwater vehicle Icefin will
be deployed in collaboration with Antarctica New Zealand who are establishing a
camp at the grounding-zone channel at Kamb Ice Stream. Icefin carries onboard
sensors that map the physical structure of the ice, seafloor, and water column.
Icefin observations will test two key hypotheses: that transitions in the
hydrology of the ice stream caused stagnation that is recorded in the channel,
and that channel evolution is driven by ice-ocean interactions caused by
subglacial water interacting with the inflow of ocean water. In combination with
sediment cores, oceanographic moorings, and geophysical surveys conducted by New
Zealand colleagues, these data should enable a better understanding of
connections between subglacial outflow and the ocean, and how these interactions
have evolved over time as the channel has grown. The subglacial channel will be
mapped in high resolution along an approximately 3-4 km section up and
downstream of the borehole. The collected data will be analyzed to produce
reconstructions of the ice, ocean, and seafloor, and then modeling and data
interpretation will build a multi-parameter three-dimensional context for the
channel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.