* 2053239
* Quantifying the Combustion Characteristics of Hydrofluorocarbons
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Jagannath Jayachandran, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 04/30/2024
* USD 410,477.00

Halogenated hydrocarbons are extensively used as refrigerants and fire
suppressants. Compounds that are currently used by the industry have large
global warming potential and/or ozone depletion potential. Environmentally
friendlier alternatives that have been identified are hydrofluorocarbons, which
are flammable and pose fire risks. Some of these hydrofluorocarbons are already
in use as refrigerants even though their combustion behavior is not well-
characterized. Candidate fire suppressants that were tested were found to
promote combustion instead of inhibiting it. This project aims to quantify the
reactivity of hydrofluorocarbons through novel experiments. Furthermore,
computations will be performed to investigate the fire risk associated with
these compounds in the case of accidental leakage and subsequent ignition. The
results from these studies are expected to play an important role in the
selection and adoption of hydrofluorocarbons in the industry and the development
of safety protocol. The project will not only advance the understanding of the
combustion behavior of these exotic compounds but also of other fundamental
combustion aspects such as gravity-induced acceleration of flames. The proposed
project will also create opportunities for undergraduate students to have hands-
on, experimental research experience and will result in the development of
education modules, which will be used to strengthen courses as well as inspire
K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrofluorocarbons are mildly flammable
compared to hydrocarbons, which makes quantifying their reactivity challenging.
Flame speeds will be measured by overcoming challenges associated with buoyancy-
induced flow and radiation heat loss, using a lab-scale drop tower experiment
and detailed computational models, respectively. Judiciously performed
parametric studies will enable the elucidation and quantification of their
reactivity, dominated by reactions of fluorine-based radicals, and create
archival data valuable for the development of chemical kinetic models. Due to
their mild reactivity, gravity-driven instability growth is expected to
significantly influence the dynamics of hydrofluorocarbon/air flames. Direct
Numerical Simulations will be performed to investigate the effect of instability
growth on flame dynamics, the coupling between the gravity-driven and intrinsic
flame front instabilities resulting from thermal expansion and non-
equidiffusion, and the resulting flame acceleration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.