* 2053588
* Leveraging Crowdsourced Data to Assess Spatiotemporal Patterns of Resilience in Diverse Gulf Coast Communities Impacted by Natural Hazards
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Antwi Akom, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 10/31/2023
* USD 396,200.00

The severity and cost of flood events continue to increase in the US, often with
disproportionate impacts on vulnerable populations who may have higher
sensitivity to the negative effects of flooding and lower capacity to adapt.
Understanding what makes communities vulnerable or resilient to flooding is
critical to developing mitigation actions that can reduce the negative effects
of future hazards. However, existing frameworks for assessing resilience often
fall short, as they do not address important dynamic and highly localized
factors that influence peoplesâ€™ ability to cope with, adapt to, and recover from
natural hazards. This Disaster Resilience Research Grants (DRRG) project will
develop a bottom-up, community-driven framework for local-level resilience
assessment by generating and utilizing high-resolution crowdsourced datasets and
leveraging local knowledge and experiences to examine how the factors
contributing to resilience (i.e., exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity)
vary over space and time. Findings will have implications for more effective
resilience building. As part of the project, crowdsourcing efforts using
Streetwyze, a community-driven mapping platform, will increase the awareness of
flooding and its daily impacts in communities and will encourage diverse voices
to participate in the collection of data to support local resilience planning
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use a mixed-methods,
sociotechnical approach to examine how crowdsourced datasets can be leveraged to
(1) improve the spatiotemporal characterization of factors that influence
community resilience to flood disasters, (2) develop new metrics that account
for the dynamic social and physical nature of resilience, and (3) encourage more
equitable capacity-building to reduce the impacts of future floods and enhance
disaster resilience across diverse populations. The project focuses on flood
hazards in coastal Mississippi and engages with diverse community partners from
flood-prone areas in the cities of Gulfport and Biloxi. Two novel crowdsourcing
technologies that include passively collected mobility data and actively
generated qualitative and imagery data will be used to characterize fine-scale
spatial and temporal patterns of exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity.
Surveys will evaluate how community members use the crowdsourced data and will
assess the role of demographic and socioeconomic factors in influencing
participation in the crowdsourcing effort. Geospatial, statistical, and machine
learning models will be developed and applied to integrate the crowdsourced
datasets with conventional sensor, satellite, and survey data. Model outputs
will be used to develop novel measurement approaches that improve assessments of
the factors contributing to community resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.