* 2053014
* Assessing Urban Post-Earthquake Community Recovery to Inform Pre-Disaster Planning
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Jack Baker, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 10/31/2024
* USD 309,441.00

Significant effort has been devoted to predicting physical damage to the built
environment from disasters, but much less is understood about simulating
disaster recovery, and how mitigation actions influence recovery. Further, it is
well understood that there are existing socioeconomic inequalities in disaster
risk and resilience. This Disaster Resilience Research Grants (DRRG) project
aims to develop models to simulate housing and business operations recovery
after a disaster. New insights will be gained into how a community's
physical/demographic/economic characteristics interact in the recovery process.
The models will be used to quantify a region's current ability to recover from
disaster and evaluate the efficacy of actions that could be taken before
disasters occur. Given the enormous costs of post-disaster disruption, and the
significant resources committed for mitigation, insights on improving recovery
will significantly benefit society, by improving disaster resilience and
efficiently allocating limited societal resources to promote equity. Programs to
involve underrepresented researchers, engage with city planners, and publicly
release the modeling software will also contribute to the broader impacts of
this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a new generation of
high-resolution computational simulation tools for disaster recovery simulation,
to support enhanced and more equitable housing recovery. High-resolution
simulations of the built, natural, and human environment (including household
and company behavior) will be combined with mechanisms to quantify the benefits
of resilience-enhancing policies. The housing recovery will be jointly simulated
with the recovery of infrastructure and businesses, constrained by the
availability of resources and affected by socioeconomic factors. The recovery
process of individual households will be simulated, providing great flexibility
in examining results and assessing the benefits for different groups of
resilience-enhancing policies. This work will enable a holistic understanding of
the community recovery process after earthquakes. The research will advance our
capabilities to assess, before a disaster, the extent to which disaster
preparedness interventions can reduce initial disaster consequences, speed
recovery, and ensure that all groups participate in the benefits. This project's
deliverables will be a modeling framework for assessing post-earthquake recovery
and case-study analysis of recovery in San Francisco.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.