* 2053022
* I-Corps: Low-Friction and Durable Graphite Coatings for Conveyor System Applications
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Min Zou, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project lies in
addressing the economic losses resulting from poor lubrication practices in
conveyor systems, associated maintenance, and equipment downtime, which are
estimated to be 6% of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP), with a total of more
than $1 trillion per year across all U.S. industries. The successful completion
of the project could significantly reduce the energy consumption and equipment
failure in conveyor systems and provide a fundamental understanding of the
proposed coating technology, which could be applied to other systems or
components, such as shaft seals, bearings, gears, and chains, producing
significant savings across U.S. industries. The technology could expand the
global low-friction coating market and replace the use of non-durable powder or
spray lubricants as well as petroleum-based oil lubricants, which are harmful to
the environment. The project will provide extensive education and leadership
training in innovation and entrepreneurship to the I-Corps team, equipping the
team with the required knowledge and skills to lead high-tech startup companies
and develop knowledge-based industries in Arkansas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project focuses on the commercialization feasibility of low friction,
durable graphite solid lubricant coatings for conveyor systems. The use of
graphite as a solid lubricant coating has been limited due to its poor adhesion
to substrates and high wear rate. The proposed novel graphite coating can
potentially address these challenges. The key differentiation of the proposed
coating technology is a unique bonding approach to adhere the graphite coatings
to a substrate with high strength, which has been challenging to achieve
previously. The expected technical outcome of this project is the production of
dry-lubricated conveyor materials that show friction reductions of at least 50%
with improved durability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.