* 2053372
* Collaborative Research: Exploring System-Wide Events on Complex Fault Networks using Fully-Dynamic 3D Earthquake Cycle Simulations
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Brittany Erickson, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 416,219.00

The world’s largest earthquakes occur on interconnected fault networks embedded
in the Earth’s crust. The conditions under which large earthquakes occur is
believed to be dependent on a millennia-long history of tectonic motion in the
region, as well as other physical conditions such as frictional forces acting on
the fault itself. The goal of this work is to use mathematical modeling to
expand our understanding of the physics that dictate where and when an
earthquake will occur. The high computational cost associated with simulating
long periods of earthquake activity has limited previous modeling attempts to
simple scenarios (for example, considering only a single fault, with no
generation of damaging seismic waves). The PIs will overcome these limitations
by using a high-performance implementation of their recently developed advanced
numerical scheme for earthquake cycles. Key questions the researchers will
explore include: why do some large earthquakes occur on faults that seem stable
when subjected to tectonic loading? Results from these studies will improve
seismic hazard estimates by shedding light on if and how such large earthquakes
can occur on a given fault network. The codes will be made publicly available
under a permissive open source license for use by others. In addition to
supporting one junior faculty member (under-represented in her field) and one
mid-career faculty member, the proposal supports the mentoring of two graduate
students in interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
work is to expand understanding of the physical settings in which system-wide
earthquakes can occur through the use of large-scale, physically-robust
earthquake cycle models. This work will develop a large-scale, high-performance
framework that accounts for complex fault geometries, off-fault material
properties, and full dynamics in 3D volumes. The method will couple interseismic
loading with coseismic rupture and wave propagation in a self-consistent manner.
The coupled approach will be used to explore the role that tectonic loading,
rupture history, fault geometry and other physical features play in system-wide
failure of fault networks. This will include such studies as the keystone fault
hypothesis, namely, that faults in a system that are optimally oriented with
respect to the regional stress field are stabilized by misoriented keystone
faults until the entire network is primed to fail. The high computational cost
associated with simulating the interseismic period has limited previous cycle
models to simple fault geometries, suppressed dynamic effects, and/or use small
simulation volumes. The project will use recently developed hybridized scheme
for the interseismic period, which is well suited for problems that in the past
have been too computationally expensive. The hybrid method will be coupled with
a newly developed technique for dynamic rupture simulation to study sequences of
multiple earthquakes on complex fault networks. By leveraging state-of-the-art
algorithms and high-performance computing, this work will lead to the
development of a large-scale, physically robust, predictive modeling framework
of earthquake source processes on complex fault networks. This new framework
will allow the exploration of fundamental questions in earthquake science,
focusing on how earthquakes can nucleate on misoriented faults, often giving
rise to huge, network-wide events. The 2010 Mw 7.2 El Mayor-Cucapah and the 2016
Mw 7.8 Kaikoura are two well-known examples of earthquakes whose magnitudes
exceeded expectations by cascading through multiple segments of a fault network.
This work will contribute to seismic hazard estimates by calculating event
probabilities associated with complex fault networks in a physically robust
modeling environment, complementing and improving the greater efforts of the
earthquake simulators currently used to inform earthquake forecasting. In order
to benefit the larger earthquake science community the PIs will make the
developed codes publicly available under the MIT license, and will use an open
development strategy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.