* 2053954
* Structure and Process Engineering Facilitated by PAMAM Dendrimers for Highly Stable Perovskite Solar Cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Dawen Li, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 06/30/2025
* USD 398,000.00

Despite dramatic progress in efficiency, perovskite solar cells still must
overcome some major problems before becoming economically competitive in the
photovoltaic market. The main obstacles for commercialization of perovskite
solar cells are short lifespan and long fabrication time. In this project, the
short lifespan and manufacturing issues will be addressed through a novel
process and device structure engineering enabled by a specific polymer material,
polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimers, while maintaining the efficiency. The
proposed research will not only advance the knowledge in solar cell fabrication,
but also impact society. The educational goal is to promote STEM education on
advanced manufacturing of solar cells. Through this project, under-represented
minority and female students will be hired to work on the proposed research, and
research outcomes will be integrated in the teaching courses. As outreach
activities, scientific modules on solar cells will be developed and demonstrated
in the middle schools of the Black Belt region of Alabama, encouraging more
minority students to enter STEM fields in their college study.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Perovskite solar cells (PVSCs) suffer from instability,
which leads to short lifetimes. The processing of these types of solar cells
also requires long annealing times, and multiple deposition steps. In this
project, device instability will be addressed from both active layer and charge
transporting layers. With the incorporation of a specific polymer into the
perovskite active layer, a condensed perovskite film will be attained, which
will prevent penetration of moisture and oxygen, leading to significant
improvement in stability. Device structure engineering will be based on the
conventional inverted planar architecture with inorganic metal oxide as electron
transporting layer and removal of hole transport layer. Because of the addition
of PAMAM dendrimers, good adhesion and water resistance are ensured at the
perovskite/ITO interface, precluding water diffusion into the perovskite
absorber from the ITO side. The ITO work function will be increased through a
chemical treatment, serving as an “invisible” hole transport layer to assist
hole collection and block electron transport at the perovskite/ITO interface.
Therefore, this structure engineering approach will not only enhance stability,
but also maintain the promise of high power-conversion efficiency (PCE). To
advance fundamental understanding on addition of PAMAM dendrimers, distribution
of polymer additives in perovskite thin films will be characterized with
Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM), and in-situ characterization of defects,
recombination, and carrier lifetime will be conducted for samples without
polymer addition and with optimal polymer loading. In addition, an ultra-smooth
ITO film will be attained through sputtering on polymer coated glass. The
increase of rob-off resistance from the polymer on both sides of the ITO
surfaces improves device reliability. Throughout this study, all the stacking
layers of perovskite solar cells will go through rapid photonic annealing and
sintering, paving the way for mass production of perovskite solar modules
through low-cost, high-speed printing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.