* 2053760
* LEAP-HI: AI-Optimized 3D Printing of Super-Soft Materials for Personalized Sensing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Baskar Ganapathysubramanian, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2026
* USD 2,008,000.00

A common need in the medical community is an ability to monitor local tissue
continuously, but current sensing technology lacks the personalization necessary
to contour sensors for the unique anatomy of different individuals. This Leading
Engineering for America's Prosperity, Health, and Infrastructure (LEAP-HI)
research seeks to develop low-cost personalized sensors which can be fabricated
on demand to enhance the health and well-being of Americans from all walks of
life. The approach leverages fundamental research into new materials in tandem
with advanced machine learning and artificial intelligence to ‘3D print’
personalized sensors with applications in health care—from prosthetics to
diagnostics and therapeutics—that could impact millions of people. These
advances spanning materials science, engineering, and computation will improve
the economic competitiveness of the United States’ innovation and help train the
next generation of scientists and engineers through a tight synergy between
experimental and computational research. A series of initiatives spanning
diversity, education, and outreach to further will advance key aspects of the
work across age groups. This includes (a) modules on cybermanufacturing in a new
cyber physical systems minor at Iowa State University, (b) working with the
local chapters of Society for Advancement of Chicanos/Hispanics, Native
Americans in Science, and the National Society of Black Engineers to draw
students into research, (c) K-12 engagement through activities at the Wolf
Museum of Exploration and Innovation (MOXI) for children, (d) working with
Center for Industrial Research and Service (CIRAS) to disseminate best practices
and training modules in cyber manufacturing, and (e) working with the
communications offices of both the University of California at Santa Barbara and
Iowa State University to disseminate the research to the public to promote the
need for Engineering Leadership in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will overcome the limitations of conventional sensor technologies for
personalized health monitoring by developing new materials and processing
techniques to 3D print polymers with mechanical properties that are matched to
human tissue. Our strategy will yield fundamental insights into the translation
of advanced materials to manufacturing by: (1) Designing and synthesizing
materials that inherently provide processability for 3D printing while
maintaining biocompatibility and mechanical function; (2) Advanced multi-scale
simulations of the printing process through modeling and predictive dynamics at
the device scale to understand macroscopic progression during the build process,
and at the microstructure scale to tailor the material properties as a function
of material deposition and curing; (3) Data fusion from sensor response and
physics-aware machine learning models to enable real-time prediction and control
of the 3D printing process; and (4) Creating ultra-soft structured sensors that
enable unique sensing modalities for societal impact in personalized human
health. These research aims to harness the data revolution by exploiting
computational and machine-learning models to design more effective polymers and
sensors in a convergent fashion. This research will yield experimental and
computational methodologies that can also be applied to other engineering
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.