* 2053172
* CDS&amp;E-MSS: Optimal Recovery in the Age of Data Science
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Simon Foucart, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 149,783.00

Machine learning techniques have proved to be successful, leading society to a
modern era enhanced by data science. These techniques usually rely on
statistical assumptions and provide solutions that are guaranteed to work
approximately well most of the time. However, these assumptions and limitations
are insufficient to meet the demands of areas critically important to the Unites
States, such as defense, medicine, and transportation. In these applications a
failure, however infrequent, is not an option. This project focuses on data
science algorithms with certified guarantees valid in a worst-case setting. Its
theoretical outcomes will have implications in any field of science involving
data not favorably captured by random models. Students will be involved in
research and receive training in next generation data science tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop methods within a subfield of
approximation theory called Optimal Recovery with focus on improving their
computational practicality rather than on abstract theory. In particular, purely
analytic approaches will be replaced by a more computation-embracing perspective
exploiting modern optimization theory. Another breakaway from traditional theory
consists in modeling real-world functions not by their smoothness properties but
by their approximability properties which is relevant for numerical approaches,
e.g., those based on neural networks. The project has several facets: a
theoretical facet expanding the scope of optimal recovery to ensure the
properties of volume, veracity, velocity, and variety which are desirable in
modern data science; a computational facet that consists in implementing
recovery methods as efficient algorithms made publicly available; a practical
facet that consists in transferring the theoretical findings in applied fields
such as in system identification; and an educational facet that consists in
integrating novel concepts into the culture of the next scientific
generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.