* 2053163
* Carbon Storage in Mangrove Ecosystems via Abiotic Sulfurization
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Morgan Raven, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 06/30/2024
* USD 497,604.00

Mangrove forest sediments are important hotspots of organic carbon preservation,
and they have the potential to sequester substantial amounts of atmospheric CO2.
Currently, however, is it not fully understood why these environments are able
to bury so much organic carbon, or how they will respond to future changes in
sea level, land use, and climate. This project will investigate a mechanism that
may help explain this carbon burial: organic matter sulfurization, the
transformation and effective ‘pickling’ of sedimentary organic matter by
sulfide. Its central aim is to understand what controls the extent of
sulfurization in mangrove sediments, and to estimate the contribution of organic
matter sulfurization to sediment carbon storage in different parts of the
environment. By providing some of the first constraints on how, when, and where
organic matter sulfurization happens in mangroves, the results of this work will
guide decisionmakers managing coastal watersheds and carbon stocks in the face
of land use, climate and sea level change. As part of this work, four
undergraduate students and one PhD student at UC Santa Barbara will gain field
and research experience. And, in collaboration with local groups associated with
the field site, the team will produce a season of ‘Ocean Solutions’ podcast
episodes related to conservation and human impacts of Caribbean mangroves.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to understand how
microbial sulfur cycling affects organic matter preservation in vegetated
coastal sediments, which have substantial leverage to impact the global carbon
cycle on decadal to millennial timescales. It specifically investigates organic
matter sulfurization, which can transform fresh, easily respired organic matter
into recalcitrant, polymerized carbon stocks with long-term preservation
potential. Although organic matter sulfurization is known to occur in mangrove
sediments, the scale of its impact is essentially unknown. A pair of field
expeditions will be conducted at a mangrove forest on the southwestern coast of
Florida. In the first field season, geochemical profiles will be used to
quantify organic matter sulfurization in sediments and its relationships with
carbon storage, iron mineralogy, and the characteristics of sedimentary organic
matter inputs. In the second field season, cyclic voltammetry will be used to
target redox dynamics at the millimeter scale. Laboratory experiments will be
conducted to test the susceptibility of various local organic matter sources to
sulfurization and characterize their sulfurized forms. Throughout, the project
applies a holistic approach to sedimentary organic matter by characterizing the
dissolved, lipid, protein/carbohydrate, and proto-kerogen pools with isotopic
and spectroscopic techniques. This work will yield a first quantitative,
mechanistic framework for predicting the extent of organic matter sulfurization
in coastal vegetated habitats and its likely response to changes in ecology,
land use, or sea level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.