* 2053620
* LEAP-HI: Optimal Design and Life-Long Adaptation of Civil Infrastructure in a Changing and Uncertain Environment for a Sustainable Future
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Chris Forest, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,997,980.00

The increasing frequency and intensity of weather-related events is negatively
affecting the operation, integrity, and life-span of the Nation’s built
environment, resulting in significant economic and other losses. This is due, in
part, to the fact that buildings and civil infrastructure have been, and
continue to be, designed based on historical data and climate trends that no
longer accurately reflect the relevant uncertainties about what can be expected
in the future. Furthermore, although substantial investments are made in
designing, constructing, and maintaining the Nation’s buildings and
infrastructure, each of these activities is managed independently, resulting in
redundant costs and other negative impacts. Ultimately, the convergence of these
factors is leading to increasing risks for the American people and economy. To
address these challenges, this Leading Engineering for America's Prosperity,
Health, and Infrastructure (LEAP-HI) project will research a new framework that
transforms the way in which the Nation’s buildings and infrastructure are
designed, maintained, and adapted to facilitate informed and responsible
decision-making for a sustainable future. That framework balances safety and
resilience with resource consumption and environmental impacts, while accounting
for current and future uncertainties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
research a computational framework for simultaneously optimizing the design,
maintenance, and life-long adaptation of the built environment, based on
probabilistic life-cycle metrics, while accounting for uncertain and non-
stationary life-cycle demands. The objectives of the project are to: quantify
hydrometeorological hazards at various scales based on the most current climate
science and considering a variety of uncertainties; propagate those
uncertainties to the life-cycle decision criteria (e.g. costs, environmental
impacts, hazard related losses) by mathematically considering the maintenance
and adaptation actions through a partially observable Markov decision process
problem solved with Deep Reinforcement Learning; devise a methodology and tools
for efficiently and rigorously evaluating and comparing a set of design and
adaptation alternatives with respect to multiple life-cycle decision criteria by
adapting concepts of mean-risk and stochastic dominance; understand how various
sources of uncertainty affect the ability to discriminate among design
alternatives; determine under which scenarios green infrastructure components
can lead to optimal design and adaptation solutions; and demonstrate the new
framework and findings on practical design scenarios, such as a riverine bridge
threatened by flooding and age-related deterioration, an urban mid-rise building
threatened by increasing temperatures and natural and operational stressors, and
a port and systems of infrastructure assets threatened by sea level rise. The
project will improve engineering leadership in response to a non-stationary
climate by building research capacity and outreach through workshops and
educational efforts that disseminate the new knowledge and methods to decision-
makers and end-users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.