* 2053154
* CAREER: Enhancing Shock-Driven Turbulent Mixing using Multiphase Hydrodynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Jacob McFarland, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 551,637.00

Multiphase mixing is common in everyday life, such as the stirring of sugar
granules into coffee. Yet the interactions between the two separate phases
(solid sugar and liquid coffee in this example) results in complex mixing
processes that occur at both large and small length scales. In many engineering
and natural applications, this mixing is induced by shock waves, resulting in
rapid mixing and phase change. Understanding multiphase mixing processes can
help scientists better understand natural problems like supernovae and volcanic
eruptions, and improve engineering applications, such as steam turbines used to
produce electric power and advanced jet engine designs used for military
aircraft. This work will use a simplified experiment to study the role of
particle characteristics (like size) in shock-driven mixing. Experimental
measurements will be used to validate new models for multiphase mixing and to
ensure the accuracy of computer simulations. These simulations can then be used
to study additional problems in multiphase mixing. Additionally, this work will
have a broader impact by preparing engineering students to be leaders in their
careers and communities. This will be accomplished through several initiatives,
including developing a high school classroom lesson on fluids mixing; recruiting
and mentoring students from underrepresented groups; and organizing a national
security research symposium to help students and faculty apply research toward
national defense. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this CAREER
project is to test the hypothesis that shock-driven turbulent mixing can be
enhanced by the inclusion of a prescribed multiphase component. This project
will use an integrated experimental and simulation approach to develop a new
theory establishing the relationship between small-scale particle-driven
mechanisms and large-scale hydrodynamic mechanisms in strongly accelerated
multiphase mixing with evaporation. Experiments will be performed in the PI?s
shock tube facility where measurements of hydrodynamic and particle mixing will
be made. Simulations will be performed using the PI?s previously developed
particle models, validated by the experimental measurements. The work will be
broken into three tasks: 1) Determine the effect of particle velocity relaxation
time on hydrodynamic mixing; 2) Determine the effect of hydrodynamic mixing on
particle evaporation; and 3) Determine the effect of vapor production on mixing
from secondary accelerations. Using these measurements, the simulation particle
models will be validated and used to explore additional experimentally
inaccessible measures and a wider parameter space. Both experimental and
simulation results will be used to develop and test new theory to predict gas
and vapor/particle mixing in hydrodynamic and turbulent
regimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.