* 2053660
* An Integrated Housing Design and Logistics Operations Modeling and Analysis Framework for Hurricane Relief
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Dustin Albright, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 10/31/2024
* USD 399,999.00

This Disaster Resilience Research Grants (DRRG) project contributes to the
advancement of national health, prosperity and welfare by creating new knowledge
on disaster recovery housing design and logistics planning. A critical need
following a major hurricane event is to provide housing solutions for the
affected population. The main objective of this project is to create an
integrated modeling and analysis framework for disaster housing designs and
logistics planning, including evaluating and enhancing their effectiveness in
resilient hurricane response and recovery. In particular, this framework will
integrate the physical resilience of disaster housing, the system resilience of
the disaster housing supply chain and logistics network, and the operational
resilience of robust and adaptive logistics operations under various hurricane
scenarios. A host of disaster housing logistics decision support tools and novel
disaster housing architectural designs will be developed to reduce suffering,
lower manufacturing and logistics costs, and foster a long-term collaboration
between disaster resilience researchers and emergency management agencies. A key
goal is to support recovery housing scenarios that get people back into their
home neighborhoods in the quickest possible timeframe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project draws on converging research efforts from multiple disciplines including
architectural design for disaster housing, natural hazard and fragility
analysis, and disaster relief logistics network design and operations planning.
Novel stochastic optimization models and solution methodologies will improve
disaster housing logistics network design and operational policy, leveraging
weather forecast data and fragility analysis for hurricane hazards. These tools
offer a quantitative approach for analyzing how various disaster housing
solutions can be deployed to achieve lower social and logistics costs and to
inform new disaster housing architectural design iterations by various
cost/benefit tradeoff analyses of their logistics and socioeconomic attributes.
The overall project outcome will improve the housing component of disaster
relief.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.