* 2053333
* Learning Combinatorial Non-Convex Structures in Data: Statistical Foundations and Computational Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Cheng Mao, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 05/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Learning latent structures in complex data sets is a crucial task in
computational and data-enabled sciences. For applications in computer vision,
genomics, and social networks, the hidden structures are often of discrete
nature, making traditional algorithms not scalable to modern large data sets. To
address this computational challenge, this research will introduce statistical
methodologies to develop new models and fast algorithms for recovering discrete
structures in data. The integration of computational and statistical
perspectives will lead to not only advancement in theory, but also statistical
packages for learning tasks. Moreover, multiple components of the research will
bring societal benefits such as uncovering threats to online anonymity and
understanding social polarization. This project will also provide high-quality
training and research opportunities to next-generation data
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the research will focus on
three types of problems: graph and shape matching, graph layout problems, and
mixture models. Central to all these problems is the inference of permutations
from noisy, incomplete observations. Due to the combinatorial nature of
permutations and other hidden structures, the associated optimization problems
are highly non-convex and intractable in the worst case. To develop efficient
algorithms, this research will take an average-case perspective and employ a
variety of techniques including spectral methods, convex relaxations, and non-
convex local search. Theoretically, the fundamental limits of the proposed
problems and algorithms will be characterized in terms of the trade-off between
statistical and computational efficiency. On the practical front, all
implementations of new methods will be made open-source for interdisciplinary
applications such as alignment of biological networks and object matching in
computer vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.