* 2053195
* Hydration Structures and Perturbed Hydrogen Bond Network in Salt Solutions by Advanced Ab Initio Molecular Dynamics and Electronic Structure Simulation Methods
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Xifan Wu, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 04/30/2024
* USD 360,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and
educational activities with an aim to advance our fundamental understanding of
the physical and chemical properties of salt water. Salt water is ubiquitous on
earth, and it plays important roles in many physiological and biological
processes, such as signal transduction in living cells as well as protein
solubility and folding. The precise picture of how water molecules arrange
themselves and move around salt ions is prerequisite to understanding the
properties of salt water. This requires a quantum mechanical modeling for both
the electrons and nuclei of water and salt molecules. However, due to the high
computational cost, current computational studies can only model salt water in
small simulation boxes for short time periods, which makes it difficult to
extract accurate information about the long-range effects of salt molecules on
the molecular and electronic structures of water. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to build theoretical tools and a computational framework to solve
this problem by using machine learning methods. Utilizing computationally
intensive calculations for only a few configurations of salt water, the PI and
his team will build efficient deep learning models that can model salt water in
simulation boxes containing thousands of water molecules for long time scales.
The resulting deep learning models will not only be computationally efficient,
but they will also be able to yield accurate predictions with comparable
accuracy to advanced, fully quantum mechanical calculations. Both the
microscopic and macroscopic properties of salt water will be accurately
predicted by this approach and compared with experimental
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participating postdocs and graduate students will
carry out cutting-edge, interdisciplinary research based on advanced molecular
dynamics simulations and machine learning techniques in the fields of condensed
matter theory and quantum chemistry. Accurate deep learning models of salt
solutions will be developed and distributed to the computational materials
community. An outreach activity that explores the science of water will be
developed and presented to high school students in New
Jersey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports research and educational activities that are aimed at understanding the
hydration structure of important salt aqueous solutions and exploring how the
hydrated ions will affect the hydrogen-bond network of liquid water. Ab initio
molecular dynamics simulations based on density functional theory provide an
ideal framework to study salt water from first principles. However, accurate
predictions of salt water properties require a high-level functional
approximation, and nuclear quantum effect should be taken into account due to
the small mass of the proton. Accordingly, accurate first-principles
calculations of salt water are computationally very expensive and cannot be
applied to study the long-range effect of hydrated ions on the water structure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PI and his team will overcome these computational
challenges by combined deep learning techniques and advanced density functional
theory calculations. Efficient deep molecular dynamics models of salt solutions
will be built on Feynman path integral ab initio molecular dynamics simulations
based on the hybrid meta-GGA SCAN0 density functional. Using deep learning
models, molecular dynamics simulations of salt water can be performed in a
simulation box containing thousands of water molecules at the nanosecond time
scale, with a level of accuracy comparable to direct density functional theory
calculations. With this powerful approach, the converged thermodynamic
properties such as diffusivities and molecular structure in salt water can be
accurately predicted and studied. Using the molecular trajectories of salt
water, the electronic properties will also be modeled by deep learning
techniques and compared to available experimental
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participating postdocs and graduate students
will carry out cutting-edge, interdisciplinary research based on advanced ab
initio molecular dynamics simulations and machine learning techniques in the
fields of condensed matter theory and quantum chemistry. Accurate deep learning
models of salt solutions will be developed and distributed to the computational
materials community. An outreach activity that explores the science of water
will be developed and presented to high school students in New
Jersey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.