* 2053412
* Excellence in Research: Actor-Based Modeling and Control of Distributed Networked Autonomous Systems with Fault-Tolerant Protocol Settings
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Getachew Befekadu, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 321,189.00

A common vision of the future is the one where our surrounding environments are
replete with smart distributed autonomous agents whose normal functioning
significantly relies on tight integration of complex dynamic environments,
making decisions and autonomously sensing their environments, and by doing so
realizing a set of complex and often changing tasks for which these distributed
autonomous agents are designed or expected to operate. The focus of this
proposal is to present design and functionality analysis for autonomous agent-
based systems, where agents dynamically process information received from their
connected neighbors and make decisions or statistical inferences about their
networked connections for reliable exchange or aggregation information across
the whole distributed systems. The findings from this project will have positive
impacts on the current development and deployment of distributed autonomous
agents, sensor networks and ubiquitous computing systems, and their interactions
that need high confidence and fault-tolerant protocol settings. The project will
also provide many opportunities and educational resources to STEM students that
broaden their participation in engineering through algorithm development,
testbed experimentation, performance evaluation and other project related
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at addressing fundamental
challenges that arise from attempting to integrate a data-driven computational
paradigm in settings, where distributed networked autonomous agents seek making
strategic-decisions, inferences and/or establishing reliable network connections
in complex uncertain environments. The basic idea is to expand efforts in
modeling the structural behaviors of distributed autonomous agent-based systems,
aimed at facilitating transmission of necessary information for decision-making
capabilities or inferences based on fault-tolerant protocol settings. The
proposed work provides a framework for addressing the following questions: (i)
how should autonomous agents dynamically revise their local connections based on
the messaging patterns they receive from neighboring agents over a certain
duration of time, that support global network formation with desirable
structural properties? (ii) how is the resulting network formation process
sensitive to noises in the communication channels or jamming activities due to
adversaries? (iii) under what conditions may the network formation process never
reach steady-state or how any adjustments in the messaging patterns or protocol
settings can help address such issues? Overall, the proposed framework along
with its theoretical algorithms and software tools that are being developed will
facilitate the transition to real-world application
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.