* 2053277
* Collaborative Research: An implantable intracranial ultrasound stimulation for treating neurodiseases
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Sri-Rajasekhar Kothapalli, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 07/31/2024
* USD 290,044.00

Ultrasound stimulation has been demonstrated to be an effective therapeutic tool
for treating several brain related disorders in humans. Reducing the symptoms of
chronic disorders such as migraine, epilepsy, neuropathic pain due to spinal
cord damage, essential tremors and Parkinson’s disease can be accomplished
through neuromodulation and targeted delivery of drugs to specific regions of
the brain via temporary disruption of the blood- brain-barrier (BBB). However,
current ultrasound neuromodulation technology uses a bulky arrangement of
several single element ultrasonic transducers inside a helmet shaped device that
require high voltage for operation. This limits its use to only clinical
settings in hospitals. In contrast, minimally invasive, implantable intracranial
ultrasonic stimulation microchips can help treat neurodiseases that require
intermittent and chronic stimulation over prolonged periods. Towards this goal,
this project will design, fabricate, and validate a low power and biocompatible
intracranial micromachined ultrasound chip for temporary opening of the BBB.
Such a chip will consume minimal power, operate at safe low voltage, and has the
potential to treat chronic neural diseases requiring intermittent on-demand
stimulation over periods of months to years. Beyond the application proposed
here, successful demonstration of miniaturized ultrasonic chips could also find
applications for non-invasive wearable imaging of arterial blood flow for
diagnosing vascular diseases and inspection of critical fractures and material
failures in aircraft and infrastructural constructions like bridges and
pipelines. The multidisciplinary research will enable integration of new
pedagogical materials on ultrasound neuromodulation and piezoelectric
micromachined ultrasound transduces (PMUTs) design and development, into both
undergraduate and graduate engineering curriculum and Senior Capstone Design
projects. Outreach activities will target diverse middle and high school
students, underrepresented in engineering, with the goal of raising interest and
curiosity in ultrasound transduction and imaging
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the current need for
implantable focused ultrasound (fUS) technology by leveraging a
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) approach to fabricate miniaturized curved
3D transducers in single and array formats and demonstrate their use for trans-
BBB drug delivery. To suit implantable and wearable applications, low-voltage,
scandium-doped aluminum nitride (Sc-AlN) MEMS approach will be used to realize
the PMUTs. To achieve ultra-high electromechanical coupling coefficient, unique
curved PMUT membrane shapes will be developed using chip-scale glass-blowing
fabrication. The proposed curved PMUT arrays will use optimized Sc-AlN thin
films for piezoelectric material, thus ensuring lead-free and biocompatible
implants. Inherently curved 3D PMUTs are expected to reduce beam width in
elevational direction and thus deliver ultrasound energy more efficiently to the
neural target of interest. Overall, by using a set of innovations at material,
structure, and system level, 8 x 8 PMUT arrays will be demonstrated to generate
steerable focused ultrasound output at up to 2 cm depth in the brain tissue with
&gt; 1 MPa pressure at the focal spot and &lt;0.5 mm resolution. This approach
will offer unique flexibility to cover a large region of interest in brain with
high resolution for ultrasound stimulation applications. Further, the pressure
output of the fabricated curved PMUT array device will be validated using
experiments on brain tissue. BBB-opening capabilities will be tested using in
vitro cell culture experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.