* 2053694
* Collaborative Research: Development of Realistic Seismic Input Motions for Improving the Resilience of Infrastructure to Earthquakes
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Chanseok Jeong, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 10/31/2024
* USD 271,000.00

The ability to reconstruct a seismic wave field in a domain of interest from
sparsely-measured seismic ground motion data can help engineers to accurately
model potential damage during earthquakes, improve safety, and reduce costs.
Realistic seismic ground motions are essential for improving design and
assessment of infrastructure by engineers, owners, and regulators. Although a
large amount of ground motion data are available from modern sensors (e.g.,
accelerometers, optical cables, etc.), no established method can reconstruct the
full 3 component (3C) incident wave field from the measurements in a three
dimensional (3D) near-surface domain. This Disaster Resilience Research Grants
(DRRG) project will address this need by developing a new method for
reconstructing a full, 3C seismic wave field within a soil/rock volume adjacent
to infrastructure from field measurements. The resulting 3C seismic wave field
obtained by this approach accounts for local geology and variability, and can be
used as a realistic seismic motion input into models of structures and
infrastructure to assess their performance during
earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current use of one component (1C) motions for
horizontal and vertical seismic shaking introduces a number of epistemic,
modeling uncertainties into soil-structure interaction analysis. Regional-scale
wave models need information about seismic sources, and deep and shallow geology
that introduces large epistemic and aleatory, parametric uncertainties in the
generated seismic motions. This project will develop a method for resolving
these issues and providing accurate, realistic seismic motions that will improve
modeling and simulation of earthquake-soil-structure interaction (ESSI)
behavior. Consequently, design of infrastructure and lifelines and assessment of
their earthquake response will be improved, resulting in increased resilience to
seismic loading. The method will be integrated into a public domain program,
Real-ESSI simulator (http://real-essi.us). The methodology will be scalable to
various types of measurement modes (e.g., full translational 3C, 6C
(translational 3C with rotational 3C), vertical-only 1C or the amplitude of
full-3C motions measured by accelerometers at discrete locations, surface
vibrations measured by vision-based sensors, or 3C motions-along-lines measured
by optical cables). An advisory panel will provide feedback on the project to
facilitate translation of the research into industrial practice. The PIs will
develop online educational material on 'Inverse Modeling for ESSI Systems'. Such
educational effort and material will help educate not only students working on
this project, but also undergraduate and graduate students worldwide, as well as
practicing engineers with interest in modeling of ESSI
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.