* 2053045
* EAR-PF: A high-resolution 142Nd/144Nd record of mantle-derived rocks to constrain mantle stirring rate and tectonic regimes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Eugenia Hyung, Hyung                   Eugenia
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 174,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Eugenia Hyung has been
granted an EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry out research and education plans
at Harvard University and University of Nevada Las Vegas. Dr. Hyung will use
high precision measurements of the composition of rocks from deep in the Earth
and deep in time to better understand Earth’s history. Plate tectonics – the
movement of large rocky plates over the surface of the Earth – influences the
fate of Earth’s evolution. Through plate tectonics, the surface of the Earth is
shaped by the mantle below, influencing mountain building, creating the ocean
floor, and generating many major earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. Yet the
origin and history of plate tectonics is not well understood. Understanding how
the mantle is shaped throughout time, will help to answer these questions.
Because high-precision chemical data are missing from key time intervals
throughout geologic history, questions remain about precise limits on how and at
what rate the mantle becomes homogenous through time. This project aims to
address these questions by acquiring high-precision data from rocks that are
billions of years old to establish the stirring time of the mantle. The work
will be carried out under the mentorship of Professor Stein B. Jacobsen (Harvard
University) and Professor Shichun Huang (University of Nevada, Las Vegas). While
conducting this research, Dr. Hyung will provide mentorship to both graduate and
undergraduate students, be involved in developing teaching methods and courses,
and engage in outreach activities that promote understanding and appreciation of
the Earth in the context of current issues, as well as its evolution throughout
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The presence of 142Nd/144Nd variability well after
the extinction of the short-lived 146Sm isotope has led to the idea that the
mode of tectonics early in Earth’s history would have been fundamentally
different from the present-day form of tectonics to have enabled the
preservation of geochemical heterogeneity over billions of years. The mode of
tectonics (mobile vs. stagnant lid) is thought to exert influence on the
efficiency of mantle mixing, and homogenization of the silicate Earth. Through
this project, PI Dr. Eugenia Hyung aims to constrain the stirring rate of the
Earth’s mantle and to deduce the dominant mode of tectonics in the time frame in
which this occurs, by (i) filling the gap in the 142Nd/144Nd isotope record by
performing high-precision measurements on Proterozoic samples and (ii) derive
the stirring rate of the mantle during this time period through modeling, using
the data as constraints. PI Dr. Eugenia Hyung is well-positioned to undertake
the proposed study, having previously developed the methods in measuring
142Nd/144Nd ratios at a very high degree of precision while having experience in
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.