* 2053851
* LEAP-HI: Coordinated Advances in Reproductive Engineering for Health Research (CARE4HeR)
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Kristin Myers, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2026
* USD 2,016,000.00

The overall goal of this Leading Engineering for America's Prosperity, Health,
and Infrastructure (LEAP-HI) Coordinated Advances in Reproductive Engineering
for Health Research (CARE4HeR) project is to address the alarming healthcare
challenges associated with pregnancy and childbirth by integrating novel and
transformative approaches in experimental, theoretical, and computational
mechanics. Pregnancy and childbirth can have tragic and devastating effects on
the health, wellness, and quality of life of many women, children, and families.
The maternal mortality rate in the United States (US) is rising, even as other
developed countries experience a decline in pregnancy-related deaths. Preterm
birth is very common: 500,000 babies are born preterm every year in the US.
Complicated vaginal deliveries make up 16 percent of all childbirths in the US
annually, and they represent primary risk factors for the development of pelvic
floor disorders. These disorders affect 25 percent of all women, leading to not
only physical pain but also social isolation, depression, anxiety, and sexual
dysfunction. Large racial and ethnic disparities exist, with higher rates in
maternal mortality and preterm birth among African Americans. Although several
factors undoubtedly play a role, alterations of the mechanical function of
reproductive tissues throughout pregnancy significantly contribute to pregnancy-
related and childbirth-related complications: (a) most maternal birth injuries
are due to excessive tissue stretching, (b) spontaneous preterm birth is
attributed to loss of tissue structural integrity, and (c) pelvic floor
disorders develop as a result of compromised tissue
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;State-of-the-art experimental methods will be
employed to characterize the fascinating mechanical interplay of the uterus,
cervix, and vagina, both in vivo and ex vivo, in the murine model. These include
biaxial inflation testing with digital image correlation, multiphoton
microscopy, biochemistry, three-dimensional ultrasound, and high-precision
magnetic resonance imaging techniques. A new constitutive framework will be
developed to describe the experimentally-observed mechanical properties of
reproductive organs, including the remarkable remodeling during pregnancy and
postpartum. High-fidelity and robust finite element models will be created and
validated using the new experimental data to study the anatomically complex
function of the female pelvic system during pregnancy and parturition, offering
a new, non-invasive risk detection method for women's health. The PIs will
facilitate and nurture vibrant interactions among researchers in engineering and
healthcare professionals by organizing symposia and conference sessions, serving
as guest-editors for special issues in peer-reviewed journals, and publishing
various types of scientific publications. This CARE4HeR project will support the
creation of innovative research and unique educational opportunities for high
school, undergraduate, and graduate students, especially from racial and ethnic
minorities. This CARE4HeR project will break down the existing silos in
reproductive biomechanics, streamlining research operations and accelerating
progress and innovation in women’s reproductive health. New resources, ranging
from cutting-edge experimental methodologies to novel constitutive models and
high-fidelity simulation tools, will be created that can be used by both the
engineering and medical communities to address the urgent US women’s
reproductive health needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.