* 2053121
* Collaborative research: Quantifying Global and Regional Impacts of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) Slowdown in the 21st (twenty-first) Century
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Wei Liu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2024
* USD 324,994.00

A denser liquid will sink below a lighter one just as vinegar sinks below oil in
a salad dressing. This sinking effect happens in the North Atlantic around
Greenland and Iceland, where warm surface water brought by the Gulf Stream cools
in the subarctic climate and becomes denser than the water below it. The cold
surface water sinks to great depth where it flows slowly southward, circulating
throughout the world's oceans before resurfacing and returning to the North
Atlantic. The resulting Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) moves
surface water northward and deep water southward throughout the entire Atlantic
basin. The AMOC transports heat northward over its whole length, not just from
the warmer tropics to the colder high latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere but
across the equator as well, transferring heat from the Southern Hemisphere into
the Northern Hemisphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simulations of the response of
climate to increases in greenhouse gas concentrations consistently show a
slowdown of the AMOC as climate warms, a consequence of warming-induced
reductions in the density of surface water in the northern North Atlantic.
Density reduction is a direct consequence of warmer water temperature but
reductions in saltiness also contribute, as fresh water (which is less dense) is
added by melting ice sheets and increased precipitation. Also, the increased
moisture content of warmer surface air reduces evaporation, and reduced
evaporation means less salty surface water since evaporation removes fresh water
leaving salt behind. There is observational evidence for AMOC slowdown but the
period of record is somewhat short for a definitive
assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several climatic effects of AMOC slowdown have
been claimed, including changes in precipitation over Europe, an increase in
North Atlantic storms tracking into Europe, changes in the frequency and
strength of El Nino events, and a southward shift in the intertropical
convergence zone (ITCZ), the narrow rain band that typically sits north of the
equator over the tropical oceans. Many authors have argued that the AMOC
slowdown is responsible for the North Atlantic Warming Hole (NAWH), a region of
minimal warming or even slight cooling found in the North Atlantic south of
Greenland in most climate change simulations. A reduction in AMOC heat transport
into the northern North Atlantic is a reasonable explanation for the warming
hole, but it is possible to produce a NAWH in global warming simulations using a
model that does not allow AMOC slowdown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work supported
through this award uses a novel methodology to examine the effects of AMOC
slowdown and their connection to the NAWH using simulations from an ensemble of
four climate models. The simulations use a novel methodology in which just
enough salt is removed from the surface ocean in the northern North Atlantic to
prevent the AMOC slowdown that would otherwise occur due to greenhouse gas-
induced warming. A preliminary simulation performed with a version of the
Community Earth System Model (CESM) produces the NAWH as a consequence of AMOC
slowdown, along with a reduction in rainfall over the warming hole and several
other climatic impacts. But results from a single model are not definitive given
that differences in model formulation can lead to substantial differences in
model behavior. The project also includes a detailed examination of the
mechanisms through which AMOC slowdown causes local and remote
responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has societal relevance due to the human
impacts of climate change and the need to help decision makers confronting
climate change. The Principal Investigators conduct outreach activities at two
museums, the Museum of Riverside and the Peabody Museum of Natural History,
including public lectures and symposia as well as teacher development workshops.
The project supports a graduate student and a postdoctoral fellow, thereby
supporting workforce development in this research
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.