* 2053330
* CDS&amp;E: Collaborative Research: An integrated computational suite for large-scale modeling of crystal nucleation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Tianshu Li, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2024
* USD 328,338.00

This project is funded by the Condensed-Matter-and-Materials-Theory program in
the Division of Materials Research and by the programs in Computational and
Data-Enabled Science and Engineering and Process Systems, Reaction Engineering,
and Molecular Thermodynamics in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crystal nucleation is
one of the most ubiquitous processes in nature; it is a phenomenon that also has
countless consequences in pharmaceutical, solar energy, and semiconductor
manufacturing technologies. Despite its significance, understanding crystal
nucleation remains a grand-challenge problem, both for the atomistic-scale
spatial resolution required and the widely ranging timescales that are
encountered in its analysis. Compounding these challenges, definitive
explanations of the fundamental physical mechanisms at work during nucleation
continue to elude researchers. Recent advances in computational algorithms and
hardware have created new opportunities for devising practical strategies to
further the reliability and impact of molecular modeling as an effective tool to
elucidate the fundamental mechanisms underlying crystal nucleation. Therefore,
the collaborative research group behind this proposal identified the need for
developing a critical cyber infrastructure that offers (1) the versatility
necessary to model crystal nucleation across different materials and
crystallization environments, (2) the computational efficiency required to
simulate naturally occurring and industrially relevant crystallization
processes, and (3) the scalability needed to bridge the gap between simulation
predictions and experimental measurements. In addition to pharmaceutical,
energy, and semiconductor applications, such an infrastructure will pave the way
for understanding polymer-controlled crystallization and biomineralization, will
make it possible to develop new aircraft anti-icing strategies, and will
facilitate the design of bio-inspired materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will bring together academic experts in molecular simulation method
development and implementation, aiming to deploy an integrated, large-scale
open-source computational suite that enables modeling crystal nucleation under
realistic conditions. This package will integrate a cohesive set of advanced
computational tools through an implementation and distribution of these methods
as individual modules of LAMMPS, which allows large-scale applications to a
broad range of nucleation problems with state-of-the-art quantum-accurate
potentials. The methodology and software will be validated through (1) examining
the role of surface topography on ice nucleation and benchmarking the nucleation
efficiency of experimentally identified inorganic ice nucleators, and (2)
modeling the nucleation of NaCl and alkaline earth carbonates from aqueous
solution. The proposed computational toolkit will enhance current understanding
of the thermodynamics and kinetics of nanoscopic crystal nucleation and
subsequent crystal growth, with direct applications in surface engineering,
reduction of membrane fouling induced by mineral scaling, inorganic
mineralization, and materials synthesis. The products of this research will be
made available to the broader scientific community in the form of open-source
software. The investigators will engage in outreach efforts by working with
high-school students through a Science Olympiad event, EarthDate broadcasts, and
Chemistry Club demonstrations. Special efforts will be deployed in areas with a
large presence of underserved populations, thus fostering diverse and equitable
interest and involvement in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.