* 2053366
* Collaborative Research: A plan to determine if the core can be the ultimate high 3He/4He source
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Colin Jackson, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 07/31/2025
* USD 282,930.00

Studies of noble gases, such as helium (He), suggest that parts of the mantle
have largely escaped melting at, or near, the Earth’s surface. These mantle
domains are characterized by high ratios of the isotopes 3He to 4He (3He/4He).
Much work has been done to understand how these mantle domains within Earth’s
interior have escaped melting in the face of billions of years of mantle
convection and plate tectonics. New observations of these high 3He/4He domains
suggest that, rather than reflecting previously unmelted portions of the mantle,
these domains may be the result of Earth’s core leaking into the mantle. Through
this leak, pristine noble gases from the core imprint their helium ratios on
mantle rocks that sit above the core-mantle boundary. Subsequently, the mantle
rocks are transported to the surface and sampled by intraplate volcanism. This
project will involve experiments using metal and magma at temperatures and
pressures similar to the Earth’s core to explore the question of whether the
core is the source of the high 3He/4He found in parts of the mantle. If true,
and the core is the source, this would provide new information about the
chemistry of the core and would mean that high 3He/4He mantle domains may not,
in fact, be unmelted and pristine. This helps us understand Earth’s early
evolution.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to test the hypothesis that
the core can be the ultimate high 3He/4He source. Experiments will be conducted
that react metal and magma under controlled conditions that range up to the
pressures and temperatures directly applicable to core formation within Earth.
The noble gas distribution in the experiments will be analyzed using laser-
ablation mass spectrometry. These analyses will yield constraints regarding the
ability of the core to incorporate noble gases during its creation. These
constraints will be applied towards developing a core formation model that
predicts the isotopic composition of the core for both He and Xe for various
plausible formation conditions. Important model parameters include core
formation timing, nature of Earth’s primordial atmosphere, the prevailing redox
state associated with core formation, and core formation pressure-temperature
conditions. Model predictions will be compared to existing geochemical analyses
to identify if the core is a plausible source of high 3He/4He noble gases. This
proposal will support the training of two PhD students in cutting-edge
experimental and analytical methods, the production and characterization of
noble gas analytical standards that will be made available to the community, and
summer internships for college students in and around New
Orleans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by EAR Petrology
and Geochemistry and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.