* 2053929
* Collaborative Research: AI-Driven Multi-Scale Design of Materials under Processing Constraints
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ankit Agrawal, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2024
* USD 379,022.00

The objective of this project is to improve the knowledge of materials design by
developing a multi-scale methodology that combines physics-based models of
thermo-mechanical processing and materials with artificial intelligence (AI) and
machine learning (ML). The underlying hypothesis is that the metallic components
can be designed to achieve targeted macro-scale properties and performance by
optimizing the underlying microstructural features and processing parameters.
The project will build design methodology that enables: (i) investigation of the
effects of microstructures and processing parameters on macro-scale properties;
and (ii) identification of multiple optimum material designs that provide
desired macro-scale performance. The ability to optimize macro-scale properties
by designing microstructures and processes will improve the performance of
current and future engineering systems. Additionally, with the consideration of
manufacturing constraints, this multi-scale design framework will not merely
identify mathematical solutions, but the designs that will be manufacturable.
The researched methods and results will be tested against the experimental data
of a Titanium-Aluminum alloy. The societal impacts of the project will be on the
economy, with performance improvement in metallic components and minimization of
the time and costs associated with manufacturing. The gained knowledge will be
disseminated to academia and industry with technical activities and open-access
software tools. Additional deliverables of the project include curriculum
development at both undergraduate and graduate levels, research and education
experiences for students, and other outreach activities involving students and
educators with a special focus on individuals from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to advance
knowledge in the design of metallic materials by developing a multi-scale
optimization strategy that will be driven by the physics-based models of thermo-
mechanical processing and microstructures, and AI/ML-based predictive modeling
and knowledge discovery approaches. The research will address the inverse design
problem that aims to optimize the thermo-mechanical processing parameters (i.e.,
strain rate, temperature, duration) to achieve desired microstructural features
(i.e., crystallographic texture, grain morphology) and macro-scale properties by
investigating the coupled, multi-scale, and high-dimensional interactions within
the processing-(micro)structure-property chain. To achieve this goal, the
project will develop physics-based models that enable explicit quantification of
microstructural orientations and morphology (grain sizes and shapes), and an ML-
guided feedback-aware identification strategy for key
processing/(micro)-structure parameters, which will be subsequently explored by
targeted sampling. The research will improve the understanding of inverse
materials design by also integrating manufacturing constraints into the design
framework and exploring multiple optimum material solutions that provide desired
macro-scale properties. The physics-based and AI/ML-driven models, as well as
the optimum results obtained by the multi-scale design framework, will be
validated using the experimental processing, microstructure, and property data
of a Titanium-Aluminum alloy. The education and outreach objectives of the
project focus on training students and the future workforce to create new
knowledge on computational and ML-driven design of materials, which will be
supported with curriculum development and an extensive dissemination and
outreach plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.