* 2053253
* CSBR: Transfer of Ownership: Transfer of Lachance Yeast Collection to UC Davis
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Kyria Boundy-Mills, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 579,246.00

The goal of this project is to transfer a large research collection of yeasts
from Ontario, Canada to UC Davis. Yeasts (single-celled fungi) have great
importance for life science research, industry, and natural ecosystems. They
serve as degraders, nutrients, mutualists, competitors, parasites &amp;
pathogens. These important aspects of yeast ecology were elucidated in recent
decades by several key researchers, including Herman Phaff (1913-2001, UC Davis)
and Marc-André Lachance (University of Western Ontario). Lachance isolated,
characterized, and preserved thousands of yeast strains between 1977 and 2014.
He retired in June 2020 and seeks to transfer the collection to a public
repository to make them available to the scientific community. Several aspects
of this collection make it particularly valuable. It contains 330 type strains
including the original type specimens of the 150 species that Lachance
described, dozens of undescribed species, and strains that originated from 48
countries. Extensive characterization data was gathered. 5,000 yeast strains
comprising the Lachance research collection will be transferred to the Phaff
Yeast Culture Collection at the University of California Davis, the fourth
largest of its kind in the world, with over 9,000 strains in the public catalog.
This transfer will make the Lachance yeasts and associated data available to the
research community for the first time, enabling use in a broad range of research
fields such as taxonomy, ecology, physiology, comparative and functional
genomics, and biogeography. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collection maintenance
protocols of the Phaff Yeast Culture Collection follow relevant best practice
guidelines to ensure the yeast strains meet the needs of the users: they are
viable, pure, of the declared species, are backed up remotely, their
characterization data are available to the user community, and handling,
distribution and use comply with regulatory requirements such as biosafety,
biosecurity, and Nagoya Protocol. Yeasts from the Lachance collection will
therefore be accessioned into the Phaff collection under the collection’s
standard protocols. Specifically, strains will be inventoried then shipped to UC
Davis. Strains will be cryopreserved in triplicate: working and backup stocks at
UC Davis, and a third copy cryopreserved off-site at the USDA National
Laboratory for Genetic Resource Preservation in Fort Collins, Colorado. The
viability, purity and species ID of each strain will be validated. Each strain
will be identified by ribotyping using next generation sequencing by our
collaborator Novozymes, Inc. at their research facility in Davis, CA. Strains
that pass quality control criteria will be added to the Phaff collection public
catalog and the Global Catalog of Microorganisms. DNA sequences will be
deposited in GenBank. In addition to the already databased geographic and host
material information, over 40 years of unpublished physiological data (up to 80
descriptors per strain) will be entered into the BioloMICS database and
published in the Phaff collection online strain catalog. This multi-step process
ensures that Lachance’s yeasts will continue to spark discoveries by future
generations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.