* 2053318
* Magneto-Inductive Waveguides: Interconnecting the Next Generation of Wearables and Implants
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Asimina Kiourti, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 372,711.00

Advances in electromagnetics, electronics, and materials in recent years have
created new opportunities for wireless body area networks (WBANs) in healthcare,
sports, defense, emergency, and consumer applications. However, low-power and
reliable WBAN communications have yet to be realized. To overcome these
limitations, this project proposes to investigate and develop a new class of
WBANs enabled by magneto-inductive waveguides (MIWs). To form an MIW, the space
between a resonant transmitter and a receiver will be leveraged which will
include magnetic induction facilitated by resonant loops placed in transverse
and longitudinal configurations, or a combination of both. The MIWs, because of
their inherent wave-guiding nature, have the potentials for low loss, reduced
power requirements compared to the state-of-the-art and are generally less
vulnerable to interference and shadowing. They are also more secure and can
likely be adapted to implantable applications. The above features are
complemented by the fact that MIWs use magnetic fields which are expected to
have minimal to no effect to biological tissues. MIWs can be embroidered onto
fabrics (among other flexible solutions) to facilitate their applications in
WBANs. The outcomes of this research will potentially impact applications such
as personalized rehabilitation, athlete training, patient monitoring, human-
machine interfaces, and more. Besides advances in the basic science, the
proposed research is expected to be of significant interest to students and the
public. At the pre-college level, hands-on workshops will be organized to
provide students with experiences in electromagnetics and conductive textiles.
The project includes an undergraduate module which will focus on
interdisciplinary education, while a graduate-level course on
bioelectromagnetics will be updated by incorporating results from this research.
&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to enable fundamental scientific
understanding of MIW WBANs, investigate their real-world application challenges
and develop mitigation techniques, including fabric implementations and testing
on human subjects, and explore advanced aspects for MIW integration with
existing sensors and mobile devices. The creation of analytical, numerical, and
equivalent circuit models for MIW WBANs will reveal correlations among loop
design configurations, shapes, operating frequencies, on-body placement, and
associated performance. These models will in turn provide the framework for the
creation of new MIW-enabled WBANs for many applications. Electromagnetic
modeling of e-thread loops and modeling of their inherent shifting/deformation
on garments will prove useful for diverse e-textile implementations in the
future. Specific topologies of interest will be fabricated and tested to
validate performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.