* 2053118
* Support to Broaden Student Participation in the 2021 Meeting of the North American Membrane Society (NAMS)
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2022
* Yifu Ding, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 03/31/2022
* USD 15,990.00

This award will provide travel support for 13 U.S.-based undergraduate students
to attend the 2021 Meeting of the North American Membrane Society (NAMS) at
Estes Park, Colorado. NAMS is a premier membrane conference, providing
outstanding technical sessions across the full breadth of topics within membrane
science and technology. The theme of the 2021 meeting is "Convergence -
Connecting Membrane Science to Societal Challenges," which aligns with several
Grand Challenges recently identified by the National Academy of Engineering. The
meeting has a rich history of engaging graduate student researchers directly
through targeted programs and award opportunities. The goal of this travel
support is to extend these opportunities to undergraduate researchers who
identify as a member of an underrepresented group in STEM and might otherwise be
unable to attend the conference. Additionally, it will provide a platform for
students to network with community leaders and fellow undergraduate and graduate
students. A unique undergraduate mentoring program will foster inclusivity and
encourage the students to take full advantage of the technical, social, and
networking opportunities available at NAMS 2021. Early engagement in a
professional society/conference will provide students with motivation and
encouragement to pursue advanced degrees in their respective fields and,
subsequently, develop a healthy and diverse workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
NAMS organizing committee is comprised of diverse North American researchers,
and invited speakers from academia, industry, and government labs feature
prominently in the program. The meeting will feature 26 technical sessions,
daily plenary sessions, a poster session, and abundant unstructured discussion
periods to catalyze new collaborative relationships and research ideas. The 2021
NAMS meeting will cover a variety of topics ranging from fundamental studies of
membrane material science to process systems development and applications of
membrane technology in water, bioprocessing, chemical separations, environmental
systems, and energy. Historically, hundreds of graduate students participate in
the NAMS meeting and engage in unique professional development and training
opportunities. This award will extend such opportunities to a cohort of U.S.
undergraduate students with the intention of growing and retaining a diverse
community of membrane scientists and engineers. All undergraduate attendees will
be paired with senior graduate student mentors who will serve as meeting guides
and support an immersive experience. The program's effectiveness will be
assessed through surveys and observation of student outcomes. It is anticipated
that the award for travel and registration fee subsidies will attract diverse
young scientists in the field and enhance the membrane science and technology
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.