* 2053935
* Reconstruction of Four-Dimensional Near-Surface Wind Characteristics from Debris and Damage Attributes using Computer Vision
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Mani Golparvar-Fard, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 09/30/2024
* USD 399,235.00

Extreme windstorms, including hurricanes, tornadoes, and thunderstorms, are
major drivers of economic losses and fatalities in the United States. Mitigating
these impacts requires in-depth understanding of the fundamental characteristics
of extreme windstorms. These characteristics then inform building codes and
standards, education, and risk assessment. Significant knowledge gaps exist for
tornadoes and thunderstorms, with basic characteristics such as near-ground wind
speeds rarely measured directly. A promising new approach to address these gaps
is the application of computer vision techniques to track the 4D motion of wind-
borne debris that is contained in the numerous videos of extreme windstorms
generated each year by scientists and citizen scientists. This multi-
disciplinary Disaster Resilience Research Grants (DRRG) project will integrate
wind engineering, structural engineering, computer vision, and machine learning
disciplines to develop robust new datasets and methods for understanding near-
surface wind and debris characteristics. Graduate students from each discipline
will be trained in cross-disciplinary methods. The engagement of citizen
scientists will spur awareness and education of the public as to the true nature
of these windstorms. Ultimately, the improved understanding of near-ground level
winds and debris in extreme windstorms addresses the critical need for improved
community resilience to extreme windstorms. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Little is
known about the near-surface characteristics of extreme windstorms and the
debris they generate. High space and time resolution of velocity fields of these
storms are rarely measured in-situ, resulting in fundamental characteristics
such as the relative magnitudes of the horizontal and vertical velocity
components, vertical profiles of the 3D velocities, and turbulence intensities
remaining largely unknown. This project adopts an innovative and integrated
approach to characterizing near-surface wind and debris characteristics using
visual data sources. The primary objectives of this project are to (1) build a
formal database of both structured and unstructured debris motion media with
appropriate metadata; (2) generate a robust dataset of labeled debris motion
suitable for model training and validation; (3) develop a new generation of
computer vision and machine learning based tools with application to fine-scale
and large-scale debris identification, classification, and motion tracking; and
(4) demonstrate a framework for inferring near-surface wind characteristics from
debris motion. In fulfilling these objectives, this project will utilize
collaborations with the NHERI Wall of Wind Experimental Facility at Florida
International University and citizen scientists within storm chasing networks.
The datasets created through this project can be used to train a new generation
of tools, integrating artificial intelligence and civil engineering in ways that
will ultimately benefit both fields. The outcome will be a deeper understanding
of extreme windstorms, with a framework in place for continuous refinement and
learning beyond the lifespan of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.