* 2053029
* EAR-PF: Unraveling Fluvial Kinematics before the Rise of Land Plants: Bridging Laboratory and Geologic Scales
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Jeffery Valenza, Valenza, Jeffery Michael
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 07/31/2023
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Jeffery Valenza has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry
out research and education activities at the University of California Santa
Barbara under the mentorship of Dr. Vamsi Ganti, and at Imperial College London
under Dr. Alexander Whittaker. This study aims to understand how rivers function
in the absence of bank-strengthening vegetation. While nearly all modern river
environments are impacted by vegetation, this has only been the case for the
most recent ~10% of earth’s history. Prior to the evolution of terrestrial
plants, rivers drained the continents without the stabilizing effects of rooted
plants, much like extraterrestrial environments on Mars and Titan. The research
will characterize the ways that vegetation-free rivers change through time using
physical experiments and outcrop analysis. Experiments will focus on discovering
conditions that produce a vegetation-free, winding river and will measure the
resulting features. These data will be used to characterize and interpret
ancient environmental conditions using sandstone exposures in NW Scotland.
Bridging laboratory and geologic scales will provide new measures of how pre-
vegetation rivers evolved and is applicable to other planetary bodies such as
Mars, with preserved river features in an environment with no plants. The
project also included outreach and mentoring activities that highlight the
laboratory experiments through educational demonstrations and scientific
training. Mentoring of undergraduates will be facilitated by the California
Alliance for Minority Participation program and mentoring of high-school
students and science teachers will be accomplished through the Apprentice
Researchers program at University of California Santa Barbara.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An irreversible shift occurred in the rock record of
ancient rivers, which coincides with the evolution of land plants during the
Silurian period approximately 450 million years ago. This stratigraphic shift
was hypothesized to mark the transition from the predominance of shallow, multi-
threaded rivers in un-vegetated landscapes to the widespread occurrence of low-
gradient meandering rivers that developed due to the bank-stabilizing effect of
vegetation. However, recent observations indicate that single-threaded rivers
can readily form in barren desert landscapes, and their occurrence is
increasingly recognized on extraterrestrial surfaces and from sediments pre-
dating the greening of the continents. These observations challenge the paradigm
that the Silurian transition in fluvial strata occurred due to a geometric shift
in river planform. Through a combination of reduced-scaled physical experiments
of single-threaded river evolution in the absence of plants and field
observations of Proterozoic fluvial deposits in NW Scotland, I will test the
hypothesis that the Silurian-age stratigraphic shift occurred due to a kinematic
shift in the rates of river evolution that was coeval with plant evolution.
Specifically, I will test the hypotheses that: (1) pre-vegetation single-
threaded rivers were sustained by fine-grained cohesive bank sediment but their
lateral channel migration rates were an order-of-magnitude greater than their
vegetated counterparts; (2) high lateral migration rates—relative to river
avulsion rates—caused the rapid reworking of floodplain deposits and flushed
fine-grained sediment from the fluvial realm, resulting in vertically-truncated,
poorly preserved, laterally extensive bar packages and a paucity of preserved
alluvial mudrock. New experimental and field data generated from this study will
enable the critical evaluation of the causes and consequences of an enigmatic
shift in fluvial strata that records the co-evolution of life and surface
processes on our planet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.