* 2053188
* CDS&amp;E: Point Process Models for Traffic Risk Analysis and Crash Prevention
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Richard Warr, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 199,941.00

Traffic and crash databases collected by state and federal departments of
transportation contain a wealth of information that can be used to increase
highway safety. For example, crash databases can be used to identify locations
where crashes frequently occur as well as the underlying factors that
contributed to those crashes. Such analysis of crash databases can subsequently
lead to identifying countermeasures that can be enacted to decrease the
frequency of crashes at high-risk locations. While many efforts are ongoing to
use the information contained in these databases to increase traffic safety,
modern traffic datasets contain more information than can be currently extracted
using traditional data analysis techniques. The most glaring shortcoming of
common statistical techniques for crash data is that such techniques focus only
on small segments of the road (e.g. intersections) rather than analyzing the
entire roadway network simultaneously. In this project, the researchers are
developing statistical methodology that will analyze an entire roadway network
to capture important relationships between roadway features that may lead to an
increase in crashes. Ultimately, the goal of this project is to analyze traffic
network data so as to identify ways to create a safer roadway network for all
travelers. Beyond research activities, mentoring activities associated with this
project include student mentoring on advanced topics in data science and traffic
safety engineering. Educational activities will include STEM career
presentations to high school students as well as the development of a novel
interdisciplinary research group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Historically, statistical
models for traffic crashes have analyzed aggregated crash counts along with
roadway segments, where aggregated data forfeit the use of any within-segment
information. Modern crash databases, however, contain data on the exact
locations of crashes (referred to as point pattern data) which, if analyzed
appropriately, can give richer statistical inferences than aggregated data. This
project seeks to fully utilize the information in modern traffic databases by
considering the continuous nature of roadway traffic rather than relying on
arbitrarily aggregated count data over roadway segments. Specifically, this
project will develop easily implementable and computationally feasible
approaches to modeling crash point pattern data to determine where crashes are
likely to occur (referred to as hot spot identification) as well as how features
of the roadway influence the potential for a crash (referred to as risk factor
identification). Specifically, this project has the following goals related to
statistical and civil engineering science: (1) develop piece-wise linear point
process models on roadway networks and (2) develop a hierarchical point process
approach to model multiple crash types simultaneously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.