* 2053056
* EAR-PF: Controls of and connections between silicate weathering and organic carbon cycling in watersheds: A test case in the Upper Deschutes Basin, Oregon, USA
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Evan Ramos, Ramos, Evan J
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2023
* USD 174,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Dr. Evan J. Ramos has been awarded an NSF EAR
Postdoctoral Fellowship to conduct research, professional development, and
outreach activities at Rice University and Brown University under the mentorship
of Professors Mark A. Torres and Daniel E. Ibarra, respectively. This project
investigates the nature of silicate weathering, organic carbon (OC) cycling, and
their potential couplings across a watershed in the Cascade Mountains of Oregon,
USA. Silicate weathering and OC cycling in soils influence the transfer of CO2
between the solid Earth and Earthâ€™s ocean and atmosphere, thereby forcing and
responding to changes in climate over a range of timescales. These processes are
known to influence one another, but without tools to quantitatively probe both
simultaneously, our ability to understand how either silicate weathering or OC
cycling have responded to past climate change or how they will respond in the
future is critically limited. The goal of this project is to develop a
multiproxy geochemical approach that allows for the dual analyses of silicate
weathering and OC cycling over timescales spanning millennia to millions of
years. Motivated by a significant inverse correlation found between published
soil lithium (Li) isotope compositions (a measure of silicate weathering
intensity) and soil OC concentrations in a soil age sequence in Hawaii, Dr.
Ramos will test the applicability of these combined measurements by (1)
measuring Li isotope compositions and OC concentrations in soil and river
sediments across a watershed with environmental and geologic conditions that
differ from Hawaii and (2) developing models that simulate silicate weathering
and OC cycling in soils. Research and professional development will involve the
training of one undergraduate at Rice and one at Brown in sample acquisition,
geochemical analysis of soils, model development, and written and verbal
scientific communication. Project findings will be incorporated into a virtual
field experience on ecosystems and watersheds, and lesson plans related to this
virtual field experience will be developed with Houston-area science educators
for usage in middle and high school science
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Silicate weathering and organic carbon (OC)
cycling in soils respond to and affect climate on a range of timescales, from
millennia to millions of years. While typically studied independently of one
another, both silicate weathering and OC cycling are intimately tied via the
budgets of nutrients, acids, and reactive surfaces in soils. The result is a
complex set of positive and negative feedbacks that make it difficult to predict
how either weathering or OC cycling will respond to environmental change.
Moreover, the relationship(s) between weathering and OC cycling need not be the
same across a landscape and may instead be modified by the physical processes
operating on distinct landscape elements (e.g., mountain hillslopes,
floodplains). Dr. Ramos will test the hypothesis that, over millennial
timescales, silicate weathering and OC storage are positively coupled through a
mutual dependence on the rate of phyllosilicate (clay) mineral formation and
that, as a result, landscape elements where clay mineral formation is favored
(e.g., floodplains) strongly impact the net amount of CO2 drawdown. This project
will involve sampling of river sediments, soils, and bedrock and subsequent
measurements of Li isotope ratios, OC contents, and radiocarbon (14C) contents
across an upland to floodplain transition to further our understanding of the
coupled inorganic and organic C cycles. The Upper Deschutes Basin in the Oregon
Cascades offers a compelling setting to gather critical data that test our
hypothesis because of its lithologic (volcanic) uniformity, geologically recent
formation (6.8 kya), and its physiographic similarity to other headwater
catchments in recently deglaciated terrains. Additionally, results will be used
to develop a generic model to address outstanding inconsistencies in modern
weathering budgets and the potential magnitude of secular C cycle variation due
to changing landscape forms over geologic time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.