* 2053109
* I-Corps: Metal hybrid multi-metal parts made possible by additive manufacturing technology
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Frank Pfefferkorn, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a new metal additive manufacturing technique that is designed to
print parts in a single process containing multiple metal alloys. These multi-
metal parts are called “metal hybrids,” and this system enables the design and
manufacturing of metal parts with complex geometries and different metals used
in various deposition locations. This is something that no single manufacturing
process can achieve today. The metal hybrid parts may be designed to be just as
strong but lighter in weight than existing single-metal parts while offering
superior thermal, wear, and corrosion resistance. The development of this
technology is expected to be disruptive to a wide range of high-temperature
applications and systems, increase the efficiency of additive manufacturing
processes by reducing technological footprints, reduce manufacturing costs,
reduce the need for complex assemblies and joining operations, and reduce part
count. This has applications for aerospace, automotive, and energy
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a additive manufacturing technique that allows for the
simultaneous deposition and mixing of different metal powders, in thin layers,
within a type of additive manufacturing system referred to as powder bed fusion.
The deposited multi-metal powder layer is then melted using a laser beam and the
process continues layer by layer until the part has been built. In addition, a
machine learning algorithm has been developed to determine suitable laser
parameters for correctly melting the multi-metal powders with varying
composition. This proposed deposition technique and process parameter prediction
model will not only introduce a new generation of metal parts to industry, but
also will expand the fundamental understanding of the relationship between the
manufacturing process parameters and material properties of additively
manufactured multi-metal components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.