* 2053053
* I-Corps - Theranostic nanofiber membrane for the treatment of chronic and burn wounds
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Maurice Haff, University of Central Oklahoma
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a point-of-care product that diagnoses and treats bacterial
infection in chronic wounds based on theranostic nanofiber technology. The goal
is to improve clinical workflow, promote wound healing, and stop sepsis before
it starts. Sepsis, an extreme response to an infection is potentially life-
threatening. It increases length of hospital stays, often requires treatment in
intensive care units, and significantly increases hospital and pharmacological
costs. One-third of sepsis cases and nearly half of all sepsis-related deaths in
2017 were due to wound infection. Reliance on clinical signs and symptoms to
detect infection in chronic wounds has proven unreliable. Use of swab cultures
is no more accurate. Tissue biopsies provide more accurate results, but are
costly and indications take longer to acquire. Inaccurate diagnosis or patient
non-compliance in care of a wound may result in antibiotic overuse or sepsis.
The proposed solution detects rising bacterial colonization, provides visual
indication of bacterial colonization above a threshold, and releases medication
in response, preventing infection and stopping sepsis. These features may
provide significant improvements in provider workflow and patient outcomes, both
major cost drivers in clinical and low-resource
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a novel theranostic (diagnostic and therapeutic) nanofiber membrane focused
on prevention of infection in chronic wounds caused by severe burns, and by
pressure, venous, and diabetic ulcers. Wound dressings often are extremely
painful to remove, particularly for severe burn wounds. Requirements for pain
management may significantly impact clinical workflow and influence patient
compliance outside the clinic. There is high risk for infection and the onset of
sepsis. Experimental results confirm that detection of bacterial colonization,
visual notification, and responsive release of antibacterial agents may be
achieved using the proposed nanofiber membrane. Incorporating colorimetric dyes
provides tunable sensitivity for the detection of infection. Using an
antibacterial agent in bioresponsive nanofiber enables on-demand release of a
biocide. On demand release enables extended-time wound coverage to support
healing and reduce pain by remaining in continuous contact with a wound bed
during and between wound dressing changes. A novel process is under development
for fabricating well-structured, cross-aligned nanofiber membranes needed to
optimize membrane surface exposure to a wound bed and increase detection
sensitivity. The sensitivity and responsiveness of multi-layer membranes
comprising cross-aligned, bioresponsive nanofibers using antibacterial nanofiber
compositions will be evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.