* 2053997
* EAR-PF: The spatiotemporal scales of transient slow slip on the San Andreas fault near San Juan Bautista, central California, and the implications for seismic hazard
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Heather Shaddox, Shaddox, Heather R
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 174,000.00

Dr. Heather Shaddox has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
combine seismic and geodetic observations to characterize the nature of fault
slip and earthquake hazard for the San Andreas fault near San Juan Bautista in
central California. This work will be conducted at University of California
Berkeley in collaboration with mentor Roland Burgmann. Slip on faults occurs as
a spectrum, ranging from slow, continuous sliding (i.e., aseismic slip) to rapid
movement during earthquakes (i.e., seismic failure). Aseismic slip can
temporarily relieve stress on a fault but may also trigger large, damaging
earthquakes on adjacent segments of the fault. Therefore, detecting and
understanding this temporary release of stress (called aseismic slip transients)
is key in seismic hazard evaluation and has direct societal impacts. Because
aseismic slip transients do not generate seismic waves, geodetic instruments
like land Global Positional System (GPS) stations with observational limits are
required to detect these movements. This project will use related small
earthquakes (microseismicity) to infer the location of aseismic slip transients,
taking advantage of existing and newly installed instrumentation to create a
catalog of seismicity at unprecedented resolution. The results of this project
will provide information about spatial and temporal scales of fault slip and
have implications for determining seismic hazard. This detailed analysis may
also uncover answers to fundamental fault slip questions including how often
aseismic slip precedes earthquakes and how often earthquakes trigger aseismic
slip transients. We can also gain insights into other tectonic environments
where direct observations are limited (e.g., the offshore portion of subduction
zones) by studying this natural laboratory. This project also involves
educational materials about earthquakes for elementary school students in the
San Francisco Bay Area of California, a region with high seismic hazards.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general objective of this project is to study the
spatiotemporal scales of transient aseismic slip on the San Andreas fault near
San Juan Bautista in central California at unprecedented resolution to
ultimately gain a broader understanding of the nature of fault slip. San Juan
Bautista, located at the northwest boundary of the creeping section of the San
Andreas fault and the southeast termination point of the Mw 7.9 1906 San
Francisco earthquake, forms a creeping-to-locked transition of the fault. The
dense instrumentation and historic record of transient aseismic slip near San
Juan Bautista make it an excellent natural laboratory to study the interplay of
seismic and aseismic slip. We will create a catalog of spontaneous and trigged
aseismic slip transients on the San Andreas fault near San Juan Bautista by
combining seismic (general seismicity, near-repeating earthquakes) and geodetic
(cGPS, InSAR, borehole strainmeter, creepmeter) observations to help answer the
following questions: What is the spatial scale, temporal scale, and magnitude of
aseismic slip transients? How often and by what mechanism(s) does aseismic slip
lead to small and moderate-sized earthquakes? How often do these earthquakes
lead to aseismic slip? Based on the scales of transient aseismic slip, is the
San Andreas fault near San Juan Bautista capable of large (Mw &gt; 6)
earthquakes? We will further study the relationship between shallow and deep
aseismic slip, spatiotemporal changes in creep rate in this locking transition,
and evaluate the utility of near-repeating earthquakes as a proxy for transient
aseismic slip. We additionally hope to gain insights into other tectonic
environments, particularly the offshore portion of subduction zones where direct
observations are limited, by studying this natural
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.