* 2053350
* Combinatorial Probability and Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Anne Schilling, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 200,894.00

Probability is the mathematical study of how likely an event occurs or a
proposition is true. Representation theory is the study of algebraic structures
by realizing their elements as linear maps on vector spaces or modules and
decomposing them into their smallest constituents. Both probability and
representation theory lend themselves to combinatorial analysis. For example, in
probability the events could be discrete states and in representation theory the
index set of a representation is often a combinatorial object such as a
partition. The main premise of this proposal is the development of new
combinatorial techniques for answering fundamental questions in both probability
and representation theory. This project also has a substantial computational
component (contributing to and using the rapidly growing open-source
mathematical software SAGEMATH). The outcome of this research will impact areas
beyond those of their original motivation. For example, it relates to invariant
theory, complexity theory, and voting procedures. These investigations are
fueled by extensive computational experimentation. Robust implementation of
algorithms derived from the project will lead to new, open-source code for the
SAGEMATH computer algebra system. The dissemination of this new SAGEMATH
software will not only advance the proposed research program, but will (and has
already) cross-fertilize various areas in mathematics and computer science. In
addition, the project will support a diverse group of graduate students and
encourage the participation of female students and researchers. The PI also
plans to organize workshops, engage in promoting open access publishing, and
disseminate results via lecture series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
aimed at solving open problems on five topics in combinatorial probability and
representation theory. The five proposed projects will be attacked with various
teams of collaborators and include: (1) Mixing times of Markov chains using the
recently developed new theory for computing stationary distributions for any
finite Markov chain. This approach uses sophisticated methods in semigroup
theory. (2) A new uncrowding algorithm for hook-valued tableaux in relation to
canonical stable Grothendieck polynomials in K-theory. (3) The generalization of
a crystal associated to stable Grothendieck polynomials. This approach will
likely yield new K-theoretic insertion algorithms. (4) Insertion algorithms for
the partition algebra and its subalgebras. The partition algebra is a
centralizer algebra. New insertion algorithms are required to match the
underlying representation theory in various cases. (5) Symmetric chain
decompositions of crystal bases can answer questions about plethysm coefficients
and have applications to physics, invariant theory and complexity
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.