* 2053072
* EAR-PF: Advanced statistical analysis to relate microstructural fabrics and finite strain in ductilely deformed rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Alexander Lusk, Lusk, Alexander Dmitri
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 11/30/2022
* USD 87,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Alexander Lusk has been
granted an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry out research and education
plans at the University of Wisconsin Madison. Geologists characterize how rocks
deform by measuring a quantity called finite strain. Finite strain is
conceptualized in three dimensions as an ellipsoid. When rocks are not deformed,
the 3-D object is a sphere; with increasing deformation, it becomes more
elliptical. However, most deformed rocks do not have any large-scale indicators
that record finite strain. As a result, geologists make microscope slides of
rocks to study microscopic features called microstructures. The goals of Dr.
Lusk’s project are two-fold: (1) to provide methods of characterizing finite
strain uncertainty (i.e. error bars) in three dimensions to better understand
rock deformation, and (2) to provide geologists with methods to relate rock
microstructures developed in quartz (a common crustal rock constituent) to the
finite strain experienced during deformation. To characterize finite strain, Dr.
Lusk will apply statistical methods to rocks that contain quartz pebbles, which
preserve a direct record of finite strain. During his postdoctoral fellowship,
Dr. Lusk will carry out an education plan involving the following: (1)
development of an undergraduate level, exploration based virtual education
module that will aim to make students comfortable with measuring and
interpreting finite strain in the field; (2) development of software for the
statistical analysis of finite strain, integrated in the StraboSpot field app;
(3) mentoring of two UW-Madison students in undergraduate research projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to evaluate the response of rock
microstructure developed in ductile quartz-rich rocks to the finite strain
magnitude, geometry, and strain path in which deformation occurred. The proposed
approach differs from previous work in that it applies multivariate statistical
methods to quantitatively characterize ellipsoidal finite strain data – with a
measure of uncertainty – for the first time. The key to statistical analysis of
ellipsoids is that orientations and magnitudes, while independent measurements,
must be combined and transformed into an ellipsoid tensor; in tensor form,
multivariate statistical analysis can be applied. The project will be carried
out by analyzing finite strain and rock microstructure in the ductile Bygdin
(Norway) and Funzie (Scotland) quartz-rich metaconglomerates. Finite strain will
be determined at the outcrop scale by measuring clast orientation and all three
ellipsoid axes to constrain clast shape. At the grain scale, two measures of
finite strain will be determined: (1) the grain shape and shape preferred
orientation of relict metamorphic grains, and (2) the spatial relationship of
relict metamorphic grain center points. Electron backscatter diffraction will be
used for microstructural characterization, including measurement of grain shape,
crystallographic vorticity axis orientation, and crystallographic preferred
orientation. By relating statistical measures of finite strain directly to rock
microstructural fabrics, Dr. Lusk aims to improve our current understanding of
how finite strain and strain history is preserved in the microstructural record
and to provide structural geologists with methods to infer strain history
without a direct measurement of finite strain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.