* 2054356
* Exploring the Tropical Atmosphere with Advanced Radio Occultation: Processing, Serving, and Analyzing Radio Occultation Data to Advance Atmospheric Science
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Qian Wu, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2026
* USD 2,002,366.00

The Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) is the set of satellite
constellations launched worldwide to provide positioning information for all
forms of navigation. The system includes the Galileo constellation launched by
the European Union, the GLONASS satellites from Russia, Beidou from China, and
the US Global Positioning System (GPS). GPS is well known in the US as we rely
on it for driving directions and an ever-expanding array of cell phone apps.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;But the radio waves transmitted for GNSS positioning also
have tremendous value for looking at the atmosphere: GNSS radio waves are
refracted by the atmosphere to an extent which depends on the temperature and
water vapor content of the lower atmosphere and the density of electric charge
in the ionosphere. The refraction causes a delay in the phase of the waves when
they reach a receiver, and if the reciever is placed on an orbiting satellite
the phase delay can be used to measure ionospheric charge and atmospheric
temperature and water vapor (although water vapor requires additional
information). Because the measurements are made during the rising and setting,
or occultation, of a GNSS transmitter satellite relative to a receiver
satellite, the technology is referred to as GNSS Radio Occultation (GNSSRO).
GNSSRO has proven to be a highly effective observing method as the measurements
can be made under all weather conditions, are unaffected by clouds and aerosols,
and are absolutely calibrated (SI traceable) through the atomic clocks that
support the GNSS transmitters. They also have relatively high vertical
resolution, providing a profile of atmospheric properties which can be used to
identify sharp features such as the tropopause and fluctuations in temperature
caused by atmospheric gravity waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
work on the development and scientific use of GNSSRSO measurements at the
University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR). UCAR has played a
foundational role in GNSSRO technology starting with the GPS/MET proof-of-
concept satellite mission in the 1990s, and they led the development of the
Constellation Observing System for Meteorology, the Ionosphere, and Climate
(COSMIC, also called COSMIC-1 or C1), a constellation of six GNSSRO receiver
satellites launched in 2006. They also managed the development of COSMIC-2 (C2,
a mission led by the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration), a
follow-on constellation of six satellites orbiting over the tropics and
subtropics (30 degrees south to 30 north) launched in 2019. The UCAR group,
formally known as the UCAR COSMIC Program, has also been collecting and
processing GNSSRO data from several other satellite missions, for example SAC-C
(from Argentina), GRACE (a NASA mission), Metop-A and -B (EUMETSAT missions),
and PAZ (from Spain). Including all satellite misions there are now two decades
of continuous GNSSRO observations, a long enough record to be valuable for
research on climate trends. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work here emphasizes the low
latitudes, motivated by the high density and quality of low-latitude
observations available from C2. One question to be addressed is the extent to
which RO-based observations can lead to better understanding of hurricanes and
other tropical cyclones (TCs), for instance the extent to which accumulation of
water vapor in a deep layer near the developing TC promotes storm development.
Another is whether the discrepancy between the observed profile of tropical
tropospheric warming and the profile simulated in response to greenhouse gas
increases is due to inadequacies of climate models or biases in observations.
The high resolution and absolute calibration of RO soundings makes them ideal
address this question. Other issues to be pursued include better
characterization of the tropical waves which drive the stratospheric Quasi-
Biennial Oscillation and the use of RO to assess the representation of water
vapor in commonly used reanalysis datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
also includes research on the low-latitude ionosphere, taking advantage of the
Ion Velocity Meter (IVM) deployed as a secondary payload on the C2 satellites as
well as two recently launched NASA missions, the Global-Scale Observations of
the Limb and Disk (GOLD) and Ionospheric Connection Explorer (ICON). The suite
of C2, ICON, and GOLD observations is used to study equatorial plasma bubbles
and the effect of the equatorial dynamo on the ionosphere. Further work seeks to
improve the assimilation of GNSSRO observations into ionospheric
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to these research applications the
project includes research to advance GNSSRO theory and algorithms so as to
maximize the value of RO for atmospheric research. One concern is the effects of
random refractivity fluctuations on RO measurements, as such fluctuations are
thought to contribute to the negative bias in RO-derived atmospheric moisture
commonly found near the surface. A further concern is the detection of super-
refraction, in which refraction becomes strong enough to trap GNSS radio waves
near the surface and prevent their use for determining temperature and water
vapor. Super-refraction must be detected so that data from the ducted portion of
the RO profiles is not used. Additional work develops RO methods for the
ionosphere, including better methods for detecting localized charge
irregularities and ray-tracing techniques which use separate ray paths for the
two wavelengths transmitted by GNSS satellites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work
has societal as well as scientific value due to the use of GNSSRO for weather
prediction and climate monitoring. GNSSRO is used in most weather forecasting
centers and improvements in RO algorithms developed under this award have direct
application in weather prediction. The examination of GNSSRO as an observational
technique for looking at hurricanes is particularly relevant given the lack of
observations that can be used to initialize hurricane forecasts. The ionospheric
work is also directly applicable to efforts to predict space weather. In the
area of climate monitoring, the project develops datasets from RO observations
over multiple satellite missions, processed in a consistent manner so that they
can be used to assess long-term trends in temperature and moisture. The award
includes support for hosting, archiving, serving, and supporting access to
datasets by the research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The datasets and data
services are augmented by several education and outreach efforts seeking to
facilitate use of GNSS RO data by the research community. One of these is a
postdoctoral research program which supports early-career scientists seeking to
work with RO observations. The project also works with the UCAR Significant
Opportunities in Atmospheric Research and Science (SOARS) program, through which
it provides mentorship to students from underrepresented groups. A two-week
summer colloquium is planned for 2022 to bring together experts in GNSSRO and
give early career researchers an opportunity to become familiar with GNSSRO and
its research applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.