* 2054482
* Combinatorics of Multivariate Orthogonal Polynomials
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Sylvie Corteel, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The study of families of orthogonal polynomials aims to generalize understanding
of the classical families of polynomials, such as the Legendre polynomials, that
arise in the study of differential equations and have wide application in
physics, engineering, numerical approximation, and other fields. This research
project addresses several questions on the combinatorics of multivariate
orthogonal polynomials. The goal is to develop general and efficient techniques
in enumerative combinatorics with application to questions coming from
combinatorics, algebra, and physics. The topics under study include the
combinatorial interpretation of the coefficients of Askey-Wilson polynomials and
their multivariate generalization, the interplay between exclusion processes and
MacDonald (Koornwinder) polynomials, the combinatorics of q-Jacobi polynomials
and Lecture Hall tableaux, and the relations between Rogers-Ramanujan identities
and cylindric partitions. The project will involve graduate students in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this project concerns several
interrelated questions surrounding the combinatorics of Askey-Wilson polynomials
and their multivariate generalization. The first research direction concerns the
positivity of the coefficients and the expansion of these polynomials in the
Schur basis. The project will explore the interplay of lattice paths
combinatorics, tableaux combinatorics, algebra, and probability to address these
questions. The second direction aims to employ multispecies asymmetric simple
exclusion process (ASEP) and generalized versions to understand the
combinatorics of Macdonald polynomials of different types and generalization to
quasisymmetric analogues. The PI aims to use techniques coming from statistical
physics, combinatorial algebras, and multiline queue/vertex model combinatorics
to develop this combinatorial theory. A third direction is to study the Lecture
Hall Schur functions and their skew analogues, their connections with q-Jacobi
multivariate analogues and generalizations, and tiling models coming from
Lecture Hall objects and their asymptotic properties. A final direction concerns
the Rogers-Ramanujan identities and their connection to cylindric partitions and
Hall Littlewood polynomials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.