* 2054824
* Ideal eukaryotic tetrazine ligations for imaging protein dynamics in live cells
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2025
* Ryan Mehl, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,209,960.00

The ability to modify and visualize biomolecules in live cells without
compromising their function is critical to understanding living systems. The
goal of this research is to develop a complete bioorthogonal labeling system
that can be encoded into any location in a protein and functions to label
proteins inside living systems. This project will develop protein labeling
methods that are extremely fast and highly specific, enabling wash-free protein
labeling and single molecule imaging in live eukaryotic cells. In addition, this
project will enable the continued integration of new protein engineering methods
into undergraduate lab courses and will provide fellowships to underrepresented
scientists to attend the annual Unnatural Protein Facility GCE workshops. The
Unnatural Protein Facility uses NSF funding to develop and centralize genetic
tools, and hosts undergraduate students, graduate students and researchers from
around the world to assist in integrating protein engineering methods into their
labs. These technologies also have significant potential for economic
development and companies are working with Oregon State University to license
the technologies developed in this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ability to modify and visualize biomolecules in live cells without compromising
their function is critical to understanding living systems. The goal of this
project is to develop a complete bioorthogonal labeling system that can be
genetically encoded into any protein in living systems and is extremely fast and
highly specific. This project will demonstrate that wash-free protein labeling
and single molecule imaging is possible in live eukaryotic cells using Genetic
Code Expansion (GCE) tools. The first aim of this proposal focuses on increasing
quantitative protein labeling rates by over 1000-fold by genetically encoding
tetrazine-containing non-canonical amino acids (Tet-ncAAs) into proteins. The
second aim seeks to develop labels that react with tetrazine-containing proteins
by optimizing label bioavailability and specificity to achieve ultralow
background. The third aim leverages the advantages of the site-specific ideal
labeling systems to develop a new class of protein labels that “turn-on” when
they bind to DNA, allowing one to monitor DNA-Protein interactions. The fourth
aim tackles three key questions surrounding the localization, dynamics and DNA
binding ability of the transcription factor STAT3 (Signal Transducer and
Activator of Transcription 3) by combining the ideal protein labeling system
with confocal microscopy and single molecule tracking. In addition to developing
general fluorescent labels, this research will open access to labeling
modalities by engineering protein labels that are fluorogenic upon binding DNA
and can be used to report the function of DNA binding proteins. The results of
these experiments will fill important gaps in existing knowledge that cannot be
adequately addressed using current fluorescent labeling methods. The successful
completion of this research will provide a set of GCE tools that will advance a
broad range of applications in the field of in-cell labeling and will yield the
first results of STAT3 function in the absence of an N- or C-terminal protein
tag. This project is funded by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division
of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.