* 2054845
* Catalytic Cycloaddition Reactions and Their Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Michael Doyle, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 483,119.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis (CAT) and Chemical Synthesis (SYN)
Programs in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Michael Doyle of the University
of Texas, San Antonio is working to develop new ways to construct molecules
using vinyl diazo compounds, organic building blocks that have a carbon-carbon
double bond next to an electron-poor carbon, formally known as a carbenoid
center. Catalysts are being studied to tune and control the reactivity of vinyl
diazo compounds with compatible reagents to access value-added products. These
investigations are working toward establishing new ways to construct challenging
bonds and heteroaromatic structures that are common components of valued added
target molecules, particularly heterocyclic structures of value to biological
and medicinal chemistry. Synergistically, these activities will provide
opportunities for students of different levels to broaden their knowledge and
experience in catalytic and synthetic chemistry. Undergraduate students are
being integrated into the research program with strong mentoring that prepares
them for careers in STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics)
disciplines, and opportunities are being provided to postdoctoral research
associates to prepare them for positions in the chemical sciences in both the
private sector and in academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New modular methods for the
synthesis of heterocycles and functionalized carbocycles are in high demand due
to the prevalence of these structures in pharmaceutical, agrochemical, and new
material targets. Professor Michael Doyle and his research team are identifying
catalysts that extrude molecular nitrogen from vinyl diazo-compounds to form
highly energetic metallocarbene intermediates that condense with a variety of
dipolar cycloaddition partners to form novel adduce with a high degree of regio-
and stereo control. The stereodefined products of [3+1]-cycloaddition reactions
of silyl-protected enoldiazo compounds will be studied for subsequent strain-
induced ring-opening reactivity and used to explore cycloaddition reactions of
donor-acceptor cycloalkenes. Acid-catalyzed conditions with triflimide are being
developed to engage vinyl diazo [3+1] cycloaddition products in subsequent
cycloaddition reactions that lead to intermediate structures capable of ring
expansion to medium-sized products. Highly enantioselective catalytic
cyclopropanation reactions of enoldiazo compounds are being tested to prepare
donor-acceptor cyclopropanes that are capable of engaging in cycloaddition
reactions with retention of enantioenrichement. These activities will take place
at the University of Texas, San Antonio, and augment the inclusive training and
research opportunities at this minority-serving
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.