* 2054605
* CSEDI: Understanding the influence of mantle dynamics on the generation of Earth's magnetic field throughout the plate tectonics cycle.
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Courtney Sprain, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 06/30/2024
* USD 428,655.00

Earth's magnetic field acts as a shield against cosmic radiation and magnetic
storms, which can potentially damage technical infrastructure, harm life, and
strip away Earth's atmosphere. Understanding the evolution of the magnetic field
therefore has important implications for Earth's habitability today and
throughout history. An outstanding question that currently limits understanding
of the evolution the magnetic field is: When did the solid inner core form?
Today, the solidification of the inner core is an important driver of the
geodynamo, which generates Earth’s magnetic field. This project seeks to better
constrain the timing of inner core formation, which will be accomplished by a
unique coupling of mantle convection models to geodynamo simulations that
produce Earth-like magnetic fields. The results from this project will have a
scientific impact in multiple disciplines, including geodynamics, magnetospheric
physics, studies of the deep interior, and the evolution of life. More
generally, this project addresses the important question of “How is Earth’s
internal field generated?”, which can help to better predict future magnetic
field changes that could result in harm to modern technical infrastructure or
life itself. Additionally, the proposed work will support two early-career
female PIs, build STEM talent by training and educating two undergraduate
students and one postdoctoral researcher, improve available scientific
infrastructure by releasing the created software as open-source, and will
facilitate international exchange with project collaborators in the UK and
France. A wide audience will be engaged through a multi-year outreach initiative
building on the successful Scientist in Every Florida School program in
collaboration with University of Florida Thompson Earth Systems
Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the growth of the inner core is a major
driver of the geodynamo today, it can be assumed that inner core nucleation may
have caused significant changes in Earth's past magnetic field. But so far, the
interpretation of any detectable signal in the paleomagnetic data at the Earth’s
surface has remained ambiguous because (1) the precise effects of inner core
nucleation on the magnetic field are unknown, and (2) the magnitude of magnetic
field variations caused by mantle convection are currently not well constrained.
This project will quantify the largest possible influence of mantle heat
transport on the magnetic field at Earth’s surface, taking into account the
influence of inner core size. This will be accomplished by computing realistic
core-mantle boundary heat flux patterns generated by mantle convection models,
and coupling them to geodynamo simulations that produce Earth-like magnetic
fields as assessed with the Quality of Paleomagnetic Modeling (QPM) criteria,
which is currently the only criteria set that assesses if simulations are
reproducing Earth’s long-term magnetic field behavior. In contrast to previous
studies, these mantle models do not try to recreate the relatively limited
timeframe of known plate motions, or apply simplified heat flux patterns for
present-day conditions, but instead predict the largest realistic heat flux
variations caused by synthetic plate configurations during the cycle of
supercontinent formation and dispersal in Earth's past. This work will improve
understanding of the mantle’s role in regulating the magnetic field throughout
Earth's history. Additionally, this work will determine whether changes in the
magnetic field so far ascribed to inner core nucleation could instead partly or
completely be explained by mantle dynamics alone. This project connects
planetary evolution, mantle convection, the geodynamo, and paleomagnetic data.
This wide collaboration will drive significant advances in the understanding of
the Earth as one system, not separated into its layers. More generally, this
project addresses the science priority question, “How is Earth’s internal field
generated?”, released in the National Academies of Science, Engineering and
Medicine decadal report for NSF-EAR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.