* 2054966
* Appalachian Solutions in Cybersecurity Innovation Initiative:  Cybersecurity Technician Pipeline Development in Rural, Eastern Kentucky
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Cindy McKenzie, Kentucky Community & Technical College System
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The arrival of a 288-strand fiber optic cable system in fall 2019 was the first
step in providing a high-speed, high-capacity broadband connection to businesses
and residents in Central Appalachia. The resulting growth in the Central
Appalachian digital economy has created unprecedented challenges and
opportunities for region’s current skilled technical workforce and future talent
pipelines. As business and service providers in the region use this high-speed
infrastructure, there is an increased need for skilled cybersecurity
technicians. To meet this need, this project will design and offer Kentucky’s
first associate degree in Cybersecurity. Design of the new degree program will
be informed by regional industry needs and federal standards. This project
intends to increase understanding of effective recruitment strategies, student
support services, and curricular design in Cybersecurity education for remote
rural environments such as Central Appalachia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will use the Business and Leadership Team framework as published by the
National Convergence Technology Center to validate course content and learning
outcomes for an associate of applied science degree program in Cybersecurity.
Student success will be supported by implementing a student cohort program
model, embedding a contextualized first-year experience course into the
curriculum, and providing tutoring. Students will participate in external
opportunities such as the National Cybersecurity Student Association,
Cyberleague competition, and apprenticeships. The project team will work closely
with other NSF ATE projects in Cybersecurity, the National Center for Systems
Security and Information Assurance at Moraine Valley Community College, and the
National CyberWatch Center to adapt course content and create exercises for
remote and virtual delivery. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.