* 2054175
* Collaborative Research: Sustainable Land and Water Resources - A Community Based Participatory Research Experience for Undergraduates
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Antony Berthelote, Salish Kootenai College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 04/30/2024
* USD 307,805.00

This REU Site is a tribally-focused, community-based team project focused on
training students in the implementation of Sustainable Land and Water Resources.
Its goal is to introduce undergraduate students to key elements of research on
land and water resources essential to improving management practices, with a
focus on Community-Based Participatory Research (CBPR) and diverse
interdisciplinary research teams. Each year, students divided into three teams
to conduct research that integrates Earth-surface dynamics, geology, hydrology
and other disciplines. Research teams are hosted by two Native American
communities (Confederated Salish Kootenai Tribes and Fond du Lac Band of Lake
Superior Chippewa) and the University of Minnesota to work on projects developed
in collaboration with the tribes' resource management divisions. This REU Site
incorporates an interdisciplinary team-oriented approach that emphasizes
quantitative and predictive methods, CBPR, indigenous research methods, and
traditional ecological knowledge. The REU Site encourages participation by
underrepresented students and students who are unsure about how they fit into
the world of science to pursue STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site
is developing a new paradigm for undergraduate research that will increase
participation of all students, particularly URMs in the geosciences via a
transformative process that places the communities where research is being
conducted and the participants themselves at the core of the program design. The
REU is designed to be transformative not only to student participants, but to
the institutions themselves, by increasing interaction between tribal
communities, tribal colleges, and mainstream research institutions. The program
design starts from the position that diversity in the geosciences can only
happen when the system itself is fundamentally changed, adopting a partnership
rather than a domination model. Every aspect of the REU is considered from the
perspective of increasing institutional capacity for inclusive excellence. The
PIs are building knowledge on increasing participation in REUs by the non-
traditional student and students from groups underrepresented in STEM. The PIs
are building knowledge on increasing participation in REUs by non-traditional
students and students from groups underrepresented in STEM. The researchers have
developed a proven, structured, scaffolded method of teaching science research
and writing, which takes students who may have never written a technical
research paper and provides them with the skills and support needed to routinely
deliver high quality intellectual outputs and increase their intellectual self-
confidence in the process. The mentoring plan for the REU Site is focused on
helping mentors to: a) prepare to mentor highly diverse teams of students; b)
support mentors to deal with the expectations, issues and challenges that arise
when you are mentoring teams that have a large number of nontraditional
students; and c) help mentors get acculturated to conducting research on tribal
lands and with Native people. The students, faculty, graduate and post-doctoral
mentors, tribal professionals and other community members are intimately engaged
in CBPR, developing projects that inherently support tribal resource management
goals. Results are disseminated to tribal authorities and community members as
well as the broader scientific community. Outcomes of this REU research paradigm
will concurrently establish a legacy of broader scientific capacity within
reservation communities and provide pathways to scientific discoveries with a
shared foundation of trust and respect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the EAR Education and Human Resources program, the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and GEO-
ICER.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.