* 2054781
* C*-Envelopes and Other Themes in Operator Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Elias Katsoulis, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 134,447.00

This research project seeks to resolve various problems in operator algebra
theory, an area of mathematical analysis. The general study of operator algebras
began in the 1930’s in an effort to provide a mathematical formulation of
particle physics and quantum mechanics, notably to model algebras of physical
observables. Since then, this vibrant area of mathematics has become an
independent discipline bringing valuable insight to other areas of mathematics
(knot theory, dynamical systems, group theory), physics (statistical mechanics)
and engineering (signal processing). The award will contribute to US workforce
development through training of students at East Carolina University.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;There are three major areas of study in this project: the C*-envelope
of an operator algebra, the structure theory of crossed products and isomorphism
invariants for operator algebras. The methods employed in the study of these
areas are that of Functional Analysis with a strong emphasis on modern dilation
theory and representation theory of associative algebras. A particular feature
of the project is the use, for the first time, of non-selfadjoint techniques in
an attempt to resolve issues in the selfadjoint theory, including the Hao-Ng
isomorphism problem and the description of co-universal C*-algebras for
covariant representations of product systems. Conversely, this project seeks to
incorporate in the toolkit of non-selfadjoint operator algebraists techniques
which are standard in the selfadjoint world. For instance, classifying Arveson’s
semicrossed products up to stable isomorphism relates directly to the problem of
classification of crossed products via a novel use of non-selfadjoint Takai
duality. Such a synergy has not been explored before and seems to open exciting
possibilities for both the selfadjoint and non-selfadjoint theory of operator
algebras. Towards this end, the PI intends to continue organizing seminars and
workshops aimed at further facilitating collaboration between experts in these
two fields while at the same time promoting the exposure of students and early-
career mathematicians to this promising area of
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.