* 2054737
* NSF EPSCoR Workshop: Artificial Intelligence (AI) with No-Boundary Thinking (NBT) to Foster Collaborations in Research, Education and Training
* O/D,OIA
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Xiuzhen Huang, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 03/31/2023
* USD 49,999.00

There are many excellent researchers from numerous scientific fields scattered
across the EPSCoR jurisdictions. This workshop aims to bring these scientists
together in an environment designed to stimulate and foster competitive research
collaborations between artificial intelligence (AI) experts and domain
scientists/researchers outside computational science. This workshop will provide
invaluable opportunities for researchers from EPSCoR jurisdictions to learn and
understand the current research and accomplishments of their peers, and discuss
opportunities for establishing cross-jurisdictional, inter-disciplinary
collaborations. The workshop planning committee will ensure broad participation
of NSF EPSCoR jurisdictions, underserved groups, and HBCUs. The workshop will
have sessions for AI in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM),
health and medicine, humanities and social science. During the workshop, there
will be prestigious keynote speakers from a diversity of research fields, short
research presentations, panel discussions and a poster session. The agenda will
also include specifically designed training sessions to practice the principles
discussed and provide opportunities for training students and researchers from
all disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will bring researchers
together to discuss current frontier research as well as potentials and
limitations of AI in addressing science challenges from various disciplines.
These disciplines include STEM, statistics, business, art, law, journalism,
social science, linguistics, history, etc. The workshop focus is defining
problems and challenging science questions from varied domains where it is
critical to bring AI knowledge together with domain knowledge. “No-Boundary
Thinking (NBT) is no-boundary problem defining on time-chain to address real
science challenges”. The anticipated workshop outcomes include: (1) Development
of collaborative research projects with AI experts and domain scientists; (2)
Planning for the development of an EPSCoR National AI-Campus for AI training and
education; (3) Building strong collaborations and connections among NSF EPSCoR
jurisdictions, continuing to foster research collaborations among NSF EPSCoR
jurisdictions (and beyond); (4) Enhancing opportunities for students to develop
AI knowledge and technology, as well as to intellectually, technically, and
geographically broaden their opportunities for career development. A workshop
website will be established to facilitate participation and allow the public to
track the resources addressed during the workshop. There will also be contacts
and links to the groups of other EPSCoR jurisdictions. All participating faculty
will be invited to submit a two-page summary highlighting their research
methodology, and both research and educational achievements of their current
funded and unfunded research work. These summaries will be published in pre-
conference proceedings to be distributed to all conference attendees.
Furthermore, all conference presentations will be compiled in a post-conference
proceeding. We will gather and compile news, photos and videos of the
collaborative research activities at the workshop and to make the information
available to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.