* 2054755
* CAREER:  Mechanisms of defense and counter-defense in the battle between bacteria and their viruses
* BIO,MCB
* 08/16/2020,12/31/2023
* Asma Hatoum, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 12/31/2023
* USD 615,809.00

Bacteria and bacteriophages (bacterial viruses) have evolved a sophisticated
arsenal of defensive and offensive molecular weaponry targeted against each
other. Phages are ten times more abundant than their bacterial hosts in every
environment tested, and thus they profoundly impact the bacterial communities in
all environments. Although much research is currently focused on investigating
bacterial defense systems in isolation, research activities in this project will
examine whether bacterial immune systems act with other cellular processes to
maximize the efficiency of defense. In this project, Staphylococcus bacteria and
their phages, both abundant residents of human skin, will be used as a model
host-virus system. Educational activities designed to stimulate interest in
science will provide hands-on research experiences to undergraduates and high
school students through a phage discovery course. Undergraduates will also gain
early exposure to cutting-edge genome editing tools and techniques. The research
has the potential to inspire novel biotechnologies and the educational
activities are expected to promote participation of underrepresented groups in
STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to
gain fundamental insight into defense and counter-defense mechanisms in S.
epidermidis and its phages as a model system. CRISPR-Cas are an important class
of adaptive defense systems that use small RNAs and Cas nucleases to destroy
invading phages. Many staphylococci naturally possess Type III (CRISPR-Cas10)
systems, which are among the most widespread in nature. Although recent research
has shed light on the canonical immunity pathway of the model CRISPR-Cas10
system in S. epidermidis, the question of whether or not CRISPR-Cas10 relies
upon other (non-Cas) pathways to carry out defense was never posed. Preliminary
work in the PIs lab has discovered unexpected interactions between CRISPR-Cas10
and two conserved cellular pathways previously considered unrelated to immunity.
These observations support the central hypothesis that CRISPR-Cas10 integrates
with other cellular pathways, including other immune systems in S. epidermidis,
to carry out defense. This integration in turn impacts the corresponding phage-
encoded mechanisms of counter-defense. Research in this project will test this
hypothesis by using a combination of biochemistry, genetic, and molecular
biology approaches to 1) characterize molecular interactions between CRISPR-
Cas10 and other cellular pathways, 2) determine the molecular mechanisms by
which newly discovered immune system(s) operate, and 3) characterize phage-
encoded mechanisms that counter these defenses. The new insights gained by this
research are expected to form the basis for biotechnologies that can be used to
shape and control natural Staphylococcus communities.