* 2054251
* Moduli Spaces of Polygons with Applications to Protein-Macrocycle Docking
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Evangelos Coutsias, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2024
* USD 341,689.00

Synthetic Macrocycles (MCs) are receiving increased attention for their
potential as therapeutic agents. Beside their promise as therapeutics, MCs also
have great mathematical interest due to their complex topological structure.
However, for several reasons effective methods for modeling 3D complexes of MCs
and their protein targets are lacking. MCs are too large and complex for current
methods used for docking small non-cyclic drug molecules. They are also too
flexible for methods of protein-protein docking. The goal of this project is to
develop geometrical methods to efficiently model the compliant interaction of
macromolecules, also known as the Flexible Docking Problem. Current methods are
based on brute force direct computer simulations. The large size of the
molecules and the confined nature of the space to be explored renders these
impractical. The efficient exact analytical methodologies used in the software
BRIKARD for macrocycle structure modeling and in the molecular docking suite
CLUSPRO will be combined through the development of mathematical structures into
a new docking protocol, capable of efficiently handling flexible ligand protein
docking. The resulting software will find immediate use in the pharmaceutical
industry in the area of macrocyclic drug design. Moreover, the connection
between molecular flexibility and robotics offers a rich ground for creating
simple models that will be used for outreach activities introducing high school
students to basic ideas of robotics, flexibility and molecular
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the heart of protein-macrocycle docking lies a
global search for an energy minimum, a challenging problem due to high
dimensionality of the search space, rugged energy landscape, and high cost of
energy function evaluation. The non-trivial structure of macrocycle shapespace
effectively precludes successful modeling of protein-macrocycle interactions
using current methods. This obstacle will be overcome by describing
conformational spaces corresponding to different degrees of molecular
flexibility by appropriate manifolds. The search will be guided by introducing a
Riemannian metric to properly weigh ligand-protein rotation-translations and
cyclic ligand flexibility. Energetic terms will also be incorporated to account
for steric interactions of the ligand and binding pocket. This will allow
efficient sampling of low energy regions, avoiding high energy areas of the
joint conformational space. The resulting hybrid method will begin with coarse
grained global sampling to identify promising areas of protein-ligand
shapespace, followed by medium-range adjustments and optimization using more
detailed scoring functions, and, finally, targeted fine resampling to obtain
high resolution structures. The docking framework created will be applicable to
a broad spectrum of tasks including unconstrained ligand docking and protein
loop modeling. Intellectual merits include: (i) understanding moduli spaces of
polygons in Euclidean space R3 with fixed side lengths and angles, (ii) deriving
proper weights for searches in the relative placement and compliant shape
changes in a protein-ligand complex, and (iii) improvement of effectiveness of
general docking protocols. The resulting software will be released as open
source and made freely available through the widely used CLUSPRO
server.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.