* 2054756
* Asynchronous-coupled large-eddy simulation of Langmuir turbulence and the atmospheric surface layer
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* William Anderson, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 02/29/2024
* USD 239,535.00

Coupled flows of air and water near the ocean surface ocean affect ocean
sequestration of anthropogenic quantities (e.g., CO2), dispersion of biomass,
and a host of other issues of scientific importance. When the direction of ocean
waves and the prevailing atmospheric winds are coaligned, counter-rotating roll
cells emerge within the ocean layer. These cells – known as Langmuir turbulence
– manifest on the ocean surface as elongated streaks. It is common practice to
assume uniform atmospheric forcing on the ocean surface, when in fact the
atmosphere itself is composed of eddying gusts that induce spatial variability
in wind stresses. High-fidelity computer simulations will be used to
characterize how realistic spatial heterogeneity in atmospheric stress affects
evolution of Langmuir turbulence. This project offers opportunities for
fundamental research in multiphase, multiscale, large-scale turbulence. The
results of this project will be used to promote outreach activities directed to
improve diversity and inclusion in graduate-level STEM programs. The
investigator will continue to organize an annual one-day fluid dynamics
symposium for graduate students throughout Texas and
Oklahoma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Langmuir turbulence in the ocean mixed layer is
the product of imposed atmospheric surface drag and the aggregate drift due to
wave orbital motion. Langmuir turbulence is a microscale phenomenon that
regulates vertical (air-sea) exchanges of momentum, heat, and other quantities.
Langmuir cells – counter-rotating vortices, meandering spatially about a
predominant transport direction aligned with the prevailing wind direction –
exhibit lengths of tens to thousands of meters. Langmuir turbulence is generally
defined with the turbulent Langmuir number, which is the square root of
atmospheric shear velocity divided by Stokes drift magnitude. The imposed
atmospheric stress exhibits dramatic spatial and temporal variation about the
aggregate value used to compute the turbulent Langmuir number. Such variability
is driven by the passage of coherent parcels of momentum in the aloft
atmospheric surface layer – so called large-scale motions, which themselves
meander spatially and exhibit lengths up to thousands of meters. High fidelity
asynchronously-coupled large-eddy simulations of the atmospheric surface layer-
ocean mixed layer will be used to quantify how such large-scale atmosphere
motions modulate the spatial and dynamical characteristics of deep ocean
(unaffected by bottom-boundary layer) Langmuir
turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.