* 2054462
* SBIR Phase I:  In vitro cultivation of sweet cherry
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2022
* Torin Yeager, POMODYNE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 04/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to radically increase the efficiency of plant agriculture, with far-
reaching implications for both humans and native ecosystems. Agricultural land
productivity has increased approximately 3-fold in the past 60 years, due to a
combination of crop breeding and genetic engineering, adoption of chemical
fertilizers and pesticides, and irrigation. By expanding understanding of plant
developmental biology, the technology developed via this project will increase
productivity by 300-fold over current practices via high density cultivation of
only the edible fruits of plants, not the supporting roots, leaves, or stems.
The innovation will enable indoor fruit production independent of local climate
and growing seasons. Controlled environment fruit crop cultivation will
alleviate food insecurity and food deserts, creating a decentralized, resilient
global food production system, even in industrial areas or non-arable land.
Concurrently, land formerly used for conventional agriculture can be restored to
natural ecosystems, and water supplies will no longer be subjected to
contamination by agrichemicals. Additionally, controlled environment fruit crop
cultivation will combat climate change by making soil management unnecessary,
which could decrease annual greenhouse gas emissions in the United States by 5%,
or 325 M metric tons CO2 equivalent. This project represents an expansion beyond
traditional agriculture: that a seed or cutting must be grown to regenerate a
full plant, from which products and seeds or cuttings can then be harvested,
repeating indefinitely. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will advance
the frontier of understanding of flower and fruit development in sweet cherry,
and example of a fruit tree species that normally requires years of growth in an
orchard setting before sufficient flowering occurs and fruit can be harvested.
The anticipated results will prove the feasibility of flower formation in the
absence of other plant structures, demonstrating the application of plant
biotechnology to adapt fruit tree species to controlled environment agriculture.
The goals of the project are to generate totipotent plant cells and induce early
flowering from those cells with minimal to no vegetative growth. By combining
plant biotechnology techniques, tissue culture media testing and controlled
abiotic factors such as light and temperature to recreate the appropriate
environment in vitro, plant cells will be directed to form flowers and bypass
growth of vegetative structures such as leaves and branches. This project will
demonstrate the potential of indoor cultivation of sweet cherry, leading to
scaled production of proprietary cherry cultivars, plant growth media, and novel
controlled environment agriculture methods. The proposed project demonstrates a
new paradigm, in which a complete plant is never grown, but instead allows
isolated production and harvesting of specific plant
tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.