* 2054220
* Averaging, spectral multipliers, sparse domination and subelliptic operators
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Andreas Seeger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 08/31/2024
* USD 276,000.00

This project focuses on harmonic analysis, a vast area within the mathematical
discipline of analysis. Harmonic analysis is concerned with the representation
of functions or signals as the superposition of basic waves, and the study of
and generalization of the notions of Fourier series and Fourier transforms. Its
methods have found wide applications in understanding phenomena in the natural
sciences and engineering. Harmonic analysis provides efficient mathematical
tools for these disciplines and contributes to the unification of seemingly
unrelated areas. A main objective is to expand the current mathematical toolbox
in harmonic analysis to contribute towards a deeper theoretical understanding
that will ultimately be beneficial for applications. The mentoring of graduate
students in research is an important educational component of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator will work on several
projects in harmonic analysis. The first part of the project is concerned with
the precise regularity properties of certain averages over curves and the
boundedness of associated maximal operators in Lebesgue spaces. The model cases
tend to be convolution operators but eventually the goal is to understand more
general non-convolution averaging operators. A second part of the project seeks
to bound maximal functions with partial, possibly fractal, dilation sets, and to
understand how various notions of dimensions are relevant for the Lebesgue space
boundedness properties of such maximal operators. A third part of the project
deals with multiplier transformations on the Heisenberg group (functions of a
certain subelliptic operator). Via a Fourier transform they are connected to
wave operators, and the fine structure of wave propagation on the Heisenberg
group plays an important role in the multiplier problem. A fourth part of the
project is about sparse domination inequalities; one seeks to expand the scope
of the theory to cover endpoint situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.