* 2054148
* Origami for Dexterity in Miniature Manipulation and Testing
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Kenn Oldham, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2024
* USD 683,982.00

Existing methods for the manipulation and testing of miniature matter have
numerous drawbacks, which limit their dexterity and inhibit broader adoption in
science and engineering. They require large and complex equipment, have limited
output forces, lack local sensing capability, and only have one or a few degrees
of freedom for active motion. To address these issues, this project will explore
micro-origami with multiple active degrees of freedom to create low-cost and
customizable systems for versatile motion, sensing, and dexterous manipulation.
These miniature manipulators can be readily adopted for various applications
such as extraction and testing of organic cells, micro-system packaging, testing
of friction between granular particles, and micro-robotic arms. The improved
versatility and low-cost of these systems will make them widely accessible and
allow for mass fabrication of numerous devices to statistically test many
samples or for application within robotic swarms. Additionally, this award will
support outreach and educational efforts, including introducing middle-school
girls to engineering and micro-manipulators through a summer program; creating
curricula on origami inspired manipulators for a graduate course; and
establishing research and mentoring opportunities for underrepresented transfer
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will establish an integrated
methodology for the fabrication, analysis, design, sensing, and control of
micro-origami systems with advanced dexterity for miniature manipulation and
testing. Material systems will be identified, and fabrication processes will be
established to create electro-thermally active origami at scales ranging from
10µm to 1mm. Testing of the systems will give insight to their mechanical
performance, reliability, and responsiveness. Micro-origami with increasingly
complex motions will be fabricated and investigated to give insight to practical
challenges such as packaging, circuits, and dimensional limits of the
manipulators. Simplified static and dynamic analytical models will be created to
simulate the electro-thermo-mechanical coupling that occurs due to the large
angle actuation of the micro-origami. The models will be validated with
experimental tests and high-fidelity simulations and used to create an
optimization framework that will guide the design of micro-origami for specific
tasks in the manipulation of physical matter. Design and fabrication methods
will be explored to embed piezoresistive- and optic-based displacement sensors
within the micro-origami. On-chip and off-chip measurements will be synthesized
to permit for real-time feedback control and estimation of the forces acting on
the manipulators by their surroundings or payloads. Testing the micro-origami
systems will give insight to the error and repeatability of open- and closed-
loop control that would enable dexterous micro-manipulation and
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-directorate
Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and funded by the
Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.