* 2054801
* Improving Technician Training in Automation Technologies for Advanced Manufacturing
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Christopher Lee, Florida State College at Jacksonville
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 03/31/2024
* USD 437,579.00

Recent advances in automation technologies are creating new employment
opportunities for technicians in advanced manufacturing. To maintain a
competitive advantage, many manufacturers are implementing these new
technologies to create Industry 4.0 smart factories. Programmable Logic
Controllers (PLCs) play a central role in this new automation architecture and
require extensive training to implement and maintain. To meet industry needs in
Northeastern Florida, Florida State College at Jacksonville will develop a new
curriculum that focuses on PLCs and related automation technologies. To do so,
the project will create a new track in an existing engineering technology
program that will enable students to earn three national certifications in
automation. Given regional demographics, this project also provides an
opportunity to broaden participation of women and minorities in the advanced
manufacturing workforce. For example, to increase participation in academic
pathways leading to technical careers in advanced manufacturing, the project
will develop a dual enrollment program in mechatronics at a local high school.
In addition, it will offer hands-on learning experiences using advanced
manufacturing technologies for high school students and provide professional
development for high school teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to increase the number of skilled technicians who can implement and
maintain PLCs, robotics, and mechatronics systems. To achieve this goal, the
project will: 1) implement a new, four-course PLC program track to enable
students to earn national PLC industry credentials; 2) establish a new
automation education lab for students including Augmented/Virtual Reality
(AR/VR) learning software and PLC/automation hardware and software; 3) offer
hands-on learning experiences using AR/VR software, robot literacy activities,
and advanced manufacturing technologies for high school students; and 4) provide
professional development for secondary and postsecondary instructors. The impact
of the project on student demographics will be assessed by analyzing
institutional data at the beginning and end of the project. Findings will be
disseminated through national and regional venues such as the Florida Advanced
Technological Education Center, the First Coast Manufacturing Association, the
Florida College System, and the Northeast Florida STEM HUB. This project is
funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
nation’s economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.