* 2054900
* Excellence in Research: Predicting computations that lead to a stable perception of object lightness under spectral variabilities of the visual scene
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Vijay Singh, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2024
* USD 373,588.00

The human visual system allows people to see objects in a scene as unchanging,
despite variation in the light reaching the eyes. For example, consider the task
of estimating the lightness of an object (i.e., the fraction of light reflected
by the object’s surface). Properties of the object (e.g., its color), will
change the fraction of light it reflects and hence the amount of light available
to the eyes. However, the light available to the eyes also depends on several
other aspects of the scene, such as the intensity of the light source and how
background objects also reflect the light. Despite all this variation, the human
visual system allows people to stably perceive an object’s lightness. This
project aims to identify the mental computations that lead to stable perception
of object lightness. Lightness perception is just one example of a large variety
of scene invariant perception problems that the human brain deals with and thus,
an understanding of these mental computations could open the door to a better
grasp of other brain functions as well. This interdisciplinary project will
establish a color perception lab at an Historically Black College and University
(HBCU), which will train students from under-represented communities in valuable
job-oriented analytical, computational, and experimental skills that are in high
demand in academia and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To identify these
computations, the investigator proposes to combine computational methods –
mathematical models that mimic the behavior of complex systems – with
experiments involving human participants to study how changes in scene
properties affect people’s perception of lightness. Human participants will view
computer-generated pictures of natural looking scenes using specifically
calibrated equipment and will be asked to discriminate between two objects based
on their lightness. For instance, a participant may see back-to-back images of
the same scene and be asked to indicate in which of the two scenes a target
object (e.g., a spherical object) is lighter. The images will be generated using
the investigator’s custom-built software pipeline; each image will be a two-
dimensional rendering of a three-dimensional scene. The software employed here
can be used to generate large databases of images with precise control over the
properties of the objects in the scene, such as the position and color of the
objects, and the intensity and color of the light sources. During the
experiment, the investigator will vary the intensity of light sources and the
color of the background objects and measure human participants’ ability to
distinguish the lightness of the target objects. A computational model will then
be created to compare with the performance of human observers. The computational
learning methods will be designed to perform the same task as the human
participants. If the model performs in a similar manner to the humans, it will
suggest that the underlying mathematical computations of the model are similar
to the mental computations of the human observers. Taken together, the
experiments and model will provide a rich description of how human beings
perceive the lightness of objects under varying conditions and will provide
insights into the possible biological mechanisms involved in stable lightness
perception.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.