* 2054444
* How far downstream do wildfire disturbances propagate in fluvial networks?
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* David Van Horn, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 423,431.00

Devastating wildfires are increasing in frequency and severity across the
Western and Southwestern United States. In addition to the dramatic impacts of
wildfires on infrastructure, soils, and terrestrial ecosystems, there is growing
evidence that wildfires trigger cascading disturbances that propagate across
fluvial networks and watersheds impacting water quality and ecosystem services
in aquatic environments. However, there is a critical lack of data, modeling
tools and fundamental knowledge to assess how far downstream wildfire
disturbances propagate in fluvial networks and the extent to which they affect
water quality, ecosystem services, and downstream hydrological processes such as
flood attenuation by riparian vegetation and groundwater recharge by
infiltration. The overarching goal of this research is to address these gaps in
our fundamental understanding of the impact of wildfires. To advance this goal,
the Principal Investigators (PIs) of this project propose to setup, train, and
maintain Rapid Response Teams (RRTs) capable of deploying in-situ sensors to
investigate disturbances to watersheds following wildfires and assess changes in
water quality before and after wildfires. The successful completion of this
research will benefit society through the generation of new data and modeling
tools to predict and assess the impact of wildfires on water quality and aquatic
ecosystems. Further benefits to society will be achieved through student
education and training including the mentoring of a postdoctoral associate, one
graduate student and two undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
United States, wildfires are increasing in frequency, severity, and extent.
While we currently have the capability to map fire areas and their severity with
relatively high accuracy using areal and satellite images, we do not have
comparable capabilities to map the extent of wildfire disturbances across
fluvial networks and watersheds. This project will address two fundamental
questions about the impact of wildfires: 1) how far downstream do wildfire
disturbances propagate in fluvial networks, and 2) what are the key controlling
factors? To answer these two questions, the Principal Investigators (PIs) of
this project propose to leverage the combined advantages of Eulerian monitoring
(fixed sensors at a site) and Lagrangian monitoring (mobile sensors that move
with a water stream) by deploying Rapid Response Teams (RRTs) and networks of
in-situ sensors to investigate changes in water quality [e.g., pH, turbidity,
dissolved oxygen, dissolved organic matter (DOM), and nutrients (e.g., nitrate)]
before and after wildfires. The data collected by the RRTs will be analyzed and
interpreted using GIS watershed geomorphology data, land use and land cover
data, spatiotemporal statistical analysis of water quality data, and water
quality modeling. By combining these data, methods and modeling tools, the PIs
hope to develop a framework to generate scaling relationships capable of
predicting how far downstream wildfire disturbances propagate in fluvial
networks and the extent to which they affect water quality, ecosystem services,
and critical downstream hydrological processes such as infiltration, flood
attenuation and groundwater recharge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly
funded by the Environmental Engineering and Environmental Sustainability
programs of the NSF/ENG/CBET Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.