* 2054689
* Existence and Stability Analysis for Nonlinear Free Boundary and Evolution Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Mikhail Feldman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2024
* USD 274,000.00

Free boundary problems arise in many models in physics, engineering, fluid
dynamics, and economics. Free boundaries are regions of rapid variations of
conditions between two very different states, such as shock waves in gas
dynamics. Mathematically, this rapid transition is simplified as occurring
infinitely fast along a surface of discontinuity in the partial differential
equation governing the physics. The location of this surface is not known in
advance, thus one must solve both for physical states and their boundaries.
Significant progress in the study of free boundary problems has been made during
the last several decades. However, in the case of nonlinear partial differential
equations, and especially equations of mixed type, many important questions are
yet to be studied. The principal investigator (PI) plans to apply the techniques
of free boundary problems to study some fundamental multidimensional shock waves
in gas dynamics, specifically shock reflection patterns. This involves free
boundary problems for nonlinear equations and systems having a complex
structure, and thus new methods need to be developed to handle such problems.
Understanding properties of free boundaries, such as regularity, stability and
geometric properties, allows for a better analysis and numerical methods in
models and applications. Another area of the project is the semigeostrophic
system, a model of rotation-dominated atmospheric/ocean flows. It exhibits a
rich mathematical structure based on Monge-Kantorovich mass transport theory.
The PI plans to continue the study of the physically realistic case of variable
Coriolis parameter in the semigeostrophic model, and also study stability
properties of solutions. The project addresses fundamental mathematical models
in engineering and atmospheric sciences. Closer interaction with the engineering
and meteorological communities is one of the priorities of the project. The
project provides research training opportunities for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project consists of two main topics: (1)
Free boundary problems in shock analysis. The PI will continue work on self-
similar shock reflection for potential flow and for the full and isentropic
Euler system. Shock reflection problems arise in many physical situations.
Moreover, such problems are important in the mathematical theory of
multidimensional conservation laws since their solutions are building blocks and
asymptotic attractors of general solutions to the multidimensional Euler
equations for compressible fluids. Self-similar equations of compressible fluid
dynamics are of mixed elliptic-hyperbolic type. Shocks correspond to
discontinuities in the solution to the Euler system and in the gradient of the
solution for potential flow equation. The type of the equation may change from
hyperbolic to elliptic across the shock. The shock reflection problem can be
formulated as a free boundary problem in which the unknowns are the elliptic
region and the solution in that region. The PI will continue work on the
existence, stability, and regularity of global solutions to the regular
reflection, to extend the global existence results to the case of compressible
Euler system and three-dimensional reflection by a cone. Further study includes
stability for the regular reflection problem in various classes of solutions.
(2) The study of the system of semigeostrophic equations, using methods from
Monge-Kantorovich mass transport. The PI will study the semigeostrophic system
with variable Coriolis parameter, which is a model that arises from taking into
account the curvature of the Earth. The PI also plans to continue the study of
convergence of solutions of the Euler system to solutions of the semigeostrophic
system using relative entropy methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.