* 2054895
* Implementation of an Industry-Recognized Credentialing System for Biotechnicians
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Tamara Mandell, Georgia Biomedical Partnership
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,197,839.00

The ATE program supports biotechnology technician education programs that
partner with industry to ensure the education of a skilled bioscience technical
workforce. Yet, there remains a gap between educational preparation and
industry’s recognition of potential workers who have completed two-year
biotechnology programs. Over the next ten years, reports predict that life
science companies will have an increased demand for skilled technical workers,
and that filling these positions will be difficult. Thus, preparation of
sufficient biotechnicians represents a significant need for the biological
economy and related sectors. This project aims to bridge the gap between
education and industry through an industry-recognized biotechnician
credentialing system. Recently, the Bioscience Industry has identified the
Biotechnician Assistant Credentialing Exam (BACE) as an effective tool to
certify student capabilities. This exam is already used in six states and the
District of Columbia, thus increasing its potential to become the industry-
recognized credentialing system for entry-level biotechnicians. This project
will pilot the BACE system in five additional states, build consortia of
industry and education stakeholders, and disseminate BACE broadly through
InnovATEBIO (an NSF ATE Center of Excellence) and the Consortium for Advanced
Manufacturing of Cell-based Therapies (an Advanced Technical Education
Coordination Network). A nationwide industry-recognized credentialing system
will give students a portable credential that is recognized across the nation,
thus helping to address the workforce gap in the life science industry. This
credentialing model may also inform credentialing approaches for other areas of
technician education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BACE credential was developed
through engagement of educators with industry and industry representatives. This
partnership continues to evaluate the credential to ensure that it meets
changing industry needs. This project intends to expand the number of states
using the BACE by adding Georgia, Washington, California, Texas, and Nebraska.
To this end, it will set up state task forces comprised of industry
professionals, educational leaders, and government representatives. Each task
force will examine the use and sustainability of BACE in their state. Testing
sites will be established in each state, and the sites will provide faculty and
teachers with professional development to understand the BACE, so they can
support students’ exam preparation. The project will leverage the extensive
networks of InnovATEBIO and the Consortium for Advanced Manufacturing of Cell-
based Therapies to disseminate the BACE credential, and also disseminate it
through national and state industry associations, district-level industry
advisory boards, boards of education, technical educators, and government
officials. A nationally recognized credential has strong potential to improve
the transition from two-year college technician education programs to employment
in the biotechnology industry. This result would not only serve the industry,
but also serve the emerging workforce by identifying skillsets in demand across
the country. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the nation’s economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.