* 2054245
* Using Course Based Research Experiences (CUREs) to Support Tribal College Students and Enrich Tribal College STEM Research Capacity
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* George Belcourt, Stone Child College
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 40,842.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's Indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings at these
institutions expands the opportunities of their students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and generational
appreciation for science and mathematics education. This Targeted STEM Infusion
Project (TSIP) aligns directly with that goal, and moreover seeks to increase
research activities and opportunities for students to conduct research at
several tribal colleges. The project aims to strengthen existing relationships
among STEM faculty at the participating institutions (Aaniiih Nakoda College
(ANC), Little Big Horn College (LBHC), Stone Child College (SCC), and Montana
State University (MSU)) and build new course-based research experiences for
American Indian students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to increase
participation of American Indian students in STEM research and increase research
capacity at tribal colleges in Montana. The project supports the expansion of
locally relevant CUREs at ANC and LBHC while initiating course-based research
experiences (CUREs) at two additional tribal colleges. MSU faculty will provide
training on implementing an existing co-developed CURE module, using zebrafish
as an environmental indicator species, and support tribal college faculty in
designing novel CUREs based on research conducted at tribal colleges. CUREs are
integrated into the curriculum at each institution, reaching a range of students
who have not been exposed to research opportunities. Students will develop
independent hypotheses to test within the larger CURE theme. Participating
faculty will learn research techniques and receive training on instrumentation
and curriculum. Research findings will be shared through community exhibitions
and presentations at national conferences. This project is jointly funded by the
Tribal College and Universities Program (TCUP), the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Directorate for Biological
Sciences (BIO) Division of Environmental Biology (Ecosystem Science Cluster),
Division of Integrative Organismal Systems (Behavioral Systems Cluster,
Developmental Systems Cluster, Neural Systems Cluster), and Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (Cellular Dynamics and Function Cluster,
Genetic Mechanisms Cluster, Molecular Biophysics Cluster, Systems and Synthetic
Biology Cluster)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.