* 2054489
* Coxeter Groups, Scattering Diagrams, and Shards
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Nathan Reading, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 270,000.00

The goal of this project is to better understand certain mathematical objects
called Coxeter groups, and use Coxeter groups to make progress on a variety of
other mathematical questions. Coxeter groups are collections (usually called
"groups") of symmetries of highly symmetric objects, like for example the
Platonic solids (tetrahedron, cube, octahedron, dodecahedron, and icosahedron)
and higher-dimensional analogues. An important theme of mathematics in the last
hundred years or so is that Coxeter groups and related geometric objects provide
a very accessible and useful key to unlock many other mathematical theories.
This project explores the applications of Coxeter groups to Artin groups
(including the "braid group", which describes the mathematics of braided
strands), scattering diagrams (a key tool for "mirror symmetry" in string
theory), and cluster algebras (a newer theory that also functions as a key to
other mathematical theories). The award will also fund graduate students working
on this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One part of the project concerns the
combinatorics of cluster scattering diagrams and their theta functions. The goal
is to connect theta functions to the mutation fan (a fan that encodes the
piecewise-linear geometry of matrix mutation) and also to construct the cluster
scattering fan in the surfaces/orbifolds case and show that the theta functions
are the bracelets basis in that case. A second part of the project is to extend
(from finite type to affine type) the deep connections between the noncrossing
partition lattices (which appear in the theory of Artin groups) and generalized
associahedra/scattering fans. Closely related to this goal is the project of
constructing planar diagrams that realize noncrossing partition lattices of
classical affine types. The third part of the project is (in its most ambitious
formulation) to extend the weak order on a finite Coxeter group to an infinite
lattice (not semilattice) for completely general Coxeter groups and then carry
out the Cambrian fan construction of cluster scattering diagrams in complete
generality. In finite type, the weak order can be understood in terms of shards
and the Fundamental Theorem of Finite Semidistributive Lattices (FTFSDL). In the
infinite case, the plan is to construct a lattice from shards and an infinite
version of FTFSDL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.