* 2054312
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Human Foodways in the Context of Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Frank Goebel, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2022
* USD 19,071.00

This doctoral dissertation project uses integrated archaeological and
palaeoecological approaches to examine past relationships between culture and
the environment. Despite significant advances in understanding Paleoindian
lifeways, the relationship between human populations and plant communities
remains unclear. How severely did changing environmental conditions affect
available resources and how did humans respond? Answering these questions is
critical to discerning how the Americas were populated and how humans adapt to
arid environments more broadly. Research to answer these questions has been
challenged by a lack of well-preserved botanical remains from archaeological
sites and a rarity of refined paleoenvironmental records. This project will
produce high-resolution dietary and vegetation data needed to address these
longstanding questions. In addition to testing theoretical models of people-
plant dynamics in the past, this work will also inform current issues such as
the impact of warming conditions on human populations and vegetation
communities. The investigators will contribute to public education through
coordinated events, a traveling exhibit, and informational pamphlets that engage
local communities and Indigenous groups. By highlighting the long-term
relationship between humans and plants, this outreach will encourage
appreciation and stewardship of regional natural and culture resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current knowledge of Paleoindian diets is heavily skewed
toward the preferential preservation of faunal remains relative to plants in the
archaeological record. This biases perspectives and limits the ability to fully
test theoretical models. Connley Caves in central Oregon provides a unique
opportunity to conduct a two-pronged study that examines dietary plant data
within the context of a high-resolution local vegetation history. The doctoral
student will analyze the archaeobotanical remains (e.g., seeds, fruits, roots)
from five hearths preserved at the site to examine trends in diet breadth,
foraging zones, seasonality, and site activities. She will also analyze pollen
in sediment cores from a nearby marsh to reconstruct the environment in which
people were foraging. When integrated, data from the caves and marsh will
provide the framework needed to test long-held settlement-subsistence models
that predict where people foraged, what resources they exploited, and how they
divided their labor. Beyond the immediate questions of this project, the robust
archaeobotanical assemblage and powerful environmental proxy data produced by
the research will have broader applications for anthropological,
palaeoecological, and geologic studies throughout the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.