* 2054909
* Partially Hyperbolic Diffeomorphisms, Foliations, and Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Sergio Fenley, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 280,000.00

The field of dynamical systems studies properties of functions under repeated
iterations, including their periodic and long-time behavior. Dynamical systems
have many applications, for example to predict weather behavior, such as
hurricanes. These systems follow certain laws and the dynamics predict future
behavior given an initial set of conditions. The principal investigator will
study a certain class of dynamical systems where the ambient space is locally
three dimensional. In particular, the project will study what are called
partially hyperbolic diffeomorphisms. The importance of these systems is that
they satisfy strong stability conditions: nearby systems are also partially
hyperbolic, and they are the only ones in dimension three satisfying these
properties. The project will analyze the structure of partially hyperbolic
diffeomorphisms in dimension three, an area that is currently extremely active.
The project will also involve the training of graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partially hyperbolic diffeomorphisms (in
dimension three) are bijective smooth maps that admit invariant contracting and
expanding directions, and another invariant direction that is in between, called
the center direction. One goal of the project is to understand these
diffeomorphisms when they are homotopic to the identity. In particular, this
includes all such maps in hyperbolic 3-manifolds, up to iterates. Hyperbolic
3-manifolds are by far the most common manifolds in dimension three. The project
will also analyze the new class of collapsed Anosov flows, recently introduced
by the PI together with T. Barthelme and R. Potrie. This class includes all
known transitive examples of partially hyperbolic diffeomorphisms in dimension
three, when the fundamental group is not virtually solvable. One goal is to
prove that in certain classes of manifolds, including all Seifert manifolds with
hyperbolic base, the family of collapsed Anosov flows includes all partially
hyperbolic diffeomorphisms. The project will also analyze the fundamental
property of ergodicity for such diffeomorphisms. The PI recently showed that a
large class of such diffeomorphisms is ergodic. The project aims to show
ergodicity for all partially hyperbolic diffeomorphisms in certain manifolds,
including all Seifert manifolds with hyperbolic base. The project also aims to
show ergodicity for all collapsed Anosov flows not equivalent to
suspensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.