* 2054333
* Collaborative Research: DMS/NIGMS2: Computational and Experimental Analysis of Choanoflagellate Hydrodynamic Performance - Selective Factors in the Evolution of Multicellularity
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Lisa Fauci, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2024
* USD 595,484.00

The evolution of multicellular animals from a unicellular protozoan ancestor was
a pivotal transition in the history of life on earth. Choanoflagellates are
protozoans that share a common ancestor with animals. They can be unicellular or
form multicellular colonies by cell division, so we are studying them to gain
insights about the evolution of multicellularity. For multicellularity to have
evolved via natural selection in the ancestors of animals, the performance of
activities that affected growth, reproduction, and survival would have been
better for colonies than for single cells. This project will focus on
performance differences between unicellular and multicellular choanoflagellates
of activities that affect their fitness: swimming, feeding, and avoiding
predation â€“ all of which depend upon the fluid flow around the organisms. This
project also will address an important ecological issue. Choanoflagellates and
other microscopic protozoans that eat bacteria and are in turn consumed by small
animals are a critical link in aquatic food webs. Many protozoans are
unicellular, while others form multicellular colonies, but the consequences to
swimming, feeding, and escape performance of being single-celled versus
multicellular are not yet understood. Choanoflagellates that produce both
unicellular and multicellular forms permit us to study the effects of colony
formation on the performance of these functions within a single species. A
unicellular choanoflagellate has an ovoid cell body and a single flagellum
surrounded by a collar of microvilli. The cell swims by waving its flagellum,
which also creates a water current that brings bacteria to the collar of prey-
capturing microvilli. We will coordinate laboratory experiments with
mathematical models and computer simulations that study the hydrodynamic
mechanisms that determine the performance of choanoflagellates. Thus, the
principles learned from choanoflagellates about the performance of single cells
versus multicellular colonies may shed light on mechanisms affecting ecological
interactions of aquatic protozoans, as well as on the evolutionary origins of
animals. The project will also provide opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students, and postdoctoral scholars to participate in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Feeding success and predator avoidance are
examples of performance that might have been important selective factors in the
evolution from single cells to multicellularity. Our interdisciplinary team will
coordinate laboratory experiments, mathematical modeling, and computational
simulations to study the hydrodynamics of swimming, feeding, and interacting
with predators by unicellular versus colonial choanoflagellates of various
configurations, and of pumping and feeding by sponge choanocytes. Models will be
developed that probe the effects of cell morphology, number, and arrangement
that can be varied in systematic ways not possible with real choanoflagellates.
These microscale systems require novel methods that capture cell morphology,
geometry of confining structures, dynamic attachment, and detachment of bacteria
from choanoflagellate collars, and the chemical and hydrodynamic signals
presented to predators. The method of regularized Stokeslets will be advanced to
model these complex systems. Lab experiments will use species of
choanoflagellates that can be unicellular and form rosette colonies with
flagella pointing outwards, or that form cup-shaped colonies that can turn
inside-out so the flagella line the cup, as well as protozoan predators on
choanoflagellates. Micro videography will be used for particle-tracking
velocimetry of flow fields produced by the choanoflagellates, and to measure
swimming speeds, feeding rates, and interactions with
predators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.