* 2054863
* Symmetry Parameter Analysis of Singular Integrals
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Brett Wick, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 06/30/2024
* USD 197,616.00

Harmonic Analysis is the branch of mathematics concerned with the rigorous
description of signals (functions) and of their processing (operators). Examples
of signals are sound, images, time series and weather data. Such signals are
analyzed via the overlaying (superposition) of basic harmonics of well-specified
duration, intensity and frequency. These basic harmonics are functions called
wavelets. Image or audio denoising, compression, or pattern recognition are
accomplished by filter processing, which refers to a suitable superposition of
each wavelet after the action of the filter on it. This is also known as the
time-frequency method. A particular concrete example of a re-construction
process is used in tomographic imaging, where the shape of a solid body is re-
composed from samples of the body along one or two-dimensional rays of
penetrating waves, which can be mathematically described as lines or planes in
three dimensional space. One component of this mathematics research project
focuses on a new family of methods for the wavelet description of the class of
singular integral operators, arising for instance in the time-frequency analysis
of highly oscillatory signals. Another component of this research project is
concerned with the mathematical properties of sampling solid objects along lines
or planes. The integrated broader impact activities focus on strengthening the
pool of socioeconomically disadvantaged, ethnical minority students
(underrepresented groups) in graduate degrees in mathematics and improving
retention. Activities connected to training and mentoring of graduate students
in Analysis and topical dissemination of knowledge will also be carried out.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broad aim of the first circle of questions is to
produce representation formulas for classes of singular integrals in terms of
so-called model operators conserving the same invariance structure. This
paradigm applies to Zygmund-type operators and modulation invariant operators
akin to the bilinear Hilbert transform, both of which are out of reach for
dyadic-probabilistic methods. Concrete applications come from elliptic and
dispersive PDE, operator theory and quasi-conformal mappings. The second related
family of questions is motivated by pointwise convergence of bilinear ergodic
averages for Banach-valued functions, a celebrated theorem by Bourgain in the
scalar case. The approach is based on Banach-valued variational estimates for
the truncated bilinear Hilbert transform. The central item in a further set of
questions concerning directional singular integrals is a version of the Kakeya
maximal estimate where tubular averages are replaced with averages over singular
line segments, and more generally, n-dimensional subspaces. One source of
motivation is the connection with Fourier restriction in higher codimensions.
The methods involve algebra-geometric techniques such as polynomial partitioning
on manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.