* 2054113
* SBIR Phase I: Low Earth Orbit Navigation System (LEONS) - The Ground Network
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Joshua Morales, STARNAV LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 10/31/2022
* USD 275,979.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to make critical United States infrastructure
less dependent on the Global Positioning System (GPS). The transportation
industry, power grid, banking operations, and communication systems are all
interconnected and heavily rely on GPS for accurate and reliable positioning or
time synchronization. This project addresses this single point of failure by
providing accurate positioning and timing, completely independent of GPS.
Additionally, the emerging autonomous vehicle market requires a more reliable
positioning, navigation, and timing (PNT) system than GPS can provide alone for
the market to reach full potential. Addressing the known pain points of GPS
signal jamming and spoofing will improve vehicle safety and consumer confidence
in autonomous applications ranging from self-driving cars, and package delivery
drones, to autonomous search and rescue. This impact will increase sales for
autonomous vehicle manufactures and supporting technology companies, such as
sensor, battery, and computer chip manufacturers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project studies the
feasibility of using a network of ground stations to receive low Earth orbit
(LEO) satellite signals that were never designed for PNT and convert them into
PNT-usable signals. Thousands of LEO satellites are being launched into space
for internet and communication. However, unlike the GPS signal structure
designed for extraction of PNT measurements, the signal structure transmitted
from communication and internet LEO satellites was never intended for PNT. GPS
satellites transmit accurate satellite ephemeris, atmospheric, and clock
information to the GPS receiver, whereas this information is typically
unavailable for LEO satellites. This project proposes to deploy a ground network
to determine this information from LEO satellite signals and make this
information available for PNT purposes. To this end, this project involves the
following research thrusts: 1) find the optimal geometric distribution of the
ground stations to minimize LEO satellite ephemeris, clock, and atmospheric
errors, 2) develop special signal processing and estimation theory techniques to
extract accurate PNT measurements from existing and future LEO satellite signals
for free (without a subscription to their network), and 3) derive theoretical
limits on PNT estimation errors when using the ground networkâ€™s produced
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.