* 2054748
* CAREER: Capillary Electrophoretic Mobility Spectrometry - A Solution Phase Analog to Ion Mobility Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/17/2020,11/30/2024
* Christopher Baker, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 11/30/2024
* USD 562,687.00

The ability to measure the structure of molecules is key to understanding their
behavior, such as how chemical species move and why they interact with other
molecules and themselves. Creating new measurement methods that provide answers
to these questions is especially important when studying complex molecules
containing hundreds and thousands of atoms, such as biological molecules. Of
great interest are proteins, because their behavior at the molecular level is
strongly influenced by their environment, which often changes on a rapid time
scale. From a long-term outlook, developing basic science tools that offer
insight into protein behavior can lead to new perspectives on factors that
impact the health of organisms. Dr. Christopher Baker at the University of
Tennessee Knoxville develops technologies that afford unprecedented, high-speed
measurements of the structures of proteins in their native environment. In this
project, a new tool called capillary electrophoretic mobility spectrometry
enables the simultaneous measurement of protein size and ionic charge in
extremely tiny volumes of aqueous solution. This project is enabled by
developments in 3-dimensional printing to create precision measurement tools.
The educational outreach activities broaden the impact of the project by
integrating research topics into curricula created in collaboration with middle
school science-technology-engineering-mathematics (STEM) educators. This
collaboration helps educators in resource-limited environments meet learning
objectives outlined in Common Core Math and Next Generation Science standards.
The educational outreach program focuses on the design and use of hands-on
experiential learning projects and include 3-dimensional printing of practical
scientific measurement devices and computer-aided simulation of difficult-to-
observe chemical properties and events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award,
the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program is funding Dr. Christopher Baker at
the University of Tennessee Knoxville to develop and integrate two multi-
detector strategies in capillary electrophoresis (CE) to enable a new technology
termed capillary electrophoretic mobility spectrometry (CEMS). Protein structure
evaluation is a highly specific motivating force behind the development of
methods for the selective detection of proteins in dynamic biological systems.
Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and X-ray crystallography offer
excellent structural resolution, but require relatively large quantities of
highly purified proteins, which may be impossible for many analyses. Ion
mobility spectrometry (IMS) is emerging as a tool for structural
characterization and selective detection, but as a gas-phase ion analysis
technique, IMS characterizes proteins under non-native conditions that influence
protein conformation. Capillary electrophoresis (CE) is a separation technique
highly analogous to IMS, however CE is performed in the solution phase.
Unfortunately, the results of CE cannot be interpreted as straightforwardly as
those of IMS, due to deleterious intermolecular interactions and dynamic
properties of the solution environment. CEMS is based on the online integration
of Fourier transform CE (FT-CE), which dramatically improves resolution over
conventional CE, and Taylor dispersion analysis (TDA), which enables the direct
and calibration-free measurement of hydrodynamic radii. Improved resolution and
direct observation of structurally-descriptive properties are the key
distinguishing factors between IMS and CE, and therefore, the integration of FT-
CE with TDA may enable IMS-like analyses in the solution
phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.