* 2054858
* RAPID: Modeling COVID-19 Coronavirus Vaccine and Nursing Homes
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Bruce Lee, Research Foundation of the City University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 12/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Nursing Homes (NHs) have been hit particularly hard by the COVID-19 coronavirus
pandemic, with NH residents accounting for nearly a quarter of all COVID-19
deaths. This project will help answer key questions about NHs, which are
particularly vulnerable to COVID-19 coronavirus infections and may be key to
slowing the pandemic, and COVID-19 coronavirus vaccines. NH residents may be at
a higher risk for COVID-19 coronavirus infections due to their health status,
frequent interactions, and close, community-like living quarters. Once infected,
residents are also at risk of serious health outcomes as a result of age-related
illnesses, advanced chronic conditions, and frailty. Moreover, previous work has
shown how NHs are highly interconnected with other healthcare facilities in a
region and how an infectious disease outbreak in one nursing home can quickly
spread throughout a region. Thus, NHs could further fuel the overall pandemic.
COVID-19 coronavirus vaccines are one potential intervention in NHs and this
proposed project would help address important questions about COVID-19
coronavirus vaccines. There is a need to better delineate the vaccine
characteristics (e.g., efficacy/effectiveness, duration of protection, cost)
that vaccine developers should aim for and how best to use different types of
vaccines should they reach the market. It will also be helpful to understand the
impact of varying prioritization of different populations, coverage, and
compliance. A broader impact of this project is a better understanding of how
COVID-19 coronavirus spreads in NHs and the impact of vaccination and other
interventions. This will help decision makers determine what prevention and
control measures should be implemented in NHs and how to implement these
measures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will entail the development of
computational models of selected nursing homes (NHs) and their residents and
personnel (including health professionals and staff). The models would represent
the layouts of the NH, the specific residents and personnel, their
characteristics, and their interactions. Simulations will consider an infected
person in the NH transmitting the virus to others through direct contact or
potentially through aerosol transmission or surface contamination. Simulation
experiments would consider introduction of severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) into the nursing home in different ways. This work
will explore the effects and value of introducing different types of COVID-19
coronavirus vaccines to the NHs. For example, varying the efficacy, duration of
protection, and other characteristics of the vaccine. Additionally, the models
could explore the effects of varying vaccination coverage and compliance among
different nursing home residents and personnel (e.g., what would happen if
different types of residents received the vaccine at different times, which
residents and personnel should be prioritized if vaccines are limited).
Simulation experiments could also explore the effects of layering on different
selected policies and interventions (e.g., wearing face masks, testing, and
different types of social distancing) with and without COVID-19 coronavirus
vaccines. Developing and attaching a COVID-19 clinical outcomes and costing
model to each of the residents and personnel then can help calculate the
economic impact and value of different vaccines, policies, and
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.