* 2054501
* Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2021,08/31/2023
* James Lancaster, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 599,999.00

Non-Technical Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM) will convene an ad hoc committee to examine
the impact that the National Science Foundation’s (NSF’s) Designing Materials to
Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) program is having as it is
progressing and adapting to achieve the Nation’s vision for the Materials Genome
Initiative (MGI). The MGI began in 2011 with the broad goal of vastly expanding
the United States’ materials science research capabilities through the
development of a materials innovation infrastructure to address our country’s
pressing technical needs. The NSF’s principal response to the MGI was to develop
and implement the DMREF program, a broad effort across many divisions and
directorates within NSF. The NASEM committee will evaluate the goals, progress,
and scientific accomplishments of the DMREF program within the context of
similar efforts both within the US and abroad. Since the tenth anniversary of
the MGI will take place in 2021, it is an appropriate time to evaluate the
successes and challenges that DMREF has had in order to ensure that this program
becomes an even more impactful component of the MGI in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is an 18-month study by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering,
and Medicine (NASEM) that will increase the impact of the National Science
Foundation’s (NSF’s) Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our
Future (DMREF) program as it strives to achieve the lofty objectives of the
National Materials Genome Initiative (MGI). The study is supported by
experienced members of the NASEM's professional staff and conducted by an ad-hoc
committee of approximately 14-15 members, most of whom will be materials
researchers who have previously been funded by DMREF or MGI-related research
programs supported by other federal agencies. Members will also include
materials researchers from industry with backgrounds in advancing materials
research toward applications and commercialization. Workforce training and
development will also be examined. In conducting the study, the committee will
meet approximately five times, either in person or virtually. Input will be
solicited from relevant communities. These efforts may include conducting town
hall meetings, participating in professional society meetings, and soliciting
white papers, in addition to hearing from community members at its meetings. The
general task of the committee is to evaluate the goals, progress, and scientific
accomplishments of the DMREF program within the context of similar efforts both
within the US and abroad and to identify opportunities for DMREF to further
accelerate the progression of materials research. The conclusions of the report
will be disseminated to NSF, as the sponsoring agency, representatives from
other federal departments and branches, the public, and the research and
technical communities that conduct materials research. Free electronic versions
of the report will be available via the National Academies Press
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.