* 2054659
* Dynamics and Kinetics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Leonid Bunimovich, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,999.00

A deterministic system, such as a double pendulum, can exhibit chaotic or
unpredictable behavior. The principal investigator will study the finite time
evolution of chaotic deterministic systems. Traditionally it was assumed that
the subtle dynamics of such systems can be analyzed only in the limit when time
tends to infinity (that is to say when chaotic fluctuations settle down). This
project aims to extend previous studies of finite time evolution of such systems
to a much larger class of systems, which will include some models with practical
applications. Another part of this research deals with systems where the motion
of a point particle is substituted by a particle of nonzero size. The study of
such systems has led to some new findings in quantum chaos and new
interpretations of experimental data. The research will extend this theory to
dimensions greater than two, which would allow application to interpretations of
a much larger class of numerical and experimental data on physical systems. A
third topic of the research deals with understanding whether and how
probabilistic time-irreversible laws of statistical mechanics could be
rigorously derived from deterministic time-reversible laws of classical
mechanics. The project includes the training of graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A rigorous theory of finite time dynamics makes possible
the analysis of transport in the phase space of chaotic and random dynamical
systems. Namely, it allows the prediction of which events will likely occur
first, e. g., which subset of the phase space the orbits will more likely visit.
Thus far, this theory has been developed for Bernoulli shifts with equal
probabilities of states. Similar results will be proved for Bernoulli shifts
with non-equal probabilities and for Markov shifts. The principles for
constructing chaotic (hyperbolic) particle-like flows will be reconsidered, and
new ones will be created. Physical particles where a finite size hard sphere
moves instead of a point particle will be analyzed in dimensions higher than
two. A simple model with two discs localized in "cells" but allowed to collide
with each other and with two pistons will be studied. In the model, each cell is
connected to (bounded by) a thermostat, the thermostats have different
temperatures, and the pistons do not allow the discs to stop for a long time or
move very slowly for a long time. A goal is to prove that on average (in time)
the disc in a cell with a higher temperature thermostat will have a higher
energy. This will be a main step to a proof of the Fourier
law.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.