* 2054964
* CSEDI Collaborative Research: The Origins and Implications of Inner Core Seismic Anisotropy
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Bruce Buffett, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2024
* USD 408,190.00

The Earth's core is a ball of mostly iron metal. It consists of a liquid outer
shell - the outer core - enveloping the solid inner core. As the Earth cools
down over time, liquid iron freezes, growing the inner core and providing energy
to the outer core to generate Earth’s magnetic field. The inner core is
spherical in shape but appears not to be uniform. The speed of seismic waves
traveling through it depends on their direction, a feature known as anisotropy.
Seismic waves traversing the inner core along a north-south path (near-parallel
to the Earth’s rotation axis) go faster than those propagating along an east-
west path (in the plane of the equator). Inner-core seismic anisotropy carries
information about the conditions at the time of iron freezing. It has been
attributed to alignment of iron crystals in specific directions; but the
processes causing this alignment is unclear. Interpreting this feature has been
challenging because of the complex processes involved and the extreme pressures
and temperatures prevailing in the core. Here, the researchers test
experimentally how samples of iron behave at core conditions. They analyse data
from experiments carried out in the diamond anvil cell where extreme conditions
are generated at the tips of two opposing diamonds. They use computational
models to characterpize iron crystal alignment during the experiments and
calculate the resulting seismic velocities. They use seismic analytical methods
to map the velocity structure of the inner core. Combined with geodynamic
modeling, the multidisciplinary approach allows simulating inner-core growth and
unveiling the processes causing its present-day anisotropy. The project supports
an early career scientist. It promotes the training in a multidisciplinary
context of graduate and undergraduate students, notably from underrepresented
groups in geosciences. It fosters outreach towards local schools and community
colleges. The project outcomes will be broadly and freely distributed to the
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding inner-core crystallization is
central to understanding the geodynamo. Inner-core seismic anisotropy is
attributed to alignments of intrinsically anisotropic iron crystals. Here, the
researchers investigate the causes and controlling factors of this anisotropy,
and how inner-core processes influence outer core processes. Coupling seismic
analysis, mineral physics experiments, and geodynamic modeling, they investigate
the dynamics and mineralogical control of crystal alignments within the inner
core. They use both laboratory data and computational plasticity models to
constrain the behavior of iron at inner-core conditions, placing limits on the
mineralogical processes able to generate seismic anisotropy. Concurrently, with
geodynamic models they simulate inner-core growth and determine the pattern and
strength of flows and forcing that impact crystal orientation. They test
possible feedback of anisotropic thermal and electrical transport properties of
aligned crystals on inner-core dynamic evolution. Existing and new seismic
measurements provide observational constraints to test possible growth models
for the inner core. Key questions addressed by the team are: how is global
anisotropy generated during inner-core growth? What caused the present-day
orientation of anisotropy? Can growth models be reconciled with spatial seismic
structure across a range of length scales? What effect does crystallization
texture have on final anisotropy? What are the implications of thermal and
electrical anisotropy for the rest of the Earth, notably for the
geodynamo?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.