* 2054135
* Tropical Methods in the Study of Moduli Spaces of Families of Curves
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* David Jensen, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 05/31/2024
* USD 292,882.00

The study of curves is a central topic in mathematics, with far-reaching
applications to fields from cryptography to mathematical physics. Algebraic
curves, which are one-dimensional solutions to systems of polynomial equations,
are among the simplest objects in algebraic geometry. Although they have been
studied for centuries, many of their basic properties remain unknown. Over the
past century, the field has shifted from studying fixed curves to studying
curves as they vary in families, or "moduli." This project focuses on
outstanding questions in the theory of curves and their moduli, by reducing them
to combinatorial questions via a process called tropicalization. The project
will also serve to recruit and train a younger generation of mathematicians.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will use tropical methods to study questions
of fundamental importance in algebraic geometry. The principal objects of study,
including Hurwitz spaces, moduli spaces of curves, and related combinatorial
structures, are of central interest not only in algebraic geometry, but in
topology, representation theory, number theory, and mathematical physics. Recent
developments in tropical geometry and combinatorics pave a path toward improved
understanding of basic geometric properties of moduli spaces. These methods have
already been used to explore the Kodaira dimensions of moduli spaces and the
Brill-Noether theory of general covers, and this project aims to further develop
these results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.