* 2054022
* I-Corps:  Large-Scale, Waste Heat Recovery Solution Based on Thermoacoustic Energy Conversion
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Carlo Scalo, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an energy recovery system capable of converting waste heat energy
in the form of excess vapor or exhaust gas into usable electricity using the
physics of acoustic waves. Documented efficiencies of these systems are
approximately 20%. The target end user of would be a large-scale industrial
facility in the food and beverage, automotive, heavy metal, or oil and natural
gas industries or a rural government entity struggling with waste heat
management and/or committed to providing power to off-grid areas. The proposed
technology is driven by low grade waste heat in the form of vapor or exhaust
from various processes. For example, there has been a recent increase in the
number of manufacturing sites utilizing combined heat and power (CHP) units that
output low grade steam at a high mass flow rate. This technology would act as a
complementary system to CHP, providing further cost-savings by supplying
electric power from harnessed low-grade steam energy. By integrating the
proposed technology into a manufacturing facility, thermal pollution caused by
high temperature vapor output will be mitigated by cooling the vapor before
releasing it into the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of an energy recovery system comprised of two
independent subsystems: (1) a thermal module to harness the waste heat from a
vapor stack or exhaust gas tubing; and (2) a thermoacoustic electric generator
to convert the waste heat into electric power. Each thermal module may be
custom-made for any industry partner depending on the size and thermal capacity
of the vapor stack available. The heat energy harnessed in the thermal module
will be transferred via a heat transfer fluid into the thermoacoustic electric
generator. The thermoacoustic electric generator will remain consistent across
all systems allowing for more streamlined manufacturing. The proposed innovation
may be scaled similarly to the size of a small backup generator seen in private
homes or scaled to the size of a natural gas generator used in heavy industry.
Industrial sponsors have aided the advance of the technology using multiple
types of working fluids and energy extraction methods. In addition, there has
been substantial advancement in computational modeling used to predict the
physics of the fluid phenomenon that is responsible for the heat energy
conversion, focusing specifically on traveling waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.