* 2054956
* Who's Motivated to Pursue Math and Science? Testing Replications of Processes from Grade School to Occupations in Multiple Datasets
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jacquelynne Eccles, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,102,347.00

The road to science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) careers is
composed of a series of choices and achievements that begin in childhood and
continue throughout life (i.e., the STEM pipeline). To understand the STEM
pipeline, the field needs studies that examine educational experiences from
grade school to college/occupational choices and that document what processes
support or undermine the STEM pipeline during multiple developmental periods.
Moreover, historical changes in STEM (e.g., maker spaces, and women’s growing
representation in science and mathematics) have prompted questions about whether
STEM historical movements have shifted the opportunity structures supporting
students’ STEM motivation. Through this project, the researchers take advantage
of seven extant datasets to test the following five aims among demographically
diverse students across historical time: (1) examining changes and patterns in
students’ 1st to 12th grade mathematics and science motivational beliefs; (2)
testing the extent to which the changes in students’ motivation predict their
mathematics and science achievement and coursework, and STEM college/career
choices; (3) determining the extent to which parent STEM experience and support
predict students’ motivation; (4) examining intersectionality among gender,
race/ethnicity, and college generation in Aims 1-3; and (5) testing conceptual
replication across datasets and historical time for Aims 1-4. The datasets
include large, local longitudinal datasets and nationally representative
datasets, which cover the 1980’s to present day. Analyses focus on evidence of
conceptual replications across datasets for each aim. This project is funded by
the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances
fundamental research on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will address the role of affective dimensions of learning, parenting,
and intersectionality on persistent disparities in STEM. One of the most
immediate determinants of individuals’ STEM outcomes is their motivational
beliefs. Using seven existing data sets, this research will explore who is
motivated to pursue mathematics and science, what sustains students’ motivation,
and if those processes vary across development and historical time. The project
focuses on broadening participation of underrepresented individuals by
investigating their mathematics and science motivational beliefs, STEM outcomes,
and parental correlates. Testing these processes across multiple datasets
provides a more comprehensive understanding of group differences in terms of
measurement, mean-level differences, and process-level differences. This
information is fundamental for rigorous research and helps identify groups that
might benefit from interventions and which supports might be most beneficial for
whom. The current project extends prior work to focus on equity, diversifying
the STEM workforce, and providing more concrete insight into the specific
pathways toward promoting and enhancing STEM participation for underrepresented
groups. Moreover, the strategy to conceptually replicate findings across
multiple large-scale datasets is a strong test of theory and provides insights
into the universality of processes across distinct groups of intersecting
identities and developmental periods. Using datasets that vary historically
allows the researchers to test whether participation in STEM has broadened over
past decades and if the processes supporting participation have
changed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.