* 2054753
* National CyberWatch Resource Center
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Casey O'Brien, Prince George's Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,650,000.00

Keeping computers and information systems secure is a major challenge. Business,
industry, and government need well-prepared technicians who can prevent, detect,
and investigate cybersecurity breaches. The growth of cyber-threats has created
a need for many additional workers who have cybersecurity knowledge and skills.
In 2012, following a successful tenure as an Advanced Technological Education
(ATE) regional center, the National CyberWatch Center (NCC) was funded to serve
as the ATE program's national center for cybersecurity education. Having
fulfilled that role, NCC will transition to an ATE resource center, with a
narrower scope, and will continue to host some of the key resources and
activities that it previously developed to support cybersecurity education and
workforce development in community colleges. The resource center will pursue
three broad goals:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Capacity Building: Promote, support,
and enhance the capability of programs, faculty, and students based on effective
models of impact.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Dissemination: Broadly distribute exemplary
programs, practices, and materials.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Research: Advance the
development of evidence-based strategies and practices for cybersecurity
education and workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working closely with
other ATE centers, NCC will continue its role as a national leader in community
college cybersecurity education. Its activities will build on valuable efforts
that it launched during its period as a regional and national ATE center. Major
activities will include the following:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Support national
accreditation efforts for community college cybersecurity programs.&lt;br/&gt;*
Update and expand model cybersecurity degrees, certificates, and technical
courses.&lt;br/&gt;* Support the incorporation of cybersecurity learning modules
across the curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;* Offer Cybersecurity Skills Development
Workshops to help educators master new cybersecurity concepts and competency-
based instructional methods.&lt;br/&gt;* Offer Paper Development Workshops and
Collaborative Peer Review Workshops to help educators develop, test, and publish
new materials and methods for cybersecurity education.&lt;br/&gt;* Increase the
number of chapters and members of the National Cybersecurity Student
Association.&lt;br/&gt;* Broadly distribute exemplary curricular materials,
programs, practices, academic pathways, and partnership models. These resources
include the Community College Cyber Summit, the NCC Digital Press, the
Cybersecurity Skills Journal, and the "Innovations in Cybersecurity Education"
recognition program, as well as NCC's website, social media, newsletters, and
webcast series.&lt;br/&gt;* Conduct and publish research on the capability
maturity of the cybersecurity workforce, instructors, and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through its continuing collaborations and the
variety of resources that it provides, NCC will pursue three aims. First is to
ensure that the national dialogue around workforce needs in cybersecurity
reflects the important role of community colleges. Second is to provide
oversight so that workforce frameworks and occupational standards that are under
development have strong community college input. Third is to promote the
currency and relevancy that community college degree and certificate programs
have for employers in industry and government. This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education (ATE) program, which focuses on the education
of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.