* 2054850
* Visual Flight Control for the Very Smallest Aerial Vehicles
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2025
* Sawyer Fuller, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 07/31/2025
* USD 899,071.00

The goal of this project is to realize autonomous robots as small as bumblebees
and even gnats by creating design guidelines for their vision-based control
systems. This will have a revolutionary impact on robotics. Compared to larger
robots, insect robots will deploy in larger numbers, in more confined spaces, in
closer proximity to humans without impact hazard, and do so persistently by
collecting small amounts of energy that are available in the environment such as
sunlight. As a result they will sense environmental conditions in far greater
detail than is currently possible. An important application is locating leaks of
the greenhouse gas methane, of which the USA is the world's leading exporter.
Other examples include locating incipient fires, monitoring agriculture from
within the plant canopy, inspecting confined spaces, and exploring outer space
at reduced launch cost. To date, however, robots below a gram have limited
sensor and power systems and have not yet performed controlled flight without
feedback from external sensors because of extreme size, weight, and power
constraints. Our objectives are to better understand how the physics of small
scale affects the design of insect-sized feedback control systems. The
educational objectives are to drive interest and provide training in engineering
and robotics for students in high school through graduate school, particularly
minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Foundational Research in Robotics project
will address the objective of understanding how the physics of small scale
affects the design of insect-sized feedback control systems for flying robots
smaller than one gram. In particular, the project’s research activities will
include: 1) modelling and analyzing the effects of physical scale on robot
sensing, control, and power, 2) designing and analyzing a hovering controller
compatible with the constraints of the very smallest, millimeter-sized flying
robots, to be released as open source software, and 3) designing and analyzing a
system for learning basic visual navigation through a cluttered environment
while seeking a source such as a chemical or power (also open source). Findings
will be tested in simulation, as well as on a bumblebee-sized 300 mg flapping-
wing flying robot and a novel sensor suite. The result will be the first
demonstration of stable hovering and obstacle navigation on an insect sized
robot. To minimize the power required for feedback control, only passive sensing
such as vision, a fly-inspired wind sensor, and exclusively multiply and add
operations for computation will be used. Free lesson plans and other online
resources to help educators teach students how to design, build, and operate
“foldable robotics” inspired by the insect robots used in this work will be
created and publicly disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the cross-directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program,
jointly managed and funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and
Computer and Information Science and Engineering
(CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.