* 2054884
* CSEDI Collaborative Research: The nature and timing of Earth's accretion
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Sujoy Mukhopadhyay, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2024
* USD 207,061.00

The Earth formed by a series of collisions between smaller rocky bodies. At some
point during this process, the Earth also acquired the elements, known as
volatiles, that make up its atmosphere and oceans. But how and when the Earth
formed, and how and when it acquired its volatiles, are still very uncertain.
This matters, because the volatile elements are essential for life as we know
it; if we can understand how the Earth acquired its volatiles, that will help us
understand how other planets did so, in this solar system and elsewhere. To
solve this problem the investigators use two main tools. One is a series of
natural “clocks”, derived from radioactive elements that decay; these tell us
how fast things happened. The second is experiments to determine whether the
volatile elements were sequestered into the Earth’s iron core, or whether they
were left behind in the rocks and atmosphere. As part of this investigation the
team will train graduate and undergraduate students – some from under-
represented minorities - in experimental and analytical techniques, adding to
the technically-trained workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal the
investigators explore the combined effects of volatile loss and core
sequestration on a range of moderately volatile and refractory elements. They
will use four isotopic chronometers (Hf-W, Pd-Ag, U-Pb and I-Pu-Xe), with
different half-lives and chemical characteristics, to disentangle these two
effects. The modeling efforts use N-body accretion models, allowing provenance
to be tracked and isotopic evolution to be tracked; they also propose to carry
out necessary experimental measurements on partitioning behavior and mantle Xe
isotopic compositions. The team will use the four isotopic systems to answer
three major questions: 1) are the Grand Tack or conventional accretion scenarios
more consistent with the observations? 2) how did the composition of material
added to the Earth change as accretion proceeded?; 3) how much volatile loss
happened during and after accretion itself? In answering these questions the
investigators will provide a more focused picture of the formation and earliest
evolution of the Earth. The proposed research involves an inter-disciplinary
collaboration between a modeler, an isotope geochemist and a high-pressure
mineralogist. As such, it cuts across traditional disciplinary boundaries and
will provide an opportunity for the three groups to educate each other and
integrate experiments, measurements and modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.