* 2054833
* Structure and Evolution of Low Temperature Spin Systems: Entropic Repulsion and Metastability
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Eyal Lubetzky, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Spin systems are mathematical models for ferromagnetism and other properties of
materials that are governed by interactions of nuclear magnetic moments (spins).
This project aims to study a variety of problems addressing fundamental features
of some of the most canonical interacting spin systems at low temperature.
Specific models to be studied include the three dimensional Ising model (one of
the most fundamental models in statistical mechanics) and the (2+1) dimensional
Solid-On-Solid model. One feature that these models exhibit is the entropic
repulsion, where an initially flat surface goes through a series of meta-stable
states as it builds its height towards equilibrium. The main focus of this
project is to study the entropic repulsion phenomenon for these models and its
interplay with Glauber dynamics (the natural stochastic process that models the
evolution of the system). To advance understanding of these problems the project
will develop new methods in probability theory which would find applications in
other studies of interacting spins systems. The project provides research
training opportunities for graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
research project focuses on the 3D Ising model at low temperature on an infinite
cylinder, with mixed boundary conditionsâ€”minus above height 0 and plus
elsewhere. These give rise rise to an interface, a random surface separating the
plus/minus phases, and the PI aims to study the entropic repulsion effect
conditioned on this interface being positive. The main goal is to show that, in
order to gain entropy, the surface gradually rises, and its level lines
eventually form a single plateau with an a.s. scaling limit given by a Wulff
shape; the level line exhibit cube-root fluctuations away from the boundary; and
started at a flat initial state, the evolution of the surface towards
equilibrium goes through a sequence of meta-stable plateaus, each with a waiting
time doubly-exponential in its height. A related research direction aims to
study a class of crystal models that approximate 3D Ising, and show that the
scaling limit in terms of a Wulff shape and cube-root fluctuations are universal
for that entire class. For the (2+1)D Solid-On-Solid, the goal is to refine our
understanding and obtain the order of the fluctuations in the top level line.
The final topic to be studied concerns crystal models such as Solid-On-Solid at
low temperature when the boundary condition is tilted, which is known to cause
the (otherwise flat) surface to become de-localized. Here the goal is to give
quantitative bounds on the height fluctuations, and show that Glauber dynamics
is no longer exponentially slow due to meta-stable
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.