* 2054431
* 4th International Conference on Plant Synthetic Biology, Bioengineering, and Biotechnology
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Izabela Balicka, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 11/30/2021
* USD 7,638.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;Plant synthetic biology intersects many
disciplines, including plant biology, synthetic biology, computational modeling
and mathematical analysis, and engineering sciences to enable crop improvement
and enhanced bio-production of high value chemicals. The award provides
registration support to facilitate participation of US-based researchers,
including graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, and early stage
investigators, in the 4th International Conference on Plant Synthetic Biology,
Bioengineering, and Biotechnology Conference held virtually October 30-November
1, 2020. The meeting brings together researchers from various academic,
industrial, and government sectors in an interactive and engaging meeting and
enables students and early career researchers to learn from an interdisciplinary
community of leading scientists and engineers through organized talks and
virtual discussions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;Presented by the Society of Biological Engineering (SBE),
the conference includes scientists and engineers from universities, industry and
government, and consists of multiple sessions in areas such as: Redesigning
Photosynthesis, Genome Scale Engineering, Organelles and Synthetic Compartments,
Engineering Bioproduction, Biotic Interactions and Synthetic Communities,
Sustainability, and Engineering Form. Through the interactive online platform
the conference will provide a venue for scientific presentations from a diverse
group of often field-separated biologists and engineers as well as international
researchers working in various areas pertinent to plant synthetic biology. The
conference will encourage student and trainee engagement in the field, as well
as participation of women and underrepresented scientists in the field of plant
sciences, synthetic biology, and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.