* 2054775
* GOALI: Connecting the Dots: Using Radical-formation Control to Achieve Desired EB-initiated Polymer Properties
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Julie Jessop, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 307,736.00

A joint academic-industrial partnership between the University of Iowa and ebeam
Technologies (eT) is proposed to study fundamental science of electron beam
curing of polymers. The work could eliminate the need for free-radical
initiators in polymerization, help understand the mechanism of the initiation
step by ebeam, and could lead to more uniform curing profiles. Electron-beam
(EB) curing offers a faster, lower-power, and solvent-free means of polymerizing
inks, films, coatings, and adhesives when compared to thermal drying and curing
processes. The goal of this research project is to advance EB-curing
technologies by developing structure-processing property relationships that
incorporate the fundamental knowledge of how chemical structure influences
radical formation and reactivity. This understanding will also enable the
extension of EB-curing technologies to a wider range of applications, including
high-performance materials for the automotive and aerospace industries and low-
migration materials for the food and medical product
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following research topics will be pursued:
(1) correlation of the radiation yield with monomer structure, (2) comparison of
property development in EB- and UV-cured systems having equal radical
concentration, (3) control of crosslink density through monomer structure and
composition, and (4) minimization of migration through monomer structure and
composition. Kinetic rates and radical concentrations will be measured using
spectroscopic techniques to obtain monomer initiation efficiencies. Molecular
weight distributions (for linear polymers), crosslink density (for polymer
networks), and mechanical properties will be measured using gel permeation
chromatography and dynamic mechanical analysis to demonstrate the impact of
initiation mechanism, monomer structures, and process parameters on polymer
physical properties. Gas chromatography/mass spectrometry will be used to
identify and quantify leachable materials and their diffusion coefficients for
ultra-low-migration systems. Development of advanced relationships between EB
kinetics and the resulting polymer properties may provide a level of
understanding of EB-cured systems significantly beyond what is now available. In
addition to training graduate students in an industrially-relevant area of
study, outreach activities to K-12 and undergraduate students in STEM are
planned based on polymer demonstrations incorporating project results. Special
emphasis will be placed on recruiting underrepresented female and minority
students to participate in this research project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.