* 2054515
* Collaborative Research: OpenDendro - Advanced Open-source Tools for Paleoenvironmental Reconstruction
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Edward Cook, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2023
* USD 73,538.00

The research team aims to create openDendro as an open-source framework of the
base analytic software tools used in dendrochronology in both the R and Python
programming languages. The research goal is to create and curate a unified set
of critical tools in open-source environments that will provide the necessary
baseline for researchers using tree-ring data to adopt open-science practices
and increase both rigor and transparency in
dendrochronology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the software used in
dendrochronology are in legacy programming languages and have been maintained by
a small number of volunteers for decades. The codes are at risk of becoming
inoperable or incompatible as advances in computing architecture accelerate. The
techniques and tools adversely impacted include specialized data input and
output, detrending, cross-dating, chronology building, spectral modeling,
descriptive statistics, and other common data-handling and data-processing
tasks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team argues that this situation could
be addressed by incorporating these legacy programs into a modern open-source
and open-science framework. While some of this work has been completed in the R
package dplR, many of the tools most needed by the broader research community
are still not widely available in R (including signal free standardization) and
virtually none are implemented in the Python ecosystem.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include creating a modern
open-source software base that will be immediately usable by paleoclimatologists
using tree-ring data for paleoclimate research. Modernizing and enhancing this
software will also extend both their reach and utility beyond the
dendrochronology community and allow integration into related initiatives in the
atmospheric and earth sciences including LinkedEarth and Pangeo. Making these
tools open source will also facilitate further collaborative development,
broaden the responsibility for collective maintenance and enhancement of this
software, and ensure the persistence of these unique tools. This project
provides training opportunities for the next generation of paleoenvironmental
scientists with a coding `bootcamp' on the openDendro toolkit and broadly models
the application of open-science concepts and practices within
dendrochronology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.