* 2054773
* Molecular and Evolutionary Mechanisms Underlying Desiccation Resistance Across Drosophila Species
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Henry Chung, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 786,491.00

Understanding how current species adapt to extreme environments such as the
desert can help determine how the species could evolve in response to
environmental changes. As environments get warmer and drier due to rapid climate
change, organisms must adapt to these changes to survive and thrive in these new
conditions. Insects use a lipid layer on their body surface to prevent water
loss and withstand desiccation stress. The proposed study will investigate the
association between desiccation resistance and chemical properties of this lipid
layer across insect species. Furthermore, this study will use a desert-dwelling
insect species as a model to investigate the physiological and genetic
mechanisms underlying how insects can evolve very high desiccation resistance.
Since components of this lipid layer also function as pheromones in many insect
species, evolutionary changes in these components can lead to changes in mating
successes. Results from this study will provide empirical evidence in
determining how environmental adaptation can lead to changes in mating behaviors
and reproductive isolation between insect species. The project will use existing
infrastructure to promote STEM teaching, training, and learning to students,
teachers, and the public through workshops, videos, and science fair
participation, as well as broaden full participation of underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adaptation to different environments and
habitats is key to long-term species persistence. Decreasing water loss is
important for organisms adapting to different terrestrial environments. In
Drosophila fruit flies and other terrestrial insects, this ability to prevent
water loss is crucial. Previous studies suggested that cuticular water loss
accounts for the majority of water loss in insects and hypothesized that
differences in cuticular hydrocarbon (CHC) content account for differences in
desiccation resistance between mesic and desert species. However, the specific
association between different CHC components and desiccation has not been
established, and the genetic mechanisms underlying the evolution of these CHC
components that confer high desiccation resistance have not been elucidated.
This proposed study will investigate how evolution of CHCs in insects affects
desiccation resistance and elucidates the genetic mechanisms and evolutionary
constraints that govern their evolution in a desert species, Drosophila
mojavensis. As CHCs are dual traits that also have other functions such as mate
recognition, the constraints that govern the evolution of these CHCs in these
dual roles are not well understood. This project will also investigate how the
functions of CHCs in desiccation resistance may affect mate recognition.
Collectively, the long-term goal of this project is to elucidate the molecular
and evolutionary mechanisms that enable species to withstand water loss and
maintain water balance as our planet gets warmer and more arid in the next few
decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.