* 2054823
* The Nature of Engineering Work: Curricular Messaging and Alignment with  Diverse Undergraduate Students’ Values, Interests, and Engineering Intentions
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Lisa Lattuca, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,499,892.00

As part of an undergraduate education in engineering, students typically
encounter courses that emphasize core engineering technical skills but neglect
the "comprehensive engineering skills" such as the ability to collaborate, to be
creative, and to exhibit ethical thinking that are needed to address complex
societal problems. Engineering education plays a major role in shaping students'
understanding of the nature of engineering work which includes such
"comprehensive skills." Thus, it is important to understand when, where, and how
students encounter "messages" about the nature and scope of engineering work.
This project hopes to investigate how engineering curricula and instruction
represent engineering practice and how these representations align with
students' values and interests, with the goal of understanding how these
messages affect students’ sense of belonging and intentions to persist in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The systematic study of two contrasting engineering
disciplines will generate greater understandings of the effect of student
perceptions of the content of engineering curricula on diverse students'
perceptions of the field, their sense of fit, and their future plans. Existing
research has focused, rightly, on students' perceptions of campus climate and
interactions with faculty and peers, but has largely neglected study of the
curricular content itself. Findings from this theory-driven, mixed-method design
will extend and complement existing research on undergraduates' motivations for
studying engineering and their impact on their connection and commitment to the
field. By triangulating data from student and instructor interviews, classroom
observations, and census surveys of students in two engineering disciplines,
this study will extend a limited literature on diverse motivations for
engineering study. Providing future engineers with comprehensive engineering
skills is critical to preparing professionals to engage productively with
complex sociotechnical problems and with stakeholders from a variety of
backgrounds. Additionally, a deeper understanding of what curricular messaging
communicates to students about the nature of engineering work, about who
engineers are, and about the skill set needed for innovative problem solving
will support clearer communication of the value of this broader range of
engineering skills. Such curricular messaging may attract a more diverse
population of students who value socially relevant problems and may contribute
positively to these students' sense of belonging in the field and desire to
persist in their studies and into engineering careers. This project is funded by
the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances
fundamental research on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.