* 2054968
* SaTC: EDU: Secure and Private Artificial Intelligence
* EDU,DGE
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Daniel Takabi, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 05/31/2024
* USD 399,681.00

As artificial intelligence (AI) is incorporated into more systems, there are
growing cybersecurity concerns related to privacy protection as well as a need
for highly trained professionals who can develop and deploy trustworthy AI
systems. The goal of this project is to develop instructional materials that
expose students to privacy issues inherent in AI systems through real-world
examples. The project will have a direct and long-term impact by addressing the
growing national need for highly trained professionals capable of taking a
holistic approach to solving real world problems in complex AI systems. In
addition, the project will benefit numerous students from underrepresented
minority groups and improve diversity of the workforce. Georgia State University
is a minority-serving institution and has strong connections with Historically
Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) in Metro Atlanta and the wider region.
The project will disseminate the developed materials through training workshops
for the educational community and therefore promote adoption of training modules
addressing privacy and AI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary project
team will develop a new course, “Private AI”, which will include instructional
modules and hands-on labs that employ state-of-the-art private AI techniques
addressing different privacy challenges of AI systems. These instructional
modules will be designed according to learning science principles, specifically
the principles of problem-centered instruction (PCI). The modules will be based
on real-world systems and are designed to cover fundamental privacy principles
in AI systems and practical skills systematically. The learning objectives of
the interactive curricular activities are for students to (i) understand
fundamental concepts and principles of private AI; (ii) understand privacy
attacks and defenses, different privacy-preserving techniques, and the pros and
cons of each approach; and (iii) gain knowledge and skills in the development
and deployment of private AI systems. The deliverables also include manuals to
help instructors integrate the modules into their curricula and guidelines on
implementing PCI activities in the classroom since many instructors are not
experts in instructional sciences. In order to simplify integration and
encourage adoption, the modules and the labs will be based on open-source
software and tools that are free to use for educational purposes. The modules
will also be distributed via free cloud platforms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program,
which funds proposals that address cybersecurity and privacy, and in this case
specifically cybersecurity education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal
Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy
Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and economic
benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.