* 2054724
* National Cybersecurity Training &amp; Education (NCyTE) Center
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Philip Craiger, Whatcom Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 7,499,995.00

Keeping computers and information systems secure is a major challenge. Business,
industry, and government need well-prepared technicians who can prevent, detect,
and investigate cybersecurity breaches. The growth of cyber-threats has created
a need for many additional workers who have cybersecurity knowledge and skills.
As the Advanced Technological Education (ATE) program's national center in the
area of security technologies, the National Cybersecurity Training &amp;
Education (NCyTE) Center will leverage previous NSF grants, projects funded by
the National Security Agency (NSA), and the expertise of partners to provide
leadership for cybersecurity education in community and technical colleges and
related secondary school programs that build America's skilled technical
workforce in cybersecurity. The center will pursue four strategic
goals:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Expand educational pathways and the diversity of
cybersecurity programs to meet the nation's workforce needs.&lt;br/&gt;(2)
Develop and deploy leading-edge cybersecurity curricula.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Cultivate
engagement with employers (business, industry, government) and career
opportunities for students.&lt;br/&gt;(4) Disseminate resources to improve
current and future directions of cybersecurity
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to Whatcom Community College, major
partners in the center include California State University, San Bernardino;
Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University (Daytona Beach, FL); Eastern New Mexico
University - Ruidoso; the Center for Systems Security and Information Assurance
(CSSIA; based at Moraine Valley Community College); and the National CyberWatch
Center (NCC; based at Prince George's Community
College).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To advance cybersecurity education and build the
nation's cybersecurity workforce, the NCyTE Center will expand, standardize, and
disseminate cutting-edge resources for teaching and learning (including online
learning) and best practices aligned with industry standards. The center will
develop cybersecurity content targeting new industry sectors, integrate new and
updated cybersecurity concepts into existing fields, conduct associated
professional development for college and K-12 educators, and coordinate the work
of other ATE grantees in cybersecurity. A projected 1,500 faculty will receive
training and an estimated 2,300 faculty will engage in annual leadership
development workshops and forums to update their knowledge and skills and to
learn about needs in industry. Academies and boot camps will address the
shortage of cybersecurity faculty. Through forums and career fairs, an estimated
10,000 students will learn about cybersecurity careers and make connections with
employers. These activities, as well as targeted outreach and mentoring
activities (with a special focus on women, veterans, and Native Americans), will
attempt to broaden participation in the field. Using the materials, methods,
experiences, and guidance that the center provides, community colleges around
the nation will be able to launch, grow, and maintain cybersecurity programs,
ultimately expanding and diversifying the pool of graduates who pursue
cybersecurity careers. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education (ATE) program, which focuses on the education of technicians for the
advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.