* 2054391
* Representation Theory and Moduli Spaces via Young Tableaux and Parking Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Maria Gillespie, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 05/31/2024
* USD 191,903.00

This research focuses on the use of combinatorial tools, such as orderings of
numbers or algorithms for parking cars, to provide a more concrete understanding
of abstract mathematical concepts in geometry and algebra. In modern-day
Schubert calculus, many questions in enumerative geometry - counting
intersections of lines, planes, curves - have been translated into discrete
combinatorial problems or algorithms that a computer can then analyze. The aim
of this project is to come up with these types of combinatorial rules in related
areas of geometry and algebra, in order to both increase computational
efficiency and to make the geometric constructions more accessible to scientists
in other disciplines. The geometric spaces and algebraic structures that will be
studied are of central importance to quantum physics and string theory. The
project will involve graduate students in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will particularly focus on subvarieties
and generalizations of flag varieties, Grassmannians, and moduli spaces of
curves, all three of which are important geometric spaces whose cohomology rings
are graded S_n-modules. We aim to give combinatorial rules, in terms of Young
tableaux, parking functions, and other combinatorial objects, that govern
computational aspects of their cohomology rings, and use them to resolve open
questions about the corresponding geometric spaces. These new combinatorial
rules also will be used to approach long-standing open problems in symmetric
function theory, including the Macdonald positivity conjecture and the problem
of determining equality of skew Schur Q functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.