* 2054607
* Towards a New Framework for the Mechanics of Nonequilibrium Continua
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Youping Chen, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2024
* USD 452,336.00

Continuum mechanics has been the major theoretical tool for the description and
understanding of the mechanics of materials. As science and engineering advance,
however, classical continuum mechanics has been shown to be insufficient, e.g.,
for physical processes involving multiple length/time scales or for dynamic
phenomena with unknown thermal transport mechanisms. This research aims to
overcome these limitations by developing a new formalism that will enhance the
applicability of continuum mechanics to describe multiscale mechanical
deformation and thermal transport processes from the atomic to the macroscopic.
A simulation tool will be developed based on the formulation and will be freely
and broadly disseminated to benefit mechanics and materials communities. In
addition, the project will be designed to serve as a scientific training ground
for graduate and undergraduate students. The PI will also reach out to students
from underrepresented groups as well as students with physical disabilities to
provide them with hands-on research experiences from which they may launch their
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Different from the top-down formulation of
classical continuum mechanics, this research will employ a bottom-up formalism
to rederive the field representation of balance laws. The formulation will build
on a concurrent atomistic and continuum description of materials by including
the atomic degrees of freedom embedded within each material point; this will
allow atomic-scale discontinuities and thermal fluctuations to be explicitly
included in the formulation. The Theory of Distributions will be used as the
mathematical tool for the formulation, which will provide a rigorous solution to
the mathematical difficulties in linking particle and field descriptions of
physical behavior involving discontinuous or singular functions. The research
will also redefine temperature as a derived quantity, thus enabling the
descriptions of all the field quantities in continuum mechanics to be fully
consistent with those measured in experiments or calculated from atomistic
simulations. In addition, a simulation tool will be developed, demonstrated, and
validated by reproducing two highly nonequilibrium processes that are both
temperature- and size-dependent: heteroepitaxial growth and thermally activated
dislocation motion. It is expected that this research will lead to a new
framework for the mechanics of continua that can predict highly non-equilibrium
deformation processes and phenomena, as well as reveal the underlying
mechanisms, with no empirical rules or parameters other than an interatomic
potential. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Mechanics of
Materials and Structures (MOMS) program in the Division of Civil, Mechanical and
Industrial Innovation (CMMI) and the Thermal Transport Processes (TTP) program
in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems
(CBET).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.