* 2054691
* I-Corps:  AI-enabled automation intelligence software that can detect micro-anomalies in machine and robotic operations
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Jeremy Rickli, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps projects is the
development of an Artificial Intelligence (AI)-enabled automation software that
detects micro-anomalies in machine and robotic operations and pinpoints
defective components before catastrophic equipment failure. Defective components
cause unscheduled downtime and are a significant challenge for manufacturers. In
a typical factory, an engineer may spend 30-60 percent of their time collecting
information related to defective parts. Eighty-two percent of companies have
experienced unplanned downtime that costs an average of $2 million annually.
However, 70% of manufacturers still lack awareness of when equipment assets are
due for maintenance or upgrade, and 72% of manufacturers identify unplanned
downtime as their top priority or a high priority. The high penetration level of
advanced automation and sensor technologies in industrial operations also has
increased demand for methods to effectively monitor and manage complex
operations in a systematic and timely manner. The proposed technology addresses
this need by delivering capabilities to maintenance and industrial engineers to
achieve near zero Mean Time-to-Resolution (MTTR) of costly manufacturing
equipment failures. In addition, the technology eliminates the machine failures
from occurring by advancing approaches that analyze data and provide insights
after failure occurs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of 1) a proprietary Programmable Logic Controller (PLC) driver that
captures machine component micro degradation trends; 2) digital twins of the
machine ecosystem that mirror the physical system performance and interactions
between machines; and 3) an Automation Intelligence network. The proposed
technology’s unique machine performance datasets, created from its PLC-driver
and sensor feedback, captures the “normal” operation of the machines. These
datasets are then used to create causal relationship maps between different
elements of the system. Causal maps accelerate the detection of root causes of
potential machine failure and anticipate the potential risks and weaknesses
within a system. In addition, digital twins provide a cyber-physical platform
that integrates physics based models of machine components, spatial
relationships from Computer Aided Engineering (CAE) models, and data-driven
correlations inferred from self-adapting machine learning methods. The AI
platform runs on a distributed system/edge analytics network to ensure real-time
monitoring and diagnosis on the local node (e.g., individual machines and its
components) and system (e.g., production lines) levels. Integration of these
three elements establishes a scalable digital twin that leverages element
interactions to continuously discover and refine causal relationships that
rapidly and reliably detect, identify, and pinpoint
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.