* 2054424
* Linear Partial Differential Equations on Singular Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jared Wunsch, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 06/30/2024
* USD 270,000.00

Many seemingly different physical phenomena such as light, sound propagation,
and the motion of quantum particles are described in a mathematically unified
manner as propagating waves. It is therefore of considerable practical
importance to describe how waves oscillate and die off depending on the source
producing them and the medium in which they propagate. The goal of this project
is to investigate several questions surrounding the rate of wave decay, and in
particular how it is influenced by the effects of diffraction, which occurs when
the waves encounter sharp discontinuities in the medium. The questions of
interest include those motivated by very small-scale physics (the hydrogen atom)
and very large-scale physics (decay of waves on backgrounds arising in
cosmology). The PI’s prior work on analyzing the effectiveness of computational
methods used in modeling solutions to these equations in practical settings will
be continued. Training of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows will be
incorporated throughout the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project revolves
around questions involving the decay rate of waves near their source in several
settings. Of particular interest will be understanding the role of wave
diffraction by rough media in the qualitative behavior and long-time decay rates
of solutions to wave and Schrödinger equations. When studying the effects of the
singularity of the Coulomb potential on the structure of the Dirac propagator
for the hydrogen atom, diffractive effects will again play an important role. In
spacetimes of interest in general relativity, the large-scale structure of
spacetime effects on the decay of waves and the structure of their radiation
patterns will be investigated. This project will further entail a study of the
performance of numerical algorithms for computation of the scattering of waves,
bringing to bear techniques of phase space analysis that have not previously
been employed in these problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.