* 2054723
* Multiconfiguration Pair-Density Functional Theory for Spectroscopy and Photochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Donald Truhlar, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2024
* USD 550,000.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program
in the Chemistry Division, Professors Laura Gagliardi of the University of
Chicago and Donald G. Truhlar of the University of Minnesota will develop multi-
configuration pair-density functional theory (MC-PDFT) and employ it to compute
potential energy surfaces for ground and excited states. As collaborators, the
two principal investigators are developing computational methods that will
likely advance knowledge across a broad range of chemical space, from catalysis,
to photochemistry, supramolecular chemistry, spectroscopy, thermochemistry,
materials chemistry, biochemistry, and atmospheric chemistry. The new
computational tools are expected to help elucidate phenomena identified by
experimentalists and predict new chemical behavior in these areas. The work
proposed here aims to demonstratively high levels of accuracy and applicability
for quantum chemical methods. Moreover, the team will continue to develop codes
that will be available in open-source packages to the community, including
considerable effort into documentation. Additionally, the combined expertise of
two senior investigators will allow students and postdocs to benefit from a wide
range of ideas that will contribute to a well-rounded career
preparation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laura Gagliardi and Donald G. Truhlar are
developing pair-density functional theory (MC-PDFT) with new types of wave
functions, including localized active space wave functions, in order to exploit
the localized character of some important kinds of strong electron correlation.
This method will be advanced and employed to explore transition metal complexes
involved in catalysis and excited states involved in photochemical reactions.
Such systems often have a complex electronic structure that cannot be well
described even to zero order by only a single electronic configuration, that is,
by a single way of distributing the electrons in orbitals. MC-PDFT can be viewed
as a way to combine wave function theory (WFT) and density functional theory
(DFT) to take advantage of their respective strengths. In particular, the team
proposes to develop MC-PDFT with the following objectives: i) Develop pair-
density functional theory with new types of wave functions, including localized
active space wave functions, in order to exploit the localized character of some
important kinds of strong electron correlation, so as to enable the construction
of accurate electronic structure calculations for extended chemical systems such
as metal-organic frameworks, metal-ligand complexes, and molecules containing
multiple weakly-coupled -orbital subsystems. ii) Derive and implement analytic
Hessians for MC-PDFT so that one can determine whether a stationary point is a
local minimum or saddle point and then calculate vibrational frequencies at this
level of theory. This will allow the team and the community to use MC-PDFT as a
next-generation tool to compute potential energy surfaces for ground and excited
states. iii) Explore new kinds of density functionals based on the unpaired
density and the first-order reduced density matrix, to improve the accuracy of
the theory. iv) Apply the methods above to transition metal systems,
spectroscopy, and photochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.