* 2054079
* Change Makers: Crowdsolving the Energy Challenge through Cyber-Enabled Out-of-School Citizen Science Programs
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Charles Xie, INSTITUTE FOR FUTURE INTELLIGENCE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 12/31/2021
* USD 326,104.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings. In this exploratory
Change Makers project, the Concord Consortium will develop, test, and evaluate a
citizen science program that leverages innovative technology, such that youth
engage directly with energy issues through scientific inquiry. The project will
create the Infrared Street View, a citizen science program that aims to produce
a thermal version of Google's Street View using an affordable infrared camera
attached to a smartphone. The infrared camera serves as a high-throughput data
acquisition instrument that collects thousands of temperature data points each
time a picture is taken. Youth will collect massive geotagged thermal data that
have considerable scientific and educational value for visualizing energy usage
and improving energy efficiency at all levels. The Infrared Street View program
will provide a Web-based platform for youth and anyone interested in energy
efficiency to view and analyze the aggregated data to identify possible energy
losses. By sharing their scientific findings with stakeholders, youth will make
changes to the way energy is being used. The project will start with school,
public, and commercial buildings in selected areas where performing thermal scan
of the buildings and publishing their thermal images for educational and
research purposes are permitted by school leaders, town officials, and property
owners. In collaboration with high schools and out-of-school programs in
Massachusetts, this project will conduct pilot-tests with approximately 200
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To contribute to advancing learning, the study
will probe three research questions: 1) Under what circumstances can technology
bridge out-of-school and classroom science learning and improve learning on both
sides? 2) To what extent can unobtrusive assessment based on data mining support
research and evaluation of student learning in out-of-school settings? and 3) To
what extent can instructional intelligence built into the app used in the
program help students learn in out-of-school programs and improve the quality of
data they contribute to the citizen science project? Data sources for
investigating these questions include students' interaction data with the app
logged behind the scenes and the images they have taken, as well as results
based on traditional assessments from a small number of participants. Throughout
the project, staff will widely disseminate project products and findings through
the Internet, science fairs, conferences, publications, and partner networks. An
eight-member Advisory Board consisting of cleantech experts, science educators,
and educational researchers will oversee and evaluate this project.