* 2054597
* Untangling the Roles of Viscous, Elastic, and Plastic Deformation in Slab Bending
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Ikuko Wada, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/29/2024
* USD 194,399.00

Sinking of a tectonic plate beneath another plate into the mantle is called
subduction. It is a fundamental process that controls the evolution of Earth and
holds a key to understanding important processes, such as earthquakes,
volcanism, and mantle convection. However, how subduction initiates and how the
tectonic plate changes its shape during subduction initiation (SI) are still
unclear. The key driving forces are the negative buoyancy of the subducting
plate and external forces that push the tectonic plates laterally. The key
resisting forces include bending resistance of the subducting plate, frictional
resistance between the subducting and overriding plates, and viscous resistance
that is exerted by the surrounding mantle on the subducting plate. The details
of SI and how the subducting plate bends depend strongly on the balance between
these forces and also on the strength of the subducting slab, which has been
defined by some combination of viscosity, elasticity, and plasticity of Earth
materials. Further, these material prosperities are often assumed to be uniform
in numerical simulations of SI despite their dependence on pressure,
temperature, stress, and composition. Which of the three mechanical properties
(i.e., viscosity, elasticity, and plasticity) controls the bending of the
subducting plate depends on their relative values. Using numerical models, this
study aims to better understand how the bending behavior of the subducting plate
changes with the three mechanical properties. The project provides support for
an early-career female faculty member and a postdoctoral
scholar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A suite of generic 2-D and 3-D dynamic subduction
models with a visco-plastic and a visco-elasto-plastic rheology will be
developed to quantify the effect of elasticity on down-dip and lateral bending
of the subducting slab. These models will incorporate a composite viscous
rheology that accounts for both dislocation creep and diffusion creep, and
models with the visco-elasto-plastic rheology incorporates pressure- and
temperature-dependent shear modulus, using the thermodynamic code Perple_X. The
models are used to address two key questions: (1) Can the negative buoyancy of
the oceanic lithosphere be sufficient to overcome the elastic bending resistance
and to initiate subduction, and (2) Is elasticity a rheological component that
resists or facilitates down-dip and lateral bending/unbending? Systematic tests
on the effect of subduction parameters on the slab evolution will also be
performed to address these questions. Further, 2-D and 3-D models will be
developed for selected real subduction systems, including Marianas, Tonga, and
Puysegur, and the results will be compared with the tectonic history and the
current slab geometry. The numerical models to be developed will provide not
only the geometrical evolution of the slab but also the temperature and mantle
flow fields of subduction systems over a range of parameters, and the
information will be useful for the interpretations of geophysical and
geochemical observations. The results will be summarized in scientific videos to
be distributed through the PIâ€™s research website and YouTube as well as in
conference presentations and peer-reviewed journal
articles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.