* 2054321
* DMS/NIGMS 2: Collaborative Research: Modeling R-Loop Formation and Topology Using Braids and Graphs Coupled with Single-Molecule Footprinting
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Natasa Jonoska, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2024
* USD 399,998.00

Interactions of the two sister molecules of life, RNA and DNA, have long been a
focus of scientific inquiry. A new molecular complex, known as an R-loop,
consisting of a DNA duplex and an RNA strand was recently discovered. It has
been found that R-loops are prevalent, and shown to be functionally important
structures that are observed across the kingdom of life, from bacteria to
mammals. R-loops are now understood to act as a new type of signal with
important roles in a growing number of biological processes. Defects in R-loop
formation have been implicated in disease in a wide variety of species including
humans. However, little is currently understood about the formation and the
structure of R-loops. This project will address the forces that control R-loop
initiation, the way in which R-loops start and terminate, the geometry of the
RNA-DNA complex, and the factors that dictate R-loop stability. This work will
advance the fields of mathematics and biology while also reinforcing their
mutual interconnections through blending theoretical approaches with
experimental work. The research provides new avenues for postdoctoral, graduate
and undergraduate training in experimental and mathematical biology and includes
a mentoring component specifically by and for women mathematicians to support
their scientific engagement and increase their visibility. The research findings
will be disseminated broadly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;R-loops are three-stranded
structures composed of an RNA:DNA duplex and a single-strand of DNA. Initially
found in bacteria, R-loops can account for 3-5% of the genome of yeasts, plants
and mammals. This project uses novel mathematical approaches to examine the
effects of DNA sequence and DNA topology on R-loop formation and to probe the
three-dimensional geometry of R-loops. The goal of this project is to elucidate
the sequence and the topological and spatial constraints that guide the
initiation, elongation, termination, and ultimate dissociation of R-loops,
through implementing the following three specific aims: (1) Experimentally
dissect the influence of DNA sequence on R-loop formation and use these findings
to develop braid grammars that model and predict the appearance of R-loops; (2)
Uncover the role of DNA topology in regulating the formation of R-loops, and
describe their 3D structure; and (3) Develop mathematical techniques based on
braid grammars and directed graphs that probe the dynamics of R-loop formation.
In addition to addressing key biological questions, the work will generate new
mathematical knowledge and contribute to the development of an emergent area of
interdisciplinary study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.