* 2054715
* Tackling Motion-Command-Induced Nonlinear Vibration in Manufacturing Machines Using Software Compensation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Chinedum Okwudire, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2024
* USD 415,300.00

Quality, productivity and cost are three key pillars of manufacturing. To stay
competitive in an increasingly global economy, U.S. manufacturers must find ways
to improve the quality and productivity of their manufacturing processes while
keeping costs low. Manufacturing machines tend to vibrate as they move, due to
weaknesses in their mechanical structures. The resultant motion-induced
vibration adversely affects the accuracy and speed of the machines, thus
degrading the quality and productivity of the associated manufacturing
processes. Software solutions that involve generating motion commands to avoid
unwanted vibration of the machines are very attractive in practice because they
are low cost. However, existing software solutions cannot adequately handle
nonlinear vibrations which are prevalent in manufacturing machines like 5-axis
machine tools, delta 3D printers, and robots. This award supports a scientific
investigation into a software-based vibration mitigation approach that shows
great promise to overcome the technical shortcomings of existing software
solutions. Knowledge created through this investigation will enable industry to
boost the speed and accuracy of manufacturing machines at low cost, thus
increasing their competitiveness in the global marketplace.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to mathematically and
experimentally characterize the effectiveness of optimal filtered basis
functions, formulated using physics-based and data-driven linear models of
nonlinearity, as a means to mitigate motion-command-induced nonlinear vibration
in manufacturing machines. Three classes of nonlinearities found in
manufacturing machines will be addressed. Structured nonlinearities, where
nonlinear dynamics are described by first-principle equations will be tackled by
designing optimal basis functions that utilize the known structure of the
nonlinearities for vibration compensation. Unstructured nonlinearities, where
nonlinear dynamics are described as uncertainties will be addressed by designing
basis functions that are optimized for robust vibration compensation. Lastly,
unknown or unmodeled nonlinearities will be addressed using a data-driven
approach where vibration measured online from manufacturing machines will be
used to build machine learning models to compensate vibration. The theoretical
understanding and methods developed through this research will be validated
experimentally on various vibration-prone manufacturing machines with
nonlinearities, including a precision motion stage, a delta 3D printer, and a
collaborative robot. Broader impacts of this project will be realized by: (i)
cooperating with U.S.-based companies to translate the new methods to industry;
(ii) educating industry and the broader public about software based vibration
mitigation methods through tutorials and open-access publications; and (iii)
K-12 outreach to motivate underrepresented minority students to enter STEM
fields by demonstrating the benefits of software-based vibration mitigation
techniques on desktop 3D printers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.