* 2054721
* Collaborative Research: Effects of top scavenger declines – from microbes to ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* David Crowder, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 399,616.00

Unless first consumed by a predator, all animals enter the carrion pool when
they die. Scavengers and microorganisms play a critical role in returning
carcass-derived nutrients to the soil where they get recycled and used for plant
uptake and growth. The impact of carrion inputs on nutrient cycling, food web
dynamics, and ecosystem carbon balance remains a mystery. With global declines
of many species including scavengers, it is essential to quantify how the
quantity and quality of carrion-derived nutrients shapes plant community
structure and ecosystem dynamics. Tasmanian devils are an ideal and charismatic
species with which to study the effects of scavenging on ecosystem processes.
They are one of a few carnivores worldwide that consume bones. By accelerating
the cycling of key plant growth-limiting nutrients that would otherwise remain
locked in bone material for years, Tasmanian devils provide a critical ecosystem
function. In recent years, the emergence of a highly transmissible cancer —
devil facial tumor disease, or DFTD — has dramatically reduced devil population
sizes in eastern Tasmania and has spread throughout the island, threatening this
iconic species with extinction. Researchers will use this tragic situation to
test whether devil-scavenging impacts can be detected on an ecosystem scale and
how devil population declines result in a shift in the role of other scavenger
species. This project will provide training opportunities for US graduate
students and post-doctoral scholars in an international setting. Through
education and outreach activities, researchers will highlight the linkages that
exist between scavengers, biodiversity, and ecosystem resiliency.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Few studies have directly investigated the effects of non-
plant inputs on energy transfer within food web networks. As a result, there is
a considerable knowledge gap in understanding how carrion and scavenger guilds
govern biogeochemical cycling at an ecosystem scale. In Tasmania, the east to
west spread of DFTD, a lethal, transmissible cancer, threatens devils with
extinction and has created a population density gradient across the island (from
0% to 100% of carrying capacity). The resulting 'natural experiment' offers a
rare opportunity to study how apex scavenger declines alter energy transfer
within food webs and nutrient flows through carrion, soils, and plants. High-
frequency monitoring and sampling stations will be established at five study
sites that span the DFTD gradient and capture four experimental treatments: (1)
full scavenger access (staked prey carcass); (2) devil exclusion (fenced prey
carcass allowing access to all scavengers but devils); (3) reconstructed devil
latrines to capture nutrient pulses from localized scat; (4) and soil-only
controls to monitor background C and nutrient availability. Devil and
mesopredator densities at carcasses will be estimated using camera arrays;
invertebrate densities will be assessed using appropriate insect traps. Stable
isotope tracing will be used to track how carcass-derived nutrients influence
microbial community diversity and soil carbon formation. Plant productivity
(NPP), leaf quality, seedling recruitment, and fine root biomass will be
estimated at each site and across the continental DFTD gradient. Using temporal
and spatial variation in the extent and timing of devil population declines, a
series of scaled experiments will be used to: (1) determine how variation in
scavenger densities affects local soil biogeochemistry; (2) investigate how
carrion and scavenging networks induce shifts in the metabolic efficiency of
microbial communities and decomposition rates of new plant litter inputs; (3)
test the scale at which scavenging by devils is detectable; and (4) integrate
findings from field and laboratory experiments to predict how biodiversity loss
will affect ecosystem function over the next 50 years. The project will support
a team led by an early-career female scientist, involve international
collaboration and provide training at the graduate student and postdoctoral
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.