* 2054757
* Bounding global ice volumes over the last glacial cycle using reconstructions of Bering Strait flooding
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Tamara Pico, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 320,799.00

The stability of Earthâ€™s ice sheets in the past informs our understanding of
their resilience in the face of a warming climate. Knowing the magnitude and
timing of global ice sheet changes is important for understanding how past ice
sheet change related to climate change. However, we know little about how
dynamic ice sheets were prior to 26,000 years ago, when ice sheets were at their
largest. This project will use new geochemical tools to tell when the Bering
Strait was flooded or exposed during the last glacial cycle (the past 120,000
years). In combination with computer model simulations, this information will be
used to bound previously unknown global ice volume histories over this time.
Further, this project will support a PhD student, who will learn about how
science can produce social inequities through the UC Santa Cruz Science &amp;
Justice Research Center. PI Pico will develop innovative teaching tools for
making legible the roots of geoscience culture in scientific racism and
imperialism. These tools will be included in courses taught at UC Santa Cruz and
Princeton. Finally, all personnel will participate in the outreach to the Alaska
Native Science &amp; Engineering Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The history of
global ice sheet growth leading into the Last Glacial Maximum is poorly
constrained, as advancing ice sheets and subsequent sea-level rise during
deglaciation destroyed evidence of past ice margins and coastlines. To address
this uncertainty, this project will develop a continuous, non-traditional sea-
level reconstruction over the last glacial cycle (120,000 years) by constraining
the flooding history of the Bering Strait. Measuring nitrogen isotope ratios of
organic matter protected within the shell walls of Arctic planktic foraminifera
will elucidate the past connectivity of the North Pacific and Arctic Oceans,
thus constraining the local sea-level history at the Bering Strait. State-of-
the-art glacial isostatic adjustment sea-level simulations will be performed
using the range of uncertainty on global ice volumes to model local sea level at
the Bering Strait. Finally, this continuous Bering Strait flooding
reconstruction will be used to test the plausibility of different global ice
volume histories, and thus bound global mean sea-level highstands and lowstands
before the Last Glacial Maximum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.