* 2054686
* Partial Differential Equations With and Without Convexity Constraints
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Nam Le, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 178,120.00

This project studies fine quantitative properties of selected problems in
nonlinear partial differential equations (PDE) and the calculus of variations
with and without a structural condition called convexity. These problems have
connections and applications in several areas of mathematics such as analysis,
PDEs, the calculus of variations, and numerical methods. Moreover, they are
equally relevant to important applications in other areas of science and
engineering. For example, the PDE and calculus of variations problems with a
convexity constraint investigated in this project arise in different scientific
disciplines such as Newton’s problem of minimal resistance in physics, the
monopolist’s problem (where the monopolist needs to design the product line
together with a price schedule so as to maximize the total profit) in economics,
or wrinkling patterns of elastic shells in elasticity. Despite its ubiquity, the
calculus of variations with a convexity constraint is still poorly understood.
This project develops new mathematical tools, especially PDE techniques, to
better understand basic problems in this area. An important theme of this
project is to investigate fundamental questions in one field of PDE and the
calculus of variations by importing ideas and developing methodologies from
other fields, such as using complex geometric insights to tackle PDE questions
arising in economics and physics, or using convexity techniques to understand
fine properties of fully nonlinear PDEs without any convexity. This project
provides training opportunities for graduate students, and its results will be
disseminated to diverse audiences via publications of research papers and
lecture notes and via presentations at national and international
venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the solvability,
regularity estimates, and asymptotic analysis, of several classes of fully
nonlinear elliptic PDE and problems in the calculus of variations, with and
without convexity constraints and apply them to several interesting problems in
analysis and PDE and those arising in economics and elasticity. The project
consists of four main parts. The first one investigates to what extent one can
approximate the minimizers (and their Euler-Lagrange equations) of convex
functionals with a convexity constraint by solutions of singular Abreu equations
which arise in complex geometry. One of such functionals is the Rochet-Chone
model for the monopolist's problem in economics. The second part aims to
establish the global solvability of highly singular Abreu equations. These
fourth order equations can be rewritten as systems of a Monge-Ampere equation
and a linearized Monge-Ampere equation. The third part studies the convergence
of an inverse iterative scheme for the k-Hessian eigenvalue problem. The last
part investigates the sharp decay, with respect to the ellipticity ratio, for
the small integrability exponent in the second derivative estimates for fully
nonlinear elliptic equations without convexity, and linearized Monge-Ampere
equations. The principal investigator (PI) aims to systematically develop the
Monge-Ampere type equation techniques to study fine properties of fully
nonlinear PDE without any convexity. Moreover, recent PDE methods introduced by
the PI and his collaborators (such as nonlinear integration by parts for
k-Hessian equations and partial Legendre transforms for fourth order equations
of Monge-Ampere type) will be further explored to successfully attack the
problems to be investigated as part of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.