* 2054894
* CBET-EPSRC: Surfactant impact on drag reduction of superhydrophobic surfaces in turbulent flows
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Frederic Gibou, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Superhydrophobic surfaces combine water repellency and microscale texture to
yield several surprising and useful properties. When immersed in water,
superhydrophobic surfaces can entrap an air layer inside microscopic cavities,
potentially reducing friction drag between the liquid and the surface. Drag-
reducing superhydrophobic surfaces could greatly reduce energy use, emissions,
and cost for maritime transport, as well as in other applications. However,
superhydrophobic surfaces have shown inconsistent performance when tested in the
laboratory or in the field in both laminar and turbulent flow conditions. Recent
work has revealed that trace amounts of surfactants can significantly impair the
drag-reduction performance in laminar flows. This observation has vast practical
implications, since surfactants are naturally present in the environment and in
engineering systems, often at large concentrations. This project will
investigate whether surfactant can also affect the performance of
superhydrophobic surfaces in turbulent flows, explaining inconsistencies found
in experimental tests, as well as the mismatch with existing models, which
currently all ignore surfactant. The project will also develop public awareness
about drag-reduction technology and its benefits through outreach programs with
local communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to uncover
the impact of surfactant in realistic conditions, in order to identify practical
mitigation strategies and unlock the drag-reduction potential of
superhydrophobic surfaces for real-world applications. This will be pursued
through the first-ever fundamental modelling investigation of superhydrophobic
drag reduction in turbulent flow with surfactant, through a collaboration
between the University of California, Santa Barbara (US) and the University of
Manchester (UK). A fully-resolved numerical simulation approach will be
implemented, capable of representing surfactant-inclusive turbulent flow over
superhydrophobic surfaces. The simulation approach will use advanced mesh
refinement techniques, and will run on parallel supercomputers in order to reach
flow regimes relevant to realistic conditions for maritime applications. In
addition, simpler theoretical models will be developed to identify and predict
key phenomena. The theoretical models will also enable searching for likely
regimes where drag reduction can be maximized, whereas the numerical simulations
will provide a wealth of detailed information about the flow dynamics and the
effect of surfactants, and will be used to validate the theoretical models. The
simulation results will also be made available online to other researchers
seeking to advance the performance of superhydrophobic surfaces in the presence
of surfactants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.