* 2054911
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Enabling Practically Secure Cellular Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* William Enck, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 12/31/2024
* USD 601,966.00

The global cellular telecommunications system is critical infrastructure for
billions of users, providing a ubiquitous platform for Internet connectivity
that supports a wide range of use cases for both consumers and industry. We are
now on the cusp of widespread adoption of 5G technology. While 5G is widely
marketed for its gigabit per second rates and ultra-low latency, it also
fundamentally changes the internal network architecture, providing dynamic
provisioning of software-defined services that offer enhanced control to network
tenants including virtual operators and enterprises. However, these major
architectural changes expose 5G systems to new adversaries and threats, and the
ability to reason about the many technical components that comprise these
systems is critical. The goal of this work is to aid mobile network operators in
deploying cellular systems that are assured to be secure, through the
development of tools and techniques that extract, model, and analyze the
security-sensitive logic of the source and binary code existing within the
cellular network infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
address the broad research challenge of translating security-critical
requirements of cellular network infrastructure into program analysis tools to
assess those requirements for a given implementation. Rather than strictly
identifying traditional software flaws (e.g., memory safety), this project
focuses on the discovery of logic vulnerabilities within three key aspects:
cryptographic protocols, access control, and core functionality. Each aspect
presents unique challenges and opportunities to advance the state-of-the-art.
While prior work has studied the cellular cryptographic protocols themselves,
vulnerabilities can emerge when developers fail to correctly implement
assumptions made by formal proofs (e.g., secure randomness and verification of
cryptographic values). Simultaneously, the disaggregation of traditional
cellular system components into microservices running in cloud environments
increases the attack surface for core functionality, particularly as the number
and complexity of network tenants grows. As such, specification and enforcement
of access control between 5G core network functions is critical to the security
of the deployment. Finally, every computing system represents an ecosystem of
software components and dependencies. Backdoors and logic bombs can have
significant consequences when they exist within such critical infrastructure.
This project will assess these considerations within a combination of open
source and proprietary 5G implementations and generalize the knowledge for
assessment of implementations deployed by cellular
providers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.