* 2054180
* Achieving Challenging Synthesis Based on Triazole-Gold Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Xiaodong Shi, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 329,462.00

With support from the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Xiaodong Shi of the University of South Florida will develop new ways
to make azaborines and to link alkynes in large ring structures using gold
catalysts with a unique structural characteristic called a triazole. Azaborines
are benzene-like molecules where two adjacent carbon atoms have been replaced a
nitrogen and a boron atom. This structural change gives these molecules
important biological properties but makes them challenging to prepare. Large
ring alkynes are also difficult to construct but have valuable bioconjugate and
biomimetic applications. The gold catalysts being developed by Dr. Shi and his
team are being studied to facilitate new ways to easily access a larger variety
of these important but challenging compounds. The triazole portion of the gold
catalyst will be used to tune this reactivity. These studies will provide
undergraduate and graduate students important training in state-of-art chemical
synthesis and supporting the preparation of next generation scientist in STEM
research. In addition, Dr. Shi is organizing an annual student-oriented research
meeting at the University of South Florida for students in the Tampa area to
bolster STEM education and further enhance the educational mission of the state
of Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gold catalysts have well-established synthetic
utility in a variety of cycloisomerization processes, but new ligand scaffolds
have the potential to broaden these applications in new directions. Xiaodong Shi
and his research group at U. South Florida have determined that triazole ligands
impart key properties on gold catalysts that help facilitate novel reactions. In
the current project, triazole gold catalysts are being optimized for the
hydroboration of alkynyl amino boranes for the synthesis of azaborines and will
be investigated for the synthesis of macrocyclic alkynes. Mechanistic studies
will also be pursued to understand the role of the triazole motif in supporting
these transformations. Complementary synthetic studies are also ongoing to
convert the initial catalytic products to value-added synthetic targets. These
activities are supporting the training of a diverse group of graduate and
undergraduate students and providing needed synthetic alternatives to support
practical, large scale synthesis of these interesting target compounds for their
further exploration in medicinal chemistry research and in materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.