* 2054572
* Deterministic and tunable quantum dots based on bilayer semiconductor heterostructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Brian LeRoy, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 03/31/2024
* USD 390,000.00

Quantum dots are nanoscale structures capable of controllably trapping single
electrons. These nanoscale electronic devices exhibit quantum mechanical
behaviors which can potentially be used to realize quantum computing devices
that offer significant computational advantages over current computing
architectures. Furthermore, these trapped electrons can act as quantum light
sources, which would help enable quantum devices that are secure against cyber-
attacks. Over the past 20 years, optically driven quantum dots have been pursued
in a variety of semiconductor systems and have been shown to exhibit many of the
necessary properties that are required for quantum computing architectures.
However, previous quantum dot architectures have not been able to reliably scale
up to a large number of quantum dots with sufficient control to be used for
quantum devices. In this project, a new type of quantum dot will be engineered
based on two-dimensional materials which are only a few atomic layers thick. The
proposed quantum dot consists of two semiconductor monolayers stacked together
to realize electrons whose energies can be tuned electrically. Using
nanofabrication techniques, small holes will be patterned onto the device, which
will form the quantum dot. The quantum properties of the quantum dot will be
measured using state-of-the-art optical techniques. This new quantum dot
architecture has the potential to overcome previous limitations because it
offers control over the quantum dot position and energy. This research aligns
with the NSF Big Idea of the Quantum Leap: Leading the Next Quantum Revolution
by developing material systems that have the potential to enable these new
quantum information technologies. Furthermore, the project strengthens the STEM
workforce both directly and indirectly by training and mentoring graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students through the proposed research, and by
encouraging interest in STEM at the high school level in southern Arizona.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching project objective is to achieve
deterministic, scalable, and tunable quantum information devices based on
optically driven spin-valley electrons in novel two-dimensional (2D) material
heterostructures. Specifically, a nano-patterned gate engineering architecture
will be explored to realize localized quantum states of single electrons and
single excitons in MoSe2-WSe2 heterostructures. This architecture will enable
electrostatic quantum dots (eQDs) that are predicted to exhibit the desired high
levels of tunability, spectral stability, and long coherence times necessary for
spin-valley qubits with applications in quantum processing and quantum
information storage. In solid state systems, QDs can support single photon
emitter behavior and, once charged, establish a long-lived, ground-state spin
qubit that can be coherently controlled optically and potentially realize long
range interactions via entangled photons. Although other solid-state spin
systems (III-V QDs, vacancy centers) have demonstrated the single qubit
requirements, scaling these solid-state qubits to large numbers has been limited
by inhomogeneity in QDs and photonic integration challenges for vacancy centers.
These challenges motivate the development of a new solid-state spin qubit system
that is both deterministic and tunableâ€”allowing for control of both the spatial
placement and qubit energy. In this project, novel eQD structures will be
engineered and fabricated. The eQD quantum states and coherence properties will
be measured using a combination of far-field spectroscopy and near field
scanning optical microscopy. Coherent control of single spin-valley qubits will
be demonstrated using coherent nonlinear spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.