* 2054517
* Biomechanical Models and Objective Metrics for Spasticity Rehabilitation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Tse Nga Ng, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Spasticity is a chronic neuromuscular disorder due to brain or nerve damages
that affects roughly 12 million people worldwide. It is manifested as an
abnormal muscle stiffness that causes pain and interferes with movement,
impacting balance and daily functions. Evaluating the severity of spasticity is
a crucial step in selecting appropriate treatments for patients to prevent
progressive deformities. However, current clinical evaluations rely on ratings
based on perception. The subjective ratings are known to be inconsistent and not
sensitive and as such fail to accurately monitor the effects of medications or
therapies. To facilitate better diagnosis, this project aims to deliver
biomechanical metrics for evaluating spasticity with high accuracy through a
portable sensor glove system. The sensitive, consistent measurements will allow
clinicians to inspect whether a therapy effectively relieves spasticity
symptoms. The portable system will also facilitate frequent remote assessments
to enable timely interventions, reduce costs, and improve patient care.
Throughout this duration of this project, the investigators and students will
host annual AccessAbility Fair at Rady Children’s Hospital to provide
demonstrations and to disseminate resources for local San Diego children with
physical disabilities and conduct STEM outreach activities in local
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to capture the
dynamic characteristics of spastic muscles through a multi-model sensor glove,
in order to gain new insights into the physical mechanisms of spasticity. The
clinicians would wear the sensor glove while carrying out standard evaluation
maneuvers to measure a patient’s muscle resistance and movement trajectories.
This wearable tool is compact and user friendly, unlike prior biomechanical
devices that are complex to operate and limited by unwieldy, constraining
sensors that pose safety and clinical adoption barriers. This project will carry
out key feasibility studies to monitor patient cohorts undergoing routine
treatments. The first objective is to characterize spastic muscles through
biomechanical models, and thereby quantitatively connect the effects of
treatments to changes in specific biomechanical properties. The research will
lead to knowledge concerning which biomechanical properties are the most
relevant for establishing an objective scale to track the management of
spasticity over time. The second objective is to improve measurement
standardization through supervised machine learning in combination with a
robotic standard, to mitigate artifacts and maximize the inter- and intra-rater
consistency in monitoring spasticity. The third objective is to facilitate
point-of-care measurements by caregivers, to enable at-home assessment that
closely tracks the patients’ response to therapies outside of clinical visits.
The system user interface and analysis algorithms will be developed in close
collaboration with the rehabilitation clinician team and caregivers, to
dismantle the barriers to practical clinical use and facilitate telemedicine in
the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.