* 2054505
* RUI: Scaling Limits of Infinite Dimensional Queueing Models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Amber Puha, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 232,443.00

This project entails investigating some mathematical questions that emerge in
analyzing the performance of certain queueing models. Queueing models are
probabilistic models that capture the inherent randomness in a variety of modern
networks, such as those that arise in customer service systems, computing and
telecommunications, transportation, and hi-tech manufacturing. The network
structure is typically deterministic, and the scheduling policy is usually
specified. Randomness results from exogenous arrival times, service times, and
internal routing. Feedback and non-head-of-the-line scheduling policies are
common in such networks. These local dynamics interact to produce aggregate
behavior that is complex and often evades closed form analysis. Hence, tractable
approximations are needed. In this project the PI will specify and validate
various model approximations, analyzing their performance and/or optimal
control, and interpreting those results for the original system. The project
provides research training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project concerns the study of three
queueing models operating under general distributional assumptions with distinct
features presenting unique mathematical challenges as follows: (1) Develop a
diffusion approximation for networks of processor sharing queues in the presence
of feedback; (2) Obtain asymptotically optimal scheduling policies for multi-
class many server queues with abandonment through the study of fluid and
diffusion control problems; and (3) Prove limit theorems to justify fluid
invariant states as approximations of stationary distributions for randomize
load balancing algorithms. These models have been analyzed in various forms that
include Markovian distributional assumptions, i.e., exponentially distributed
inter-arrival, service, and/or abandonment times. However, such assumptions are
not particularly realistic for modeling the behavior of modern computers,
communications, and customer service systems. Furthermore, the performance can
be dramatically different for such systems in the presence of non-Markovian
distributional assumptions. Therefore, system performance needs to be understood
more fully. From a mathematical point of view, general distributional
assumptions result in the need to track significantly more information in order
to represent the system state. For example, residual service times, age-in-
service, and/or age-in-system must be tracked for each job in the system. This
leads to an infinite dimensional system where measure-valued state descriptors
provide an effective representation. Despite this common descriptor, the
mathematical challenges are different for each model due to distinct system
dynamics. For processor sharing networks, a new methodology for analyzing the
long-time behavior of fluid model solutions will be developed. It is anticipated
that this methodology will translate to other systems where time sharing is
present. For the control of multi-class queues, non-linearity that arises in the
fluid control problem for non-exponentially distributed abandonment times
presents new challenges for demonstrating asymptotic optimality. Such non-
linearities are expected to introduce further difficulties to be overcome in the
analysis of a second order, diffusion control problem. For randomized load
balancing algorithms, a methodology for proving the convergence of fluid model
solutions to invariant states as time approaches infinity will be developed. A
challenge here is to devise strategies equipped to handle the countable system
of couple measure-valued equations satisfied by fluid model solutions. Such
strategies are expected to be relevant for the analysis of other models with
load balancing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.