* 2054521
* Global Sustainability Scholars for Sustainable Oceans: building a network of transdisciplinary scientists and practitioners that represent humanity’s future.
* GEO,RISE
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Kirsten Rowell, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 10/31/2024
* USD 1,312,490.00

Humanity faces profound challenges in the 21st century. From a rapidly rising
population, a warming climate, increased demand for food, fiber, and water, and
a rapid loss of biodiversity and ecosystem services, we face environmental
problems that are more pervasive and serious than at any time in our history.
The global ocean plays a critical role in the Earth system affecting
atmospheric, geochemical, ecological, and social systems in a multitude of
interconnected ways. To predict changes, understand their impacts on natural and
social systems, and develop approaches that allow us to adapt to and mitigate
the impacts, requires more integrative approaches to the study of ocean systems,
and this, in turn, will require large-scale cooperation across disciplinary,
cultural, and national boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accordingly, the next
generation of sustainability leaders will require a broad set of skills to
engage in inter- and trans-disciplinary teams to solve the complex environmental
issues that face humanity. This project seeks to develop the next generation of
international trans-disciplinary sustainability science leaders through a
collaborative fellowship program that connects undergraduates, graduate students
and post-doctoral researchers with today's trans-disciplinary sustainability
science leaders. Using a cohort model, the participants work with international,
transdisciplinary research teams on ocean sustainability projects funded by the
Belmont Forum, over the course of several field seasons. Through these research
opportunities and training experiences, the program seeks to provide the
participants with trans-cultural, trans-disciplinary, and trans-national
cooperative opportunities which will be essential in generating and applying
knowledge to actions that speed the transition toward a more globally
sustainable future. The program seeks to help the participants be nimble and
fluent across research disciplines, and to develop collaborative leadership,
communication, and negotiation skills. The project will provide opportunities
for students and researchers from underrepresented groups to engage in
transdisciplinary, team-oriented, international science with direct relevance to
some of the most challenging issues in ocean sustainability. Engaging over
several consecutive field seasons, will further build community that is likely
to last well beyond the lifetime of the project and help generate the diverse
workforce of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.