* 2054346
* DMS/NIGMS 2: Unraveling the Role of the Human Microbiome to Advance Precision Medicine
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Guanhua Chen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2025
* USD 599,981.00

Precision medicine seeks to optimize health care quality by tailoring treatments
to a person’s unique characteristics. The current practice of precision medicine
mainly utilizes individuals’ genomics information. The new sequencing technology
allows us to quantify the human microbiome – the full array of microorganisms in
the human body. The rich information in the microbiome holds great potential to
advance precision medicine. However, the development of robust and efficient
statistical methods that adapt to the unique features of the microbiome data has
seriously fallen behind. For instance, the abundance of microbes is measured in
fractions and their actual abundance cannot be recovered in sequencing
experiments. Applying standard methods to analyze one microbe at a time will
lead to many false discoveries and irreproducible results. In this project, the
PIs will develop methods to jointly analyze many microbes for precision
medicine. Specifically, the PIs will develop novel statistical methods and
computer software to characterize disease pathology and subtypes using
microbiome data, nominate microbial biomarkers for personalized diet or drug
intake, and identify microbes in the causal pathways of disease progression. The
PIs also plan to provide training to students at all levels, recruit research
assistants from under-represented groups, and develop new interdisciplinary
courses. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop new statistical
methods that are suitable to analyze compositional, high-dimensional, and
overdispersed microbiome data for precision medicine applications. In
particular, a novel model will be developed to cluster subject-wise microbiome
time-series conditional on covariates using the mixture of generalized Dirichlet
multinomial distribution. This mixture model enables researchers to flexibly
capture the complex temporal variability of microbiome compositions and produce
meaningful disease subtypes. The subject clustering and covariate selection are
performed simultaneously, which improves the performance of both analysis tasks.
The research will also develop a new framework for learning microbiome-informed
personalized treatment rule (PTR) based on the gradient boosting tree method.
Furthermore, a novel knockoff generating method will be used to select the
microbe relevant to the PTR with proper false discovery rate control. The
developed framework will enable robustly and powerfully selecting microbes that
are important for personalized treatment or personalized diet. Lastly, the
research will introduce a novel phylogenetic-tree-assisted local mediation model
to identify vital mediating taxa for disease progression. All methods developed
in this proposal will be implemented into efficient and user-friendly R packages
to advance precision medicine and microbiome research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.