* 2054865
* NSF Workshop: Machine Learning Hardware Breakthroughs Towards Green AI and Ubiquitous On-Device Intelligence. To be Held in November 2020.
* ENG,ECCS
* 12/01/2020,11/30/2021
* Yingyan Lin, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Donald Wunsch
* 11/30/2021
* USD 15,102.00

This workshop aims to bring together experts from academia, industry, and
government agencies to discuss and identify visionary research opportunities and
challenges for machine learning hardware breakthroughs towards green AI and
ubiquitous machine learning powered intelligence. In addition, the workshop will
provide opportunities to form collaborative research from different disciplines.
This three-day workshop will be held virtually in November 2020. It will feature
keynote speeches, panel presentations and discussions, as well as break-out and
summary sessions, with the objective of bringing different research communities
together, defining important research challenges and promoting machine learning
hardware breakthroughs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: There has been
a critical growing need for innovative machine learning hardware which has the
potential to bring orders-of-magnitude hardware efficiency. However, the
development of machine learning hardware is much slower than that of machine
learning algorithms. This is because developing customized machine learning
accelerators presents significant challenges due to (1) the need for cross-
disciplinary knowledge in machine learning, micro-architecture, and physical
chip design and (2) the large design space resulting from the numerous design
choices of dataflows, processing elements, and memory hierarchy. This workshop
aims to bring together researchers with a diversified set of expertise to
discuss and identify research opportunities and challenges for machine learning
hardware (both electrical and optical implementation) to assist in a road map
for achieving breakthroughs in artificial intelligence (AI) and ubiquitous
machine learning powered intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Broader Impacts:
This workshop will bring in researchers with complementary backgrounds to offer
different perspectives on potential research challenges and directions for
enabling machine learning hardware breakthroughs. Novel ideas could be generated
to solve the future challenges for electrical and optical implementation of
machine learning hardware. Innovation and commercialization opportunities may be
identified following the research ideas. Researchers will have an unparalleled
opportunity to build collaborative scholarly and institutional partnerships that
transcend boundaries imposed by their respective technical areas. Finally,
participation of researchers from underrepresented groups as well as early-
career researchers will be encouraged. Results from the workshop will be
disseminated through workshop reports.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.