* 2054892
* Quantifying biological, diagenetic and global redox effects on uranium “stable” isotopes in deep-sea corals across glacial-interglacial cycles
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Francois Tissot, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 482,262.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most life in the ocean requires an
adequate supply of dissolved oxygen. The oxygen concentration of seawater is
impacted by temperature, ocean circulation, and biological activity. All of
these factors may change in response to rising atmospheric carbon dioxide
levels. Geologic records of ocean oxygen concentration can show how changing
climate has influenced marine oxygen concentrations in the past. That knowledge
will improve predictions of ocean oxygen levels in the future. Natural glacial
cycles are linked to changes in atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations. This
study will reconstruct marine oxygen levels across the last glacial cycle. The
study will estimate dissolved oxygen using a new method - records of natural
uranium isotopes preserved in deep-sea corals. These corals record the
composition of seawater at the time of their growth. The study will analyze
fossil corals spanning the last more than 200,000 years. These records will
improve understanding of the links between climate and ocean oxygen levels. The
Broader Impacts of the project include support for a postdoctoral researcher and
a graduate student. The research team will work with the Caltech Center for
Teaching, Learning &amp; Outreach to arrange education and outreach activities.
Those activities include visits to K-12 schools, mentoring of high-school summer
research projects, and hosting of public lectures. The goal of these activities
is to increase public awareness of past and current climate change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand how ocean oxygen levels have fluctuated
during glacial-interglacial cycles, this work will apply a new U isotope
(238U/235U) paleo-redox proxy to a unique collection of deep-sea corals. Uranium
is a redox-sensitive element whose isotopic composition in the ocean (i) is
predominantly controlled by the global extent of seafloor anoxia, and (ii) can
be faithfully recorded in carbonates when they are devoid of diagenetic and
detrital influences. The deep-sea corals to be studied here grew in oxygenated
environments on seamounts in the open ocean, meaning that local and/or secondary
processes are unlikely to have impacted their U isotopic composition. By
characterizing, at high temporal resolution, the 238U/235U of these
exceptionally well-preserved deep-sea corals from multiple sites and depths over
the last approximately 200,000 years, a detailed seawater 238U/235U record will
be reconstructed. To resolve even subtle variations in 238U/235U, state-of-the-
art methods achieving precision and accuracy of ±0.01-0.03‰ on 238U/235U data
will be employed. To most robustly interpret the high-resolution and high-
precision record to be acquired, a novel inverse isotope mass balance model will
be used, which will allow quantification of the extent of seafloor anoxia across
glacial-interglacial cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.