* 2054859
* Developing Automation and Manufacturing Technicians in North Dakota
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Reynold Miller, Bismarck State College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,954.00

As technology advances and more industries begin to embrace automation, there is
a national need for more automation technicians. These technicians must have
broad skills in areas including programming, robotics, automation, and control.
North Dakota recognizes the need to diversify its industry base and provide
training so its citizens can fill jobs in advanced manufacturing. This training
is urgently needed to enable the state to stay ahead of the anticipated decrease
in energy-focused sectors. Unfortunately, automation and manufacturing
technician training in North Dakota is limited. This project aims to help fill
this need by expanding access to automation and manufacturing technology,
especially in the rural areas served by Bismarck State
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, Bismarck State College will
expand on existing foundational courses to create an Associate of Applied
Sciences degree in Automation and Manufacturing Technology. New automation
equipment will be purchased, and faculty will develop high quality hands-on
activities that enable students to gain the knowledge and skills needed to use
the equipment effectively. The degree program will include multiple entry
points, thus serving students at different career stages. Advisers serving as
Career Navigators will receive training to help them place graduates in
manufacturing plants, processing plants, and other places that use automation.
Materials for recruiting students into the degree program will be created by
adapting case studies from the National Institute for Women in Trades,
Technology and Sciences. The college’s existing Industry Advisory Committee will
be expanded to include relevant industries in developing the content of the
degree program's stackable certificates, thus building on Bismarck State
College’s strong history of creating technical programs to meet local industry
needs. The evaluation of this project can inform industry and education
stakeholders about how to to decrease the time and expense needed to deploy a
new degree by effectively modifying and expanding an existing foundation. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.