* 2054497
* Versatile Synthesis of Chlorophylls and Bacteriochlorophylls for Fundamental Studies in Photosynthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jonathan Lindsey, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Jonathan S. Lindsey at North Carolina State University is
developing methods to create chlorophylls and bacteriochlorophylls in the
laboratory from simple starting materials. The chemical synthesis of
(bacterio)chlorophylls has never been fully accomplished from simple starting
materials, although individual steps of a very long pathway to chlorophyll a
have been achieved. The goal of this research will allow chlorophylls and
analogues to be created in a straightforward manner. The analogues ultimately
sought (and their impact areas) will afford a much deeper understanding of
energy flow in photosynthesis (biophysics, plant sciences), the nature of
metabolic breakdown products (ecology, global carbon balance), and the
properties of such compounds (nutrition, medicine). The project lies at the
heart of organic chemistry but will also impact diverse areas of science
including understanding of photosynthesis. Thus, the project is well suited for
the education of scientists at all levels. Professor Lindsey's group is also
well positioned to provide the highest level of education and training for
students underrepresented in science. Outreach activities involving North
Carolina teachers will also be part of the funded project.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Chlorophylls and bacteriochlorophylls are the chief pigments in
photosynthetic organisms, including plants, cyanobacteria, and anoxygenic
photosynthetic bacteria. The lack of synthetic methods for preparing
(bacterio)chlorophylls and analogues constitutes an intellectual and technical
deficit in the photosynthetic sciences. The Lindsey lab proposes to fill this
chasm by developing robust methods for synthesis of such valuable macrocycles.
The particular challenges in synthesizing (bacterio)chlorophylls include (1) the
stereochemistry of substituents in the pyrroline ring(s), (2) the fifth
(isocyclic) ring, and (3) substituents arrayed about the perimeter of the
macrocycle. The intellectual merit of the work concerns the development of
routes for the synthesis of the key photosynthetic pigments and analogues; the
latter have broad impact (beyond the scope of the present grant) encompassing
studies of quantum coherence in photosynthesis and catabolism in ecology. A key
outcome is a methodology in heterocyclic chemistry for preparing pyrroles,
pyrrolines, and hydrodipyrrins relevant to the (bacterio)chlorophylls of
photosynthesis. The broader impacts entail professional development of high
school science teachers to improve teaching of photosynthesis (via a
chlorophyll-based experiment) in schools and to inspire high school students to
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), thereby broadening the
participation of underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.