* 2054299
* Acquisition of an inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer for high-throughput major and trace element analysis of aqueous solutions
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Benjamin Duval, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2024
* USD 120,731.00

This award will provide funds to purchase a new Agilent 5900 Inductively Coupled
Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometer (ICP-OES) for the New Mexico Bureau of
Geology and Mineral Resources and the New Mexico Institute of Mining and
Technology (NMT). The new instrument is replacing an outdated/obsolete ICP-OES.
In addition to funding for the new instrument, the award will also support a new
outreach program to educate students about their local water resources. The
Program is designed to broaden participation â€“ implementing a two-year high
school program that supports Next Generation Science Standards in Socorro County
public schools, which also supports Hispanic and Native American populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of a new ICP-OES supports the ongoing mission
of the Bureau of Geology and will support several new long-term research and
outreach projects. Recently hired faculty and researchers affiliated with the
Bureau of Geology and NMT are establishing programs to address the increasing
need for rare earth elements (REE) in electronics and the national power supply,
changing demands on water resources sustainability and water quality, and the
urgent need to develop carbon capture and sequestration. The instrumentation
will also support new research in ecology, environmental chemistry,
chemomechanics and plasmonics nanoresearch.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.