* 2054097
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award:  Broad Scale Integration Of Agricultural Production
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Andrew Scherer, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2023
* USD 13,555.00

The goal of this doctoral dissertation research project is to use archaeological
and paleoethnobotanical methods to investigate whether grand-scale geopolitical
changes influenced local foodways during prehistory. The co-PI will study the
effects of the growth of a regional market center and associated infrastructure
on community agricultural practice and food security. This is an important step
toward understanding political economies of subsistence goods. How did residents
of small communities navigate their proximity to a market center and the
construction of an adjacent monumental causeway? What can household food
security strategies inform about the level of integration and dependence people
experienced in food systems of the past? Paleoethnobotany, the study of ancient
plant remains from archaeological contexts, provides a high resolution of data
necessary to deduce household- and activity area-level patterns, allowing for
greater understanding of interactions between local and regional phenomena.
Ancient foodways are also relevant to discussions of heritage and identity in
the present, in addition to applied dimensions of archaeological research on
food security. In addition to training a doctoral student, the research will
provide opportunities to exchange ideas with local community members about
agriculture, foodways, and paleoethnobotany.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will be centered at a site along a monumental causeway that was built during the
Late Classic period. The research asks, did the local household economy become
embedded in the growing regional market economy, and if so, how did this affect
food security? The co-PI will conduct excavations and collect
paleoethnobotanical samples from agricultural and household spaces in order to
understand patterns of plant species diversity in food production and
consumption through time, in addition to resource access. Quantitative and
qualitative data reflected in these patterns will elucidate whether the causeway
became an avenue of access to new food resources, or, alternatively, undermined
local control over food choice. More broadly the project will investigate local
involvement in regional food systems, and how this was mediated by
infrastructural projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.