* 2054054
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Coastal Resource Stability and Human Subsistence Adaptation
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Emily Jones, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2023
* USD 20,086.00

The goal of this project is to examine how coastal human societies actively
maintain ecosystem stability within estuarine-lagoon environments. This is a
doctoral dissertation project which will permit the co Principal Investigator to
obtain data for their dissertation thesis. Sustainable coastal resource
exploitation is an important aspect of how human populations influence
ecosystems, and is relevant on a global scale today as coastal economies are
threatened by overexploitation, pollution, and other human-caused modifications.
The transition to agriculture occurred during a time with conditions analogous
to those today, with changing environment, increasing population sizes, and
substantial human migration. By understanding how past human societies created
conditions of resource stability, not just instability, in estuarine-lagoon
systems prior to the transition to agriculture, allows the identification of
similar mechanisms for recreating or maintaining stability in present-day
ecosystems. The magnitude of human niche construction, or the process of human
modification of the environment, has never been more extreme as it is at present
and by using the archaeological record, niche construction processes and their
long-term effects on resource availability can be
identified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate human management
of coastal resources, or niche construction, as a possible explanation for the
delayed adoption of intensive agriculture. The archaeological data comes from
ancient shell mound contexts.These shell mound sites are associated with, a
group of coastal foragers who lived in the region during the Archaic period.
Using zooarchaeological fish remains, the investigators will test for two forms
of coastal resource niche construction: increasing stability in the trophic
structure of the fish population and changing the season of fish harvest. They
will combine measures of fish diet and trophic level along with the season of
fish harvest to understand how the society maintained coastal ecosystem
stability prior to the transition to agriculture. These data will expand the
understanding of the variability in conditions leading up to the transition to
agriculture, especially in coastal societies, and directly link archaeological
data to that of present-day fish populations. This project will provide data of
interest not only to archaeologists, but to the local coastal inhabitants and
present-day ecologists, given its relevance to supporting present-day estuarine-
lagoon environments within the context of changing environmental conditions and
increased human fishing pressures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.