* 2054442
* Insights into the complexities of a seismogenic subduction zone: Analysis of a high-quality aftershock data set from the 2017 Tehuantepec (M8.2) offshore Mexico earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2021,09/30/2023
* Aaron Velasco, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 09/30/2023
* USD 352,839.00

Subduction zones – where one tectonic plate dives beneath another – are
responsible for the most impactful natural hazards on the planet. Those include
large earthquakes, tsunamis, and volcanic eruptions which at times are
explosive. These destructive events present major threats to human societies.
They often cause human casualties and economic losses. The Mexican subduction
zone has been responsible for large, devasting earthquakes throughout the past
century. It is marked by the Middle American Trench off the coast of Mexico.
There, the Cocos Plate dives beneath the continental North American Plate. It
was responsible for the September 7, 2017 Tehuantepec, Mexico earthquake of
magnitude 8.2 on the Richter scale. Here, the researchers investigate what
caused this destructive event. They use data collected by a rapid seismic-array
deployment following the earthquake. Analyzing the high-resolution data, they
gradually unveil subduction-zone processes and earthquake mechanisms. This
project leverages an international partnership between the University of Texas
at El Paso (UTEP) and several institutions in Mexico. It also provides training
for graduate and undergraduate students, notably from groups underrepresented in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here the team analyze a high-quality, unique
aftershock dataset from the 2017 Tehuantepec earthquake. The data were collected
after a seismic deployment supported by a RAPID award. The RAPID network
augmented permanent and temporary networks deployed by the Universidad Nacional
Autónoma de Mexico (UNAM). It included ten broadband instruments deployed in
early Oct. 2017 (that recorded data for 6 months) and 51 UTEP-owned Nodes (5-Hz,
3-component geophones, active for 22 days). During the broadband deployment, the
Servicio Sismológico Nacional (SSN) recorded over 30,000 aftershocks. This
highlights the robust nature of earthquake generation. The project goal is to
answer fundamental and specific questions that relate to subduction zone
processes. Fundamental questions, determined by community efforts, include: when
and where do large earthquakes happen? How do spatial variations in subduction
inputs affect seismicity and magmatism? How are surface processes linked to
subduction? Specific questions about the Mexican subduction zone are: will the
Tehuantepec earthquake load the upper plate and possibly trigger a large
earthquake on the plate interface? Are the Tehuantepec and subsequent
earthquakes linked? These earthquakes are the September 19, 2017 Morelos-Puebla,
Mexico (M7.1), the February 18, 2018 Pinotepa Nacional, Mexico (M7.2), and the
June 23, 2020 (M7.4) La Crucecita. To answer these questions, the researchers
merge the various datasets which builds a foundation for five complementary
approaches: 1) calculate a high-resolution aftershock dataset; 2) analyze
seismicity and stress, 3) search for earthquake triggering mechanisms, 4) define
the structure of the subduction zone, and 5) integrate results to address
remaining questions. This project strengthens a strong collaboration between
UTEP and, in Mexico, UNAM, the SSN, and the Universidad Autónoma de Ciudad
Juárez.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.