* 2054598
* Asymptotic Results for Stochastic Processes via New Projective Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Magda Peligrad, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 345,259.00

An important area of research in probability theory, with rich applications in
statistics, is the asymptotic theory of stochastic processes, also known as
large sample theory. This is a framework to assess properties of estimators and
statistical tests, necessary for a high level of confidence in predictions. The
large sample theory, first developed for independent variables, is considerably
more difficult when data is dependent, that is, when quantities have
dependencies that relate their values. The questions become even more
challenging when the random variations are changing with time. The goal of this
research is to address these questions by developing new methods to analyze
large samples selected from classes of dependent structures arising in many
applied fields, such as data from economics or engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to develop new techniques for
studying sequences and fields of dependent random variables, which will lead to
sharp inequalities and general limit theorems for both stationary and non-
stationary additive functionals of Markov chains and other dependent structures.
The PI plans to develop a new type of approximation with martingales for Markov
chains and fields based on the fruitful idea of conditioning with respect to
both past and future of the process. The advantage of this new, surprising
method is that no restrictions on the rate of convergence to zero of the
dependence coefficients is required for obtaining various limit theorems. The PI
also aims to develop operator perturbation theory for non-stationary Markov
chains and functions of independent random elements. This approach will lead to
new, deep local limit theorems for Markov chains, random fields, and the left
random walk on the group of invertible d-dimensional real
matrices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.