* 2054860
* Large Scale Geometry in Functional Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Bruno de Mendonca Braga, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 06/30/2024
* USD 98,834.00

Functional analysis is a branch of mathematics that investigates vector spaces
endowed with some notion of convergence and structure-preserving maps between
them. Since many objects in nature can be modeled by such spaces, functional
analysis is frequently used by scientists from different backgrounds. Topics in
functional analysis under the optics of large-scale geometry will be of
particular interest. In a nutshell, large-scale geometry is the study of the
global structure of certain mathematical objects (think of geometric behavior
measured by an observer far away from the object of interest). This subject is
motivated by computer science. Indeed, when working with large data sets, such
methods aid the understanding of global behavior. Moreover, this framework
provides the appropriate tools to study the relation between different data sets
through large-scale geometric embeddings and equivalences between those objects.
The PI will continue his engagement with undergraduate and graduate students,
and seminar/conference organization. This project will improve our understanding
of certain linear objects (for instance, operator algebras, Banach spaces,
operator spaces, etc.), given some nonlinear information about them. It is
divided into three main parts: (1) Roe algebras. The goal is to understand how
much of the large-scale geometry of a uniformly locally finite metric space (or
more generally, of a uniformly locally finite coarse space) is encoded in their
uniform Roe algebras and Roe algebras. The questions in this area are often
referred to as ‘rigidity problems’ for Roe algebras. Embeddings and isomorphisms
between those algebras and how their existence affects the geometry of the
metric spaces will be studied. (2) Quantization. The quantization of classic
mathematical objects allows one to interpret structures connected to Hilbert
spaces as "noncommutative" or "quantum" versions of their classical
counterparts. In collaborative work, the PI has recently proposed a quantization
of coarse spaces and uniform Roe algebras. Further developments in the
quantization of large-scale geometric properties and their relation with uniform
Roe algebras will be investigated. (3) Operator spaces. Although the nonlinear
geometry of Banach spaces has been receiving attention, especially in the last
two decades, its natural noncommutative counterpart (that is, the nonlinear
theory of operator spaces) has been waiting to be developed. The plan is to
understand how much of the commutative theory holds for operator spaces and
apply those results to the strictly noncommutative scenario.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.