* 2054002
* RUI: Operator Theory and Its Connections
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Stephan Garcia, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2025
* USD 239,937.00

This proposal revolves around two novel threads, both of which have already
borne copious fruit for the PI, his students, and his collaborators in the last
few years. The first concerns the dynamic interaction between operator theory
(originally developed to provide a rigorous foundation for quantum mechanics),
combinatorics (a field that often treats discrete enumeration problems), and
probability theory (the study of chance and randomness). The second thread
concerns the interplay between discrete geometry (the study of certain highly
structured geometric objects) and operator theory. Many of the sub-projects are
suitable for undergraduate involvement. The PI will recruit a diverse array of
research students to tackle these problems. As a decorated instructor who has
earned numerous teaching awards, the PI is able to inspire a broad range of
students to pursue degrees in the mathematical sciences. This project will
produce new mathematics and new mathematicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent
work, the PI and his collaborators used analytic tools familiar in operator
theory, harmonic analysis, and random matrix theory to answer virtually all
asymptotic questions about factorization lengths in numerical semigroups (staple
objects in combinatorics). New probabilistic realizations of certain symmetric
multivariate polynomials proved crucial in this work, and also provided proofs
of classical positivity results while revealing broad generalizations. In turn,
these results promise new applications in operator theory and operator algebras.
For example, their combinatorial results suggest a statistical treatment of
certain families of AF algebras. The PI also seeks physical and spectral
interpretations of the peculiar probability measures that arise when one
considers limits of certain combinatorial processes. These measures are of
independent interest, for results from computer-aided design (spline theory)
have already illuminated some of their properties. The connection between
discrete geometry (lattices) and operator theory (Toeplitz determinants and
frames) has also proven fruitful. For example, results of the PI and his
collaborators on the asymptotics of Toeplitz matrices arose from problems
inspired by lattice theory. In the other direction, frame-theoretic
constructions and operator-related methods have been used to prove new results
about lattices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.