* 2054539
* Collaborative Research:  Magmatic and Mechanical Extension of the Challenger Deep Forearc Segment: Insights into Subduction Initiation
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Veronique Le Roux, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 119,974.00

The sinking of oceanic lithosphere in subduction zones drives the fundamental
Earth process of plate tectonics. To understand plate tectonics, it is important
to understand how new subduction zones form. This project will study a new
example of subduction initiation in the Western Pacific near the Challenger Deep
and Guam USA using a research vessel and a tethered remotely-operated vehicle
(ROV) capable of working down to 3 miles deep. Investigators will study 9 sites
during a 23-day expedition. Collected samples will be subjected to several
laboratory tests. The team of young and senior geoscientists will provide
important training of new marine geoscientists and an unusually strong internet
connectivity will allow a handicapped geoscientist to participate in
expeditionary science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How new subduction zones
form is a key topic of geoscientific research that requires identifying and
studying active examples. Investigators in this study will conduct a novel
interdisciplinary marine geologic study of a newly recognized active example of
subduction initiation in the Western Pacific. They will study the Challenger
Deep Forearc Segment (CDFS) located in the inner trench wall of the Mariana
Trench SW of Guam. ROV Jason/Medea will be used to study 9 sites distributed
along 220 km of the CDFS above 6500m water depth. They will sample and examine a
full cross-section of oceanic crust and upper mantle rocks during a 23-day
marine expedition. The CDFS formed by extension associated with opening of the
Mariana Trough backarc basin over the past 5 Ma or so, suggesting an extension
rate of ~40mm/y. Such strong extension in a forearc is very unusual and provides
an opportunity to investigate a wide range of important tectonic and magmatic
processes that will advance understanding of the role of water in lithospheric
extension and how new subduction zones form, at the same time explore a new
region for Moho exposures and forearc seeps and vent communities. The
investigators hypothesize that, because subduction is more advanced in the
eastern CDFS than in the west, there will be measurable along-strike changes in
water contents, trace element compositions, rock fabrics, thermal histories, and
oxygen fugacity in rocks from the mantle, lower crust, and upper crust and
perhaps the distribution of forearc venting. They expect to collect ~450 samples
of young basalts, Eocene crust, and upper mantle and will study a subset of
these petrographically, for mineral abundances and compositions, for major and
trace element compositions, for radiometric ages, for mantle fabrics, and for
water concentrations in mantle and young fresh basaltic glass. The team of young
and senior geoscientists will provide important training of new marine
geoscientists and an unusually strong internet connectivity will allow a
handicapped geoscientist to participate in expeditionary
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.