* 2054169
* Study of spin photocurrent in 2D hybrid organic-inorganic perovskite multiple quantum wells
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Xiaomei Jiang, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 480,000.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hybrid metal halide perovskites
have emerged as a promising class of semiconductors with device applications in
solar cells, light emitting diodes and transistors. These materials also have
large spin-orbit coupling, which makes these perovskites a candidate for
spintronic devices. Spintronics combines electronics with spin, an intrinsic
property of elementary particles, to enable novel technologies such as energy
efficient devices for data storage or advanced computing. Spintronic devices
based on quantum wells made by alternating layers of inorganic semiconductors
such as silicon or germanium are expensive to make by epitaxial growth. In
contrast, a two-dimensional hybrid perovskite with a natural quantum well
structure consisting of alternating organic and inorganic layers can be
fabricated via low-cost, facile solution processing. Although perovskites meet
several important prerequisites for viable spintronic devices, there is lack of
fundamental understanding of the spin-related phenomena in this new type of
quantum well. In this project, the research team will optically probe and
manipulate spins in hybrid perovskite quantum wells. The project will yield a
fundamental understanding of spin degree of freedom in these materials. This
knowledge will help to develop guidelines for material synthesis and device
engineering for efficient and cost-effective spintronic devices. Graduate and
undergraduate students, particularly those from underrepresented groups, will
participate in multi-level research activities. The general public will be
involved through scientific exhibitions such as ‘EXPO Physics’ for middle and
high school students and ‘Show-n-tell in Physics’ for elementary school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional
hybrid organic inorganic perovskites (2D-HOIPs) with a Ruddlesten-Popper layered
structure have recently started transforming new fields. These materials have
strong spin-orbit coupling, high-charge mobility, and an intrinsic quantum well
structures with many interfaces and facile solution processability. Giant Rashba
splitting was experimentally confirmed in these materials, highlighting their
potential for cost-effective room temperature spintronic devices. However, a few
key questions remain that need to be answered to clear the pathway to viable
devices. The central question is how spin photocurrent is generated and
manipulated in two-dimensional HOIP multiple quantum well. The goal of the
project is to deepen the fundamental understanding of this new type of multiple
quantum well by conducting a comprehensive study on spin photocurrent dependence
on quantum well structure, crystal symmetry and imperfection. The quantum well
structure in a HOIP can be easily tuned from pure two dimensional to quasi three
dimensional by varying the number of inorganic layers. Hypothetically, the roles
of excitons (dominant in two dimension) and free carriers (dominant in three
dimension) will shift. The focus of this proposal is to characterize the
difference of spin photocurrent behaviors in ‘excitonic’ and ‘free carrier’
quantum wells using photogalvanic spectroscopy. The objectives of the study are
to measure spin photocurrent for free carriers and extract the information about
Rashba/Dresselhaus effects, investigate the origin of spin-polarized current
from excitons, and characterize the spin polarization of free and bound excitons
through photogalvanic spectroscopy. The knowledge gained from this project is
expected to complement the spin-photophysics well studied in two-dimensional
electron gas quantum wells, and be informative to scientists working in
optoelectronic and spintronics applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.