* 2054463
* Collaborative Research: Infection mechanisms of bacteriophages targeting motile bacteria
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Deborah Kelly, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 05/31/2024
* USD 171,755.00

Bacteriophages are viruses that infect bacteria. A successful phage must
encounter, recognize, and enter a specific type of bacteria, called a host.
Then, it takes over the host reproductive machinery to replicate the genetic
material, DNA, and make more phage copies before killing the host cell. Phages
are highly abundant and have a major influence on microbial populations, but
they are the most poorly understood components in any ecosystem. A specialized
group of bacteriophages targets motile bacteria. These phages bind to the
bacterial flagellum as a means of contacting and infecting host cells. Viral
particles are thought to migrate along the surface of rotating bacterial
flagella to reach the cell body for infection. However, little is known about
the specific processes involved in phage translocation and subsequent infection
processes. The overarching goal of this project is to directly visualize phage
movement, analyze cell surface binding, and phage DNA entry using two phage-
bacteria model systems. Outcomes will transform our current concepts of the
biology of flagella-dependent phages and their adaptation to specific hosts. The
results of this research can directly benefit future agricultural and
environmental issues by harnessing bacteriophages for the therapeutic use of
phages as “antibiotics” in agriculture and clinical contexts. Broader Impacts
activities will involve the interdisciplinary training of graduate students. The
team is committed to mentoring graduate and undergraduate students, especially
underrepresented populations and women. Public outreach activities include
hands-on demonstrations for elementary and high school students, both on- and
off-campus, and involvement of undergraduate and high school students in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flagellotropic phages target motile bacteria by
hitchhiking on their rotating flagella for infection. In addition to a lack of
direct visualization of phage movement, the infection processes following
adsorption to and translocation on its host’s flagella, particularly binding to
the cell surface and DNA entry, are unknown. The aim of the research project is
to elucidate the stepwise processes by which this specialized group of phages
uses flagella dynamics and subsequent cell surface interactions to support
effective phage propagation. Two flagellotropic phages and their bacterial hosts
will serve as model systems: phage 7-7-1 and Chi with hosts Agrobacterium sp.
H13-3 and Escherichia coli/Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium,
respectively. Both hosts possess divergent flagellar systems: Agrobacterium
flagella rotate only clockwise and are more rigid as adaptations to the more
viscous soil environment while the flagella of enterobacteria switch rotational
direction and are more flexible. First, the investigators will characterize the
adsorption properties of phages to engage and infect their bacterial hosts.
Protein-protein interactions experiments, mass spectrometry, and mutational
analyses will be used to uncover the molecular basis for phage-flagella
interaction. Second, state-of-the-art microfluidic imaging at the atomic scale,
in conjunction with in situ transmission electron microscopy, will be performed
to delineate the mechanism of phage translocation along the flagellum in real
time. Third, genetic and enzymatic techniques will be employed to characterize
phage binding events that lead to DNA entry and super-resolution fluorescence
microscopy will be performed to examine the fate of phage DNA. The proposed
research will advance knowledge of the infection mechanisms of flagella-
dependent bacteriophages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is co-funded by the
Symbiosis, Infection, and Immunity program in the Division of Integrative and
Organismal Systems and the Cellular Dynamics and Function cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate of Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.