* 2054434
* TSIP: Ola I Ka Aina: Reviving Ecosystems Utilizing Science, Math and Indigenous knowledge.
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Esther Widiasih, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's Indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings at these
institutions expands the opportunities of their students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and generational
appreciation for science and mathematics education. This Targeted STEM Infusion
Project (TSIP) aligns directly with that goal, and moreover will increase the
body of knowledge on traditional fishpond restoration and
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Hawai’i–West O’ahu will
enhance math and ecology instruction through studying the restoration and
management of traditional Hawaiian fishponds. An integrated data-driven wetland
ecological restoration, based on traditional ecological knowledge of land and
ocean, will increase research opportunities for students and improve relevancy
of math and ecology courses. Students will utilize western science and
traditional knowledge in ecological restorations and deliver presentations to
community groups and scientific audiences. The project will strengthen
relationships between the institution and community, while supporting STEM
student pathways between community colleges and the university system. The
project’s focus on data collection, analysis, and modeling will provide strong
data skills for students, while using a systems-approach to understanding
fishpond restoration. An interdisciplinary plan will expose students to a
variety of fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.