* 2054285
* Developmental determination of fish jaw protrusion mechanics
* BIO,IOS
* 08/20/2020,01/31/2024
* William Cooper, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 01/31/2024
* USD 208,520.00

This project is targeted at understanding the developmental underpinnings of
evolutionary success. Experiments will be carried out to determine how changes
in skull development alter one of the most useful biomechanical abilities to
ever evolve: Jaw protrusion. One third of living vertebrates belong to two fish
lineages that independently evolved the ability to project their upper jaws
forward from the face during feeding. These two lineages have remarkably similar
protrusion mechanisms and in both cases small changes in upper jaw shape
dramatically alter protrusion distance. Fishes with extensive protrusion occupy
different ecological niches than those that have limited protrusion due to
specialization on different food types. Jaw protrusion does not appear until
late development, usually after a pronounced metamorphosis. Thyroid hormone
signaling is a major regulator of both metamorphosis and bone formation.
Preliminary data demonstrate that changes in thyroid hormone levels can have
pronounced effects on the development of protrusion ability. Very little is
known about the controls of cranial formation during late development, yet it is
during this period that most organisms begin to remodel their bodies in ways
that allow them to occupy their adult ecological niches. This project has the
potential to illuminate a developmental period of extreme evolutionary
significance that has not yet received much investigative attention. This
research is being performed in collaboration with a high-school biology teacher-
scientist. Aspects of the work are being incorporated in to all units of their
biology course and students are performing a study of fish skull development in
the classroom&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fish jaw protrusion during feeding is linked
to extraordinary evolutionary success. This study will further integrate the
fields of evolutionary functional morphology and developmental biology by
investigating the late-developmental controls of skull morphogenesis. A great
deal is known about the evolution of skull mechanics, but most studies have
examined adult specimens. There is also a large literature on skull development,
but most studies have examined early life stages. Adult cranial mechanics arise
during juvenile to adult transitions in late development, so understanding the
developmental factors that have shaped skull evolution requires study of this
time period. Preliminary data indicate that juvenile diet and thyroid hormone
signaling are important determinants of protrusion ability via their affects on
the formation of the premaxillary bone. Premaxilla shape determines maximum
protrusion ability. This project will investigate the developmental determinants
of premaxilla shape variation in order to better understand the evolvability of
jaw protrusion. Research will examine the developmental controls of jaw
protrusion in the zebrafish and two closely related species with different
protrusion abilities. This project has the following aims: 1) to determine if
thyroid hormone production affects the development of zebrafish jaw protrusion;
2) to determine if feeding on biomechanically different diets affects protrusion
development in the zebrafish and two closely related species; 3) to determine if
altered thyroid hormone production affects mRNA expression levels in developing
zebrafish jaws; and 4) to identify genetic loci associated with jaw protrusion
ability.