* 2054439
* Collaborative Research: Community Facility Support: Facilitating Access and Innovation through a Collaborative Organization for Rock Deformation (CORD)
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Terry Tullis, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 175,626.00

This award provides support to continue a community facility for rock
deformation by providing partial funding for two full-time laboratory technician
positions, both of which will jointly support the rock deformation laboratories
at both Brown University and Massachusetts Institute of Technology as part of
CORD: Collaborative Organization for Rock Deformation. Educational and research
interactions through CORD will benefit faculty, students and staff visiting this
facility. Experimental rock deformation studies provide fundamental insights
into the natural phenomena which shape our Earth and other planets, including
earthquake generation and viscous flow of rocks and ices. Increasing knowledge
of rock properties also plays a key role in meeting societal needs such as
exploiting natural resources and enabling CO2 sequestration to mitigate climate
change. Owing to technical complexity, only a handful of laboratories exist in
the US with the capability to perform such work. Beyond dedicated
experimentalists running the equipment, there is a broad user community with
interest in performing experiments but without the resources and experience to
start their own laboratories. The key challenge in increasing access to existing
equipment is the training of users, and maintenance and safe operation of
complex machinery. The presence of dedicated technical personnel is an effective
way to facilitate access to this sophisticated equipment for a much broader
section of the Earth science community and provide a robust, effective, and
welcoming laboratory research environment. Visiting scientists will be able to
become acquainted with faculty, staff, and students at MIT and Brown. Besides
improving outreach to other universities and organizations, the CORD project
will promote coordination between the two partner laboratories. Regular
meetings, lectures and workshops that can be attended by all those interested
available by web-link will be held. Both groups will benefit from insights and
best practices developed at both institutions. Lastly, the presence of dedicated
technical personnel will facilitate the development of new experimental
capabilities, pushing the boundaries of experimental
geophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this proposal is to
encourage and facilitate participation in experimental rock deformation studies
by a broader spectrum of scientists within the Earth science community. The
technician support increases the availability and efficiency of use of the
equipment in the PI’s laboratories to colleagues from other organizations, who
are interested in rock deformation, but currently lack access to laboratory
these facilities and expertise. The secondary goal is to develop new
experimental capabilities. Each laboratory technician has become an expert
operator of equipment, and in close collaboration with the PI’s, can train new
users. The primary responsibility of the technicians is to maintain the
equipment in dependable working order and enable its safe and efficient
operation with a broad user base. Maintenance is a priority for maximizing
access to visitors working on fixed schedules. Routine tasks include training of
new users in collaboration with PIs, and replacement of seals and gaskets,
calibration of load cells, displacement transducers etc. The technicians will
organize and ensure consistent archiving of experimental data. Other duties
include maintaining inventories of consumables and lists of suppliers. Assisting
in the design and implementation of new innovative capabilities of the equipment
is also an important component of the responsibilities. Scientific and technical
advances go hand-in-hand. Sharing technical support provides inter-laboratory
calibrations, innovation, standardization of techniques, and development of a
consistent format for data management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.