* 2054575
* Collaborative Research: In Situ Laboratory Imaging and Modeling of PFAS Transport and Fate in Variably Saturated Heterogeneous Porous Media
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Bo Guo, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 06/30/2024
* USD 155,247.00

Leaching of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) currently retained in the
shallow subsurface above the water table is a persistent source of groundwater
contamination. This retention process is very complex because the timing and
extent of PFAS mobility in the shallow subsurface are controlled by soil
properties, climate, and weather events, and site-specific hydrogeologic
conditions. Despite significant advances in understanding the migration and
retention behavior of PFAS, there remains a critical knowledge gap on how
spatial variation in geologic properties—which have a strong impact on
groundwater flow processes—impact how, when, and where PFAS contamination
migrates in the subsurface. This research advances the ability to measure and
model PFAS migration and retention under more realistic geologic conditions.
Training is provided to student researchers of diverse backgrounds, and outreach
is conducted to engage with water professionals dealing with PFAS pollution
problems. Improved understanding of PFAS migration in the subsurface will enable
future progress in PFAS remediation strategy
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses medical imaging technology
and recent advances in numerical models to quantify dynamic, spatially variable
PFAS adsorption in heterogeneous unsaturated geologic porous media. The specific
aims are to measure in situ adsorption of two representative PFAS in saturated
and partially saturated heterogeneous columns. These time-lapse imaging
measurements are used, in turn, to provide direct validation to advanced
spatially-resolved numerical models and enable the development of upscaled
models of PFAS transport under heterogeneous subsurface conditions. This work
offers unprecedented in situ transport and adsorption measurements, upscaling
approaches, and parameterization of a numerical model used to describe and
predict PFAS leaching through soils to groundwater
aquifers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the GEO/EAR
Hydrologic Sciences (1579) Program and the ENG/CBET Environmental Engineering
(1440) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.