* 2054754
* Explore Electrocatalysis to Improve the Cathode Performance in Li-S Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Jun Li, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2024
* USD 386,375.00

Lithium-ion batteries are leading technologies for electric vehicles and large-
scale renewable energy storage. Lithium-sulfur battery technology, in
particular, is a forerunner of next-generation lithium-ion batteries due to
their material availability and their high energy density. The project will
investigate a new electrocatalytic concept for improving the performance of
lithium sulfide batteries. Specifically, the goal is to enhance charge/discharge
rates and suppress battery deactivation, both of which are limiting the
performance of current Li-S batteries. Beyond the technical aspects, the project
includes educational and outreach activities, focusing on underrepresented
students from middle- and high-school to graduate level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in LiS battery technology are hindered by several
critical barriers, including the low electrical conductivity of elemental S and
discharged product Li2S at the cathode, high overpotentials, and the rapid
capacity fading of the S cathode due to diffusion of soluble lithium polysulfide
(LiPS) intermediates from the cathode to react with the Li anode, notoriously
known as the “shuttle effect”. Transition metal sulfide electrocatalysts with
strong adsorption of LiPS intermediates will be explored to accelerate the
conversion between S and Li2S, the two insoluble end products. The project
focuses on improving the cathode performance based on the new electrocatalytic
concept using two types of hybrid materials as the electrocatalysts, i.e. the
two-dimensional (2D) atomic layered MoS2 and the quasi-1D chain-like VS4, both
strongly attached on highly conductive reduced graphene oxide (rGO) nanosheets.
The specific objectives include (1) catalyst synthesis and characterization
(including their ability for LiPS adsorption and electrocatalytic conversion);
(2) electrocatalytic LiPS trapping and conversion (via hybrid materials
incorporation in the interlayer and the S/C cathode, respectively), and (3)
electrocatalytic conversion of Li2S to S. The MoS2/rGO and VS4/rGO catalysts
will be incorporated in the lithium-loaded Li2S/C cathode to reduce the
activation energy of the initial delithiation of Li2S and enable a stable and
reversible Li2S/C cathode. Electrochemical characterizations will be correlated
with both ex-situ and operando micro-Raman spectroscopy studies to provide a
good understanding of the dynamic charge/discharge processes and render
mechanistic insights of the electrocatalysis. These studies will provide
solutions to realize the full potentials of the Li-S batteries, an important
sustainable energy technology. In addition to the technical objectives, this
project provides cross-disciplinary training in nanomaterials
synthesis/characterization, electrochemistry, catalysis and energy storage
technologies to two graduate students and one undergraduate student. The project
team will participate in summer STEM camps to engage with high/middle school
students (particularly girls in Kansas) and provide hands-on workshops using the
materials developed in this project. An outreach effort will be made through a
strong collaboration with Xavier University of Louisiana (XULA), a Historically
Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU), to host visiting undergraduate students
from XULA for summer research on electrical energy storage in Kansas State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.