* 2054451
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Community Input to Architectural  Construction
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Patricia Crown, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2023
* USD 29,379.00

This doctoral dissertation research investigates how labor was organized to
produce and maintain architecture. When people construct buildings, they work
together in groups that may consist of friends, relatives, neighbors, or
professionals. Examining the organization of architectural labor can reveal how
people interact with their communities and how they manage their time and
resources. Information on architectural production can also supplement studies
of social organization, economic and non-architectural labor strategies, and
site occupation histories. This research expands on traditional archaeological
studies of architecture with a special focus on the earthen materials used in
construction. Earthen plasters and mortars have the potential to provide
significant information about the technological and materials knowledge of
builders. In focusing on earthen materials in addition to other elements of
architecture, this research will establish analytical and sampling strategies
that can guide historic preservation planning, produce a record of site
condition baselines useful for monitoring and stabilizing the non-renewable
archaeological record held in trust for the public by the National Park Service
(NPS), and supplements previously conducted architectural analyses. Detailed
analyses of plasters also contribute to broader discussions on the impact of
environmental variability on cultural resources. The study provides training for
the doctoral student, who is a member of the Absentee Shawnee Tribe of Oklahoma
and will also provide training in architectural documentation and operation of
laboratory equipment for an undergraduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
doctoral student will document and examine architectural elements (including
walls, roofs, floors, doorways, plasters, and hearths) to identify patterns in
material use, construction techniques, and plaster recipes at two cliff
dwellings in Navajo National Monument, on the Navajo Nation. Both villages were
occupied for less than forty years. The co-PI and an undergraduate student
assistant studying archaeology will document and photograph the architecture.
After completion of the documentation, small samples of selected earthen
construction materials (such as plasters and mortars) will be collected and
analyzed using a combination of geochemical and petrographic methods. The goal
of the laboratory analyses is to refine knowledge of the technological choices
made by the people who lived at these sites, the extent to which people shared
their construction knowledge and plaster recipes with their neighbors, and to
evaluate the diversity of materials used in
construction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.