* 2054200
* Receiver Design for Close-In Phase Noise and Reciprocal Mixing Compensation
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Won Namgoong, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 364,958.00

In many wireless communication systems, the receiver needs to be highly
integrated, reconfigurable, and able to coexist in congested frequency bands in
the presence of many strong interfering blockers. Although significant progress
has been made in advanced receiver design, mitigating the effects of oscillator
phase noise remains a major challenge. Phase noise degrades the desired signal
in two ways – the close-in phase noise and reciprocal mixing distortion. In the
case of close-in phase noise distortion, the phase noise spectrum distorts the
desired signal itself, while in the case of reciprocal mixing, the phase noise
spectrum couples with nearby interfering blockers to corrupt the desired signal.
While the topic of close-in phase noise distortion has been addressed in the
literature, practical solutions to mitigating the effects of reciprocal mixing
are nearly non-existent. The general approach to minimizing the distortion from
reciprocal mixing today is to suppress the blocking interferers themselves with
sharp off-chip filters at the expense of increased complexity, form factor and
cost as well as reduced reconfigurability. This project will jointly and
seamlessly compensate for both the close-in phase noise and reciprocal mixing
distortion without requiring training signals or knowledge of the interfering
blockers. The immediate impact of the proposed research is the introduction of a
new approach to compensate for the effects of reciprocal mixing, which is a
major problem in communication receiver design. Furthermore, as the concepts and
techniques developed in the proposed research are general and broadly applicable
to address other sources of circuit non-idealities, the proposed research is
expected to have a major impact on how future receivers are designed. The PI’s
research activities are coupled with an educational plan that delineates how the
research will help train both graduate and undergraduate students. The multi-
disciplinary nature of the proposed research is expected to broaden the
technical understanding of the students involved. The project includes
participation of undergraduate students and the recruitment of students from
underrepresented groups by leveraging programs at the PI’s
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed approach employs an IF-receiver
architecture with a modified local oscillator to provide the receiver front-end
with the additional degrees of freedom necessary for the desired signal to span
a different vector space than the subspace spanned by reciprocal mixing and
close-in phase noise distortion. The phase noise induced distortion can then be
removed by projecting to its null space which involves multiplying and summing
of baseband samples to recover the desired signal. Despite the simplicity of the
proposed phase noise compensation approach, preliminary results suggest that the
resulting performance improvements are significant. There are significant
research issues at both the circuit and algorithmic levels that will be
addressed to fully realize the benefits of the proposed compensation
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.