* 2054768
* Dynamic Properties of Elastic Media Obtained with Self-Trained Convolutional Neural Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Bogdan-Ioan Popa, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 06/30/2024
* USD 356,135.00

This research will derive new knowledge related to the non-destructive
evaluation of all the mechanical parameters that fully describe the elastic
behavior of complex media such as biological tissue and designer materials with
carefully engineered microstructure. Previous methods for non-destructive
evaluation often rely on limiting assumptions on the nature of the probed
material (for example, direction-independent properties), require large samples
for evaluation, and/or provide only a small subset of material parameters. For
example, accurately evaluating all the mechanical parameters of biological
tissue is important because it informs on tissue changes due to pathological
processes. However, state of the art methods used to probe these parameters
(e.g. elastography) may provide only a small set of mechanical parameters, which
may delay the detection of tissue pathologies. This project will create new
methods to extract the complete set of material properties from scattered
ultrasound pulses processed with convolutional neural networks trained in an
unsupervised manner. The results of this research will be leveraged by numerous
fields ranging from infrastructure integrity evaluation to non-invasive medical
diagnostics and thus will benefit the society at multiple levels. This research
will also provide the opportunity to develop an online wave dynamics lab
accessed and controlled remotely, which will increase the participation of
economically disadvantaged students and underrepresented minorities to cutting-
edge experimental science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analytical methods currently
used to extract the dynamic mechanical properties of matter from scattered
mechanical waves have proven insufficient when several dozen parameters are
unknown. This effort will derive new knowledge and tools necessary to extract
all the unknown parameters of complex media with anisotropic stiffness, mass
density, and Willis parameter tensors. The central hypothesis is that
convolutional neural networks can learn the very complex mapping scattered-
fields-to-constitutive-parameters from numerical simulations. This simulation-
based approach will lead to an unsupervised self-training process that contrasts
with most machine learning applications requiring expensive training data sets
typically labeled by humans and obtained in long measurement sessions. This
hypothesis will be verified by fabricating and extracting the material
parameters of elastic metamaterials designed to have anisotropic stiffness, mass
density, and Willis parameter tensors. This research will consider material
property extraction from both near- and far-field
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.