* 2054805
* Development of a proof-of-concept geoelectric monitoring system for advancing research and education in hydrogeophysics at Boise State University
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* James McNamara, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 123,242.00

Groundwater is a valuable resource for our society and the ecosystem. It is
critical to understand how climate change and human activities affect the
storage, age, quality, and the flow route of groundwater. Geoelectrical methods,
which use either natural electric current or active electric sources, are
important geophysical tools for studying these hydrological problems. It enables
an effective determination of the water distribution and their movement in the
subsurface with minimal disturbances to the field condition. This award will
support scientific infrastructure by developing the next-generation
geoelectrical instrumentation for groundwater-related studies and education.
This award will also help broaden the participation of undergraduate students in
hydrological and geophysical research at Boise State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proof of concept project will develop a
new hydrogeophysical instrument by integrating traditional hydrological
measurement into geoelectrical field tests. Newly designed hydrogeophysical
probes will be fabricated in the laboratory by integrating Ag-AgCl electrodes
into traditional tensiometers. These developed probes can simultaneously measure
the soil tension (matric suction) and electrical properties (resistivity,
induced polarization, and electrokinetic potential) when they are integrated
into a traditional geoelectrical acquisition instrument. In this project,
laboratory experiments are planned to measure the main characteristics of the
probes such as drifting and temperature coefficient, and a field test is planned
to monitor the snowmelt infiltration process in a soil pit. The field monitoring
will be conducted at a mountain ridge in a small catchment of the Dry Creek
Experimental Watershed near Boise, Idaho. The monitored hydraulic and
geoelectrical data will be jointly analyzed to evaluate the performance of the
integrated hydrogeophysical instrument at field conditions. This award received
co-funding from the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR) office.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.