* 2054891
* Expanding the Biotechnology Pipeline to Adults Seeking Reemployment
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Chander Arora, Los Angeles Mission College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 04/30/2024
* USD 509,414.00

The California bioscience sector employs more 300,000 skilled technicians, as
well as at least an additional 600,000 related workers. Though the pandemic has
negatively impacted many businesses across the state, the bioscience sector
continues to expand, including efforts to develop, test, treat, and prevent
COVID-19 infection. This project at Los Angeles Mission College focuses on two
pressing needs: the acute industry demand for biotechnology lab assistants and
technicians due to the pandemic, and the need of many individuals who lost their
jobs to find new, sustainable employment. The demand for biotechnology workers
has been growing for the past ten years, and the pandemic-driven demand for lab
technicians, lab assistants and biotechnology technicians has only amplified it.
At the same time, increased unemployment and job insecurity due to changing
economic and social conditions are making displaced workers seek different, more
sustainable employment options. The project aims to create a pathway for these
individuals into biotechnology certification. With a focus on inclusion of
veterans and individuals from communities that are underrepresented in STEM, the
project aims to provide employment opportunities and increase the talent pool
for a high demand, high growth sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
adapt the existing biotechnology certificates and Associate of Science degree
programs and supplement these programs with new supports specifically to serve
re-entering adult learners. The new supports will include a Bridge to Biotech
workshop aimed at strengthening academic skills needed to succeed in science
courses, and a Bridge to Employment workshop that prepares students for
employment in the industry. Existing supports, such as tutoring, counseling, job
readiness services, and industry internships will be modified to help adult
students enter the workplace more quickly, while earning industry-recognized
certifications along the way. The project will also conduct research and
evaluation to determine how specific pathways, strategies, and activities affect
participants’ success in completing the program and obtaining employment in
biotechnology industry. The results are expected to increase knowledge about
what works in retraining adults and helping them secure employment in the
biotechnology industry. The project findings will be disseminated to a national
audience to assist other organizations in creating pathways to technology
careers for adults seeking reemployment. The project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation’s
economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.