* 2054191
* CAREER: A Closed-Loop Control Framework for the Treatment of Chronic Stroke
* ENG,CBET
* 09/12/2019,05/31/2024
* Eric Wade, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 05/31/2024
* USD 547,202.00

Each year, over 800,000 people suffer from stroke in the United States. Many of
these individuals are left with hemiparesis, or weakness on one side of the
body. Early after the stroke, this hemiparesis results in pain and reduced
strength, rendering task performance difficult. Meanwhile, there may be
spontaneous recovery of movement ability and neurological capability. However,
due to this early limb weakness, people eventually voluntarily suppress the use
of the weaker limb. Thus, a phenomenon emerges known as nonuse: a difference
between what people can do and what they choose to do. This is problematic as
nonuse is thought to lead to compensating movement strategies, which lead to
increased injury and additional medical complications. Nonuse is one example of
many phenomena that develop over time as individuals use their own movement
strategies when they are not monitored by a clinician. The goal of the current
research approach is to automatically measure when people utilize such harmful
strategies and to encourage increased limb use through feedback from a digital
device. The system is a just-in-time adaptive intervention (JITAI), a
technology-based tool capable of determining in real-time when people are
performing certain activities and providing them feedback when and where they
need it in order to promote recovery. This approach may represent the first of
many interventions for people with chronic conditions that develop over time and
takes advantage of a well-established scientific principle known as control
systems engineering. The approach will model the natural behavior of the human
and apply appropriate intervention through the use of control systems
strategies. These research goals are closely coupled with educational goals, as
control systems engineering can be taught to students at varying levels of
academic maturity. As a result, diverse students in both engineering and
healthcare will take advantage of summer training programs at the undergraduate
level designed to evaluate and simulate the technological approach and through a
novel curriculum focused on combining computation and neuroscience at the post-
graduate level. Finally, this research will represent a proof of concept for the
adaptation of human delivered, evidence-based therapy using automated tools that
can be implemented in real world settings for chronic health
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator's motivating research theme is
ambient assisted living: the use of assistive technologies in real-world
settings outside of clinical or laboratory environments to assist people living
with disability. Toward this theme, this project focuses on developing and
evaluating a framework combining control systems engineering and
neurorehabilitation to provide in-home rehabilitation for the chronic stroke
population suffering from learned nonuse. The Research Plan presents a novel
approach to addressing neurodegenerative disorders (NDs) by treating the
symptoms as outputs of a dynamical system. By treating the patient as the
'system' within a control loop, the application of classical control facilitates
the use of feedback (to monitor patient symptoms) and a controller (to provide
inputs to the patient) to drive symptoms to a desired state. The framework
facilitates a methodological and theoretically defensible approach to objective
quantification and modeling of disease symptoms, and evidence-based strategies
for intervening to mitigate such symptoms. The Research Plan is organized under
three aims. The FIRST AIM is to develop a dynamical systems model of stroke
system progression. The model includes a Nonuse forward block that describes how
behavior results from beliefs about rehabilitation, a Sensorimotor Learning
block that describes the relationship between home practice behavior and
spontaneous limb use in real world settings and a Nonuse feedback block that
relates spontaneous limb use to a person's beliefs about their capability using
self-regulation theory. The SECOND AIM is to develop a dynamical systems model
of therapy. The model includes a CIMT (constraint induced movement therapy)
Transfer Package block that relates beliefs about therapy to the CIMT
intervention components (e.g., motivation, forced limb use and positive
reinforcement) and a Control-Based Rehabilitation block that uses an SMC
(sliding mode control) approach. Noninvasive wearable sensor and functional
assessment data obtained from individuals with chronic hemiparetic stroke will
be used to calibrate the models of Nonuse and CIMT. The THIRD AIM is to develop
and validate the nonlinear control systems-based treatment delivery in
participants' homes. Efficacy will be evaluated using the UE-FMA (Upper
Extremity Fugi-Meyer Assessment) before and after 4 week studies during which
sensors will be worn 6 hours/day.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.