* 2054741
* CHS: Small: Collaborative Research: Catalyzing Youth Civic Engagement Through Innovations in Social Computing
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Andrea Parker, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2023
* USD 316,921.00

This research will design, develop, and evaluate novel smartphone applications
that help youth explore and leverage their social networks to engage in
collective action, and assess the impact of this action. From affiliation with
social movements through the use of Twitter hashtags, to collective organizing
through Facebook, social computing tools have catalyzed new and exciting forms
of civic engagement (efforts taken by individuals and collectives to address
issues of societal concern). While historically it has been challenging to
engage youth in civic action, social computing platforms offer a media-relevant
way for youth to address issues that matter to them. However, despite increased
opportunities for civic engagement online, youth can have difficulty navigating
their social networks, which creates challenges for understanding and putting to
use the social capital within networks, that is, the beneficial resources that
can support collective action. This research examines how interactive
visualizations of youth's social networks can help youth more effectively
understand and put to use the social capital within their networks. Such
visualizations may support civic engagement by easing access to the rich and
complex information about social ties, helping youth evaluate the impact they
have through online civic action, preparing them to make effective decisions
about future activities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The work will include the design,
development, and evaluation of two novel smartphone applications. Although there
is a large literature on how best to visualize these networks from an
algorithmic perspective, very little is known about how people, especially young
people, interpret network visualizations, nor whether or when network
visualizations may enhance access to and utilization of social capital. This
project will contribute new empirical findings and novel software tools to fill
this research gap. Additionally, although complex network data is increasingly
packaged for public consumption, there are few standards for how to do so
effectively, particularly in the context of mobile visualizations where small
screen real estate dramatically amplifies the visualization challenge. The
research will contribute new knowledge regarding how best to visualize network
data for lay audiences, on the mobile platforms that people are increasingly
using to interact with data. This work will yield empirical assessments of how
designed interfaces can best manage the complexities of networked data in order
to amplify cognition, action, and feelings of empowerment. This work will
culminate in a conceptual framework to guide the design of social computing
tools for youth civic engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.