* 2054684
* EAGER: Artificial Intelligence (AI) to accelerate plant species discovery
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Barbara Ambrose, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 04/30/2024
* USD 299,754.00

Herbaria are archival scientific collections of pressed and dried plant
specimens. These collections contain an overwhelming number of un-named
specimens, some of which may be new to science. There are approximately 400,000
known vascular plant species with an estimated 80,000 still to be
discoveredâ€”many of which are likely already in herbarium collections. With the
urgent threats of climate change we need new tools to quicken the pace of
species discovery within these collections to better conserve species before
they go extinct. A United Nations report indicates that more than one million
species are at risk of extinction, and amid this dire prediction a recent
estimate suggests plants are disappearing more quickly than animals. There are
approximately 3,000 herbaria worldwide and they are massive repositories of
plant diversity data: these collections not only represent a vast amount of
plant diversity, but since herbarium collections include specimens dating back
hundreds of years, they provide snapshots of plant diversity through time.
Herbarium specimens not only maintain their morphological features but also
include collection dates and locations. This information, multiplied by millions
of plant collections, provides the framework for understanding plant diversity
on a massive scale and learning how it has changed over time. Artificial
Intelligence (AI) is a powerful tool that can vastly accelerate species
discovery in herbaria. This project will provide training and professional
development opportunities for a post-doctoral
researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a tool for rapid
curation and identification of plant specimens from herbaria collections using
AI: this easy-to-use online tool, iCurate, will be readily used by herbaria
world-wide to automatically identify and curate herbarium specimens by inputting
their own specimen images. This tool will be built from the wide range of
digitized vascular plant specimens present in the GBIF and iDigBio databases,
significantly reducing the time to identify specimens and allowing herbaria to
curate plant groups for which they lack expertise. The iCurate tool will be
optimized and expanded through a stepwise process that uses crowd-sourced AI
models submitted to a series of online competitions. The competitions will use
an ever- increasing number of species and images for model training eventually
including all public vascular plant specimen images in GBIF and
iDigBio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.