* 2054014
* DMS/NIGMS 2: Collaborative Research: Developing Statistical Learning Methods for Revealing the Molecular Signatures of Microvascular Changes in Neural Injury
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2025
* Yi Ren, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2025
* USD 337,499.00

Spinal cord injury (SCI) is a traumatic and detrimental condition that can
result in temporary or permanent paralysis. SCI also causes various paralysis-
related disorders that can become debilitating and often life-threatening. It
can also lead to functional impairment via the primary mechanical injury
followed by subsequent secondary injury mechanisms at cellular levels, including
cell death and spinal blood vessel damage. Disruption of the blood-spinal cord
barrier (BSCB), the structure regulating molecular exchange between blood and
spinal cord, is one of the most detrimental factors to functional recovery. The
BSCB is composed of at least three types of cell-to-cell functions.
Understanding the molecular characteristics and functions of these cells in
response to injury is a major interest of SCI research. The PIs will use high
throughput single cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), a powerful technique for the
dissection of gene expression at single-cell resolution. They will also develop
novel modern statistical approaches to elucidate the molecular characterizations
of principal cell types of BSCB in the injured spinal cord. The study will help
us understand the complexity of blood vessels in response to SCI, generate novel
therapeutic targets for SCI treatment, and create new statistical machine
learning tools for big data analysis. The PIs plan to integrate research with
education and outreach activities and disseminate the results, data, and
software broadly to the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
develop statistical machine learning theory and methods to answer important
questions regarding the identification of new subpopulations of microvessels
that have disease-relevant functions in SCI, as well as microvessel crosstalk
with and regulation by infiltrating immune cells. The novelty is to combine
advanced scRNA-seq technologies with robust high-dimensional statistical methods
for three biological aims: a) define single-cell profiling of microvascular
cells; b) determine the mechanisms of the alteration of subpopulations of
microvascular cells in the injured spinal cord; and c) identify the crosstalk
patterns between microvascular cells and infiltrating immune cells and their
roles in neuroinflammation. The large quantities of complex data generated from
the study will prompt new challenges in developing scalable robust and reliable
statistics tools for efficient analysis of big scRNA-seq data. In particular,
PIs plan to develop (a) large-scale cell subpopulation learning tools including
multi-scale clustering and cell marker hunting algorithms and unsupervised
feature screening and selection; (b) efficient and robust methods for
identifying cell markers and differently expressed genes by developing scalable
Hodges-Lehmann's method with false discovery rate controls; (c) more efficient
factor-adjusted learning methods that take advantages of co-expression of genes
in subpopulation learning, cell marker hunting, differently expressed genes
selection, as well as cell-cell interaction by identifying important ligand-
receptor pairs. These newly developed methods will be applied to the large-scale
scRNA-seq data to answer the biological questions for
SCI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.