* 2054847
* Collaborative Research: An in situ Closure Study of Mixed Phase Clouds at Storm Peak
* GEO,AGS
* 05/31/2020,09/30/2022
* Daniel Cziczo, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Yu Gu
* 09/30/2022
* USD 342,319.00

Clouds are commonly differentiated by the precipitation that reaches the
surface, either rain or snow. This means they are often thought of as being
liquid water, also called warm clouds, or ice, also called cold clouds. Those
clouds that contain liquid water droplets and ice crystals at the same time are
called mixed phase clouds. Mixed phase clouds are currently poorly understood
because of the complicated mixture. Our lack of understanding of clouds,
particularly those that are mixed in phase, limits our ability to understand
precipitation, the atmosphere chemistry and climate. This project will determine
the particles on which the droplets and ice crystals in mixed phase clouds form
by deploying a new inlet and both warm and cold cloud chambers at Storm Peak
Laboratory. Storm Peak is a high altitude site located in the Rocky Mountains in
north-central Colorado that is among only a handful of sites worldwide that
offers scientific laboratories where mixed phase clouds exist for long time
periods. Using this new inlet, the research team will carry out two-season long
observational studies of droplet and ice crystals within mixed phase clouds.
This project will allow a resolution of the question of which atmospheric
particles make droplets, which make ice crystals, and which do not effectively
make either.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A graduate student will work on this project
full time, thereby being trained in this important area of atmospheric science.
A post-doctoral fellow will also work on this project part-time, increasing
their research experience in this area. The collected data will be archived and
presented to the atmospheric sciences community. This will include both papers
and presentations, with a focus on providing data to help improve models that
include precipitation, climate and air quality. Beyond the scientific community,
a documentary of the project at Storm Peak will be made in partnership with
Science for the Public, a WGBH-Boston television and multimedia production. This
will emphasize one of Science for the Public's objective areas, adult science,
technology, engineering and math education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.