* 2054508
* Descriptive Set Theory and Categorical Logic
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2021,04/30/2022
* Ruiyuan Chen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2022
* USD 112,111.00

This project will focus on the interaction between two different aspects of
mathematical logic: categorical logic and descriptive set theory. Broadly
speaking, mathematical logic is the formal study of mathematical language and
its meaning. For example, the assertion "between every two numbers, there is a
third" changes meaning depending on which ambient universe of "numbers"
(integers, fractions, etc.) one is referring to. Categorical logic provides
tools for constructing a "universal abstract universe" in which the
interpretation of mathematical statements captures their meanings in all
possible "real" universes at once. Descriptive set theory provides tools for
classifying all such possible "real" universes, or in certain cases, proving
that no such classification exists. Recent work has pointed toward a deep
connection between these two historically disparate subfields of logic, and this
project aims to further develop this connection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project the PI studies categorical logic and descriptive set theory as dual
"syntactic" and "semantic" representations of infinitary propositional and
first-order logic. In the propositional setting, a long line of work points to
locale theory ("point-free topology") as an uncountable generalization of
classical descriptive set theory in Polish and standard Borel spaces, and this
project aims to extend this analogy by developing localic counterparts of more
advanced classical techniques, such as projective sets, effective descriptive
set theory, and forcing. In the first-order setting, recent work by the PI has
shown that the Joyal-Tierney representation theorem for toposes yields a duality
between theories in infinitary first-order logic and their standard Borel
groupoids of countable models. This project aims to extend this duality to
continuous logic for metric structures, which will involve first developing the
foundations for a metric analog of topos theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.