* 2054970
* CAREER: Adaptive Origami Structures for Acoustic Wave Guiding
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Ryan Harne, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 372,330.00

Ability to guide acoustic waves is central to a wide range of applications from
cancer treatment to underwater ecosystem monitoring. Acoustic wave guiding
techniques are widely used in medical and engineering applications such as
ultrasound, sound projection used in public announcement systems, underwater
ecosystem monitoring, and several defense applications. The state-of-the-art
methods use fixed locations of acoustic transducers and digitally controlled
signals to manage their wave guiding ability. These methods often tend to be
inaccurate as they suffer from inherent ambiguity in locating virtual source or
receiver. This limits their ability to do effective wave guiding. This Faculty
Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will significantly enhance the
state-of-the-art in wave guiding capability by innovative use of origami
science. The research will investigate reconfigurable and adaptive origami-
inspired acoustic transducers that can achieve simple yet highly effective wave
guiding. The portability of these origami-inspired transducer arrays will propel
new applications in health care, ecosystem monitoring, and defense. This project
will make new contributions to the knowledge base in acoustic wave guiding. The
project also has significant involvement of students at all levels from
elementary to graduate. By harnessing the technical themes of folding origami
structures in an integrated research-education program, this CAREER project will
redress waning student exposures and interest in acoustics by a multi-faceted
initiative that will introduce, immerse, and instill acoustic principles for
student groups at many levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will
establish analytical and computational tools to yield understanding on how
origami-inspired, adaptive acoustic structures may transform wave guiding
practices. The modeling framework will bridge acoustics, geometry, and mechanics
via non-dimensional, spatial Fourier transforms to illuminate linear/nonlinear
wave guiding phenomena and enable clear contrast with digital control methods
and ideal acoustic radiators/receivers. The experimentally validated framework
will reveal correlations among tessellation geometry, folding extent, and
wavelength for scale-free wave guiding principles, while contrast between
virtual and physical transducer positioning will expose origins of deficiencies
in digital wave field control methods and guide attention to prime combinations
of origami-inspired and digitally controlled wave guiding. A reversal of the
framework will enable the design tessellated arrays for desired acoustic wave
guiding properties, and will broadly advance multiphysics optimization of
folding structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.