* 2054897
* CAS:Mechanistic Investigation of Heme-based Catalysts for Sustainable Carbene Transfer Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Yong Zhang, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 360,000.00

With support from the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. Yong Zhang of Stevens Institute of Technology will conduct a rigorous
computational study to improve catalyst design for selected important
transformations in sustainable chemistry. The targeted catalysts are engineered
heme proteins with numerous attractive properties, such as delivering products
in high yield, with high chemo-, regio-, and stereoselectivity, at room
temperature, in aqueous solution, with biocompatibility and low toxicity. These
catalysts also incorporate the most abundant and least expensive transition
metal, Fe (iron). That said, big challenges for certain catalytic
transformations involved in synthesis of natural products, drugs, and biological
compounds still persist, in particular regarding the reactions of
cyclopropanation and nitrogen-hydrogen insertion, particularly if one is to rely
upon Fe-catalysis. Dr. Zhang’s research group employs high accuracy
computational techniques to provide the previously unknown mechanistic
information of such heme-based catalysts. In particular, Dr. Zhang will work
toward enhancing their catalytic reactivity and selectivity for these
challenging chemical transformations. Such insights may lead to improvements in
certain process chemistry procedures conducted on scale in the pharmaceutical
industry, for example. Dr. Zhang’s research is broadly integrated with teaching,
training, and learning, with broad participation of students from different
groups at various levels, particularly those from underrepresented groups.
Several channels are employed to broadly disseminate their research results to
the community. For example, students in this NSF-supported project give
presentations/reports in their classes, and within their department and/or
university. There are also outreach programs for K-12 institutions, museums,
news media (both traditional mass media and social media), enhancing the
scientific understanding of the impacts of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyclopropanation is useful for synthesis of natural
products and pharmaceutical compounds and N-H insertion is useful for synthesis
of amino acids, alkaloids, N-heterocyclic compounds, and bioconjugation.
Engineered heme proteins have exhibited numerous excellent catalytic properties
for sustainable carbene transfer reactions. Yet there are still some big
challenges for certain catalytic cyclopropanations and N-H insertions,
particularly for electron-poor substrates. The origins of varied
cyclopropanation vs. N-H insertion chemoselectivity in some experimental systems
are also unknown. Dr. Yong Zhang’s research group is conducting a rigorous
quantum chemical computational study of the previously unknown mechanistic
details of some heme structural factors toward enhancing catalytic reactivities
for challenging cyclopropanations and N-H insertions. Insights into variable
cyclopropanation vs. N-H insertion chemoselectivity from different catalyst
components are sought to help design 'matched ' catalysts for selective
functionalization. Dr. Zhang’s research is broadly integrated with teaching,
training, and learning. Students in his lab are actively involved in classes and
outreach programs that incorporate their research results. Dr. Zhang continues
his vigorous efforts to have broad participation of students from diverse groups
at various levels, particularly including students from underrepresented groups.
Several channels are employed by Dr. Zhang’s research group to broadly
disseminate their research results to the scientific community and general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.