* 2054963
* EAGER: Filling a Crucial Oceanographic Observation Gap in the Southern Ocean with Animal-borne Instruments
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Luis Huckstadt, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 02/29/2024
* USD 152,929.00

Part 1: Non-technical description &lt;br/&gt;Many processes that dominate
coastal waters in the Southern Ocean are poorly studied due to the occurrence of
sea ice and land glaciers/ice sheets that prevent access to study areas. Coastal
ice prevents use of traditional moorings and glider-based research approaches
that are common tools to evaluate the structure and dynamics of coastal systems
in lower latitudes. During the past two decades there has been an explosive
increase in the use of Animal-Borne instruments (ABI) on Southern Oceans marine
mammals to collect data on aspects such as patterns of habitat usage, migratory
routes, foraging and reproductive hot-spots, and impacts of human activities
near marine predators. ABI sensors have been collecting data on aspects such as
temperature, salinity, light, fluorescence and other aspects that could
supplement sparse traditional ocean measurements from ship-based and offshore
mooring-based observations. This study will assemble many datasets collected by
a diverse community of instrumented marine mammals inhabiting the regions near
the Southern Shetlands Islands and Kerguelen Island. ABI data will be quality
controlled and evaluated for use to explore oceanographic aspects such as
variability in mixed layer depth, fresh (melt) water intrusions, light
penetration and surface temperature variability in coastal areas that will
supplement other datasets. The project involves international collaborators and
will train a graduate student in data analysis. Broader impacts will also be
accomplished through the development of learning modules for use in elementary
and high-school classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II: Technical
description: &lt;br/&gt;This study will evaluate the potential of 30 years of
archival Animal-Borne Instrument (ABI) datasets from a variety of marine
predators for oceanographic studies in two regions of the Southern Ocean. Animal
tracking data will be quality controlled and processed to obtain location-based
measurements of depth, temperature, light, and salinity in near-shore and under
ice regions. Nearshore and under ice collected datasets will be analyzed to
determine the feasibility of ABI data to explore features such as coastal mixed
layer depth, melt water intrusions and light penetration that could supplement
more traditional, but further from shore, ocean observing system data. Data from
poorly studied hotspot regions where predators feed could be of particular
importance. Results will be shared using collaborations among U.S. and
international organizations such as Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research
(SCAR) and the Southern Ocean Observing Systems (SOOS), among others. Data will
be made available using public databases for the benefit of the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.