* 2054157
* I-Corps: Metabolomics and Machine Learning Platform for Diagnostics
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2021,08/31/2022
* Ruslan Rafikov, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in developing
a simple blood test that can recognize diseases like cancer, chronic heart and
lung disorders, and diabetes. To diagnose these diseases faster, the proposed
technology uses a specific panel of metabolites in the blood. Metabolites change
as cells change their function because of disease and could serve as a specific
pattern, "fingerprint" that reports the disease. These patterns can be recorded
by mass spectrometry (MS) and recognized by artificial intelligence (AI).
Unbiased identification of the patented "fingerprints" by MS and analysis using
AI may produce a diagnosis. The proposed technology may not only reduce time-to-
diagnosis from years to days but provide less-invasive tests for customers,
replacing techniques such as biopsies, colonoscopies, and heart
catheterizations. This method will not depend on the professional qualification
of health care workers and can be used at primary care facilities, hospitals, or
urgent care sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project seeks to detect
cancers and chronic lung and heart diseases. Initially, cancers and lung or
heart diseases develop asymptomatically and so the patient does not seek
professional help. Even after the onset of nonspecific symptoms, such as
tiredness and fatigue, conditions often remain unrecognized for greater than two
years. There is a significant need for novel diagnostic tools to shorten the
time-to-diagnosis and initiate therapy at earlier stages of the disease. Cancers
and lung and heart diseases are known to significantly alter the metabolic
profile. The proposed technology shows that alterations in metabolites occur
when diseases are mild and no symptoms are evident. Thus, profiling of
circulating metabolites could become an efficient tool for tracing diseases at
early and developed stages. The proposed patented technology detects specific
changes in circulating metabolites that relate to discrete pulmonary
hypertension from heart disease, colorectal cancer, and other chronic lung
conditions. A mass spectrometry (MS) based platform is used for differential
diagnosis to distinguish from diseases with similar, non-specific symptoms.
Three preliminary metabolic panels have been developed. Each panel comprises of
ten to twelve metabolites allowing separation of a specific group of diseases
with current precision greater than 75-98%.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.