* 2054395
* Mechanistic Studies of Organic Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jeehiun Lee, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 470,000.00

Professor Jeehiun Katherine Lee of the Department of Chemistry at Rutgers
University will utilize funding provided by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic
&amp; Mechanism B Program of the Chemistry Division to explore organic
reactivity and mechanism. One major focus will be on the complementary
polarities of reactants in chemical reactions. This is commonly referred to as
nucleophilicity ("seeking nuclei") or electrophilicity ("seeking electrons").
The nucleophilicity and electrophilicity of diverse reactants will be examined
in the gas phase, with the ultimate goal of creating a scale to better
understand fundamental reactivity. A second focus will be on reactions catalyzed
by N-heterocyclic carbenes (NHCs). NHCs are novel organic substances, which have
been shown to act as catalysts for a broad range of important synthetic
reactions. Mechanisms for these reactions are poorly understood. In both aims,
chemical reactions will be studied through a combination of computational models
and experiments. Experimental studies are carried out in the gas phase, using a
mass spectrometer. The absence of solvent allows for inherent reactivity to be
revealed. This project has the potential to establish reactivity patterns for a
wide range of organic species and improve the utility of NHCs as catalysts in
chemical synthesis. Improved synthetic methods in turn impact many areas of
chemistry, including making pharmaceuticals and other useful chemicals. These
fundamental mechanistic studies also provide educational opportunities for both
undergraduate and graduate scientists. The project provides mentoring and
training for groups underrepresented in science as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gas phase experimental (mass spectrometric) and
computational (quantum mechanical) methods are used to interrogate the
properties and reactivities of species of organochemical significance.
Specifically, a number of hypotheses centered on nucleophilicity,
electrophilicity, reactivity, and catalysis will be tested. One objective is the
development of a gas-phase scale for nucleophilicity and electrophilicity of
substrates (including N-heterocyclic carbenes (NHCs)); the second objective is
to gain insight into the mechanism by which NHCs catalyze synthetically
important reactions. These studies will ultimately aid in the development of
processes involving hydrogen activation, organocatalysis and synthesis. The work
will have societal impact in terms of the education of undergraduate and
graduate students, including students from underrepresented groups, and
publication of research that increases fundamental chemical
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.