* 2054688
* Collaborative Research: RAPID--Multi-Scale Investigation into the Storm Processes of the 10 August 2020 Midwest Derecho
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2022
* Richard Wood, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 10/31/2022
* USD 23,500.00

On 10 August 2020, a particularly intense derecho produced widespread high-wind
damage from eastern Nebraska through northern Indiana, resulting in 3.8 billion
USD in estimated agricultural losses in Iowa. Derechos, or long-lived windstorms
produced by mesoscale convective systems (MCSs), remain an important atmospheric
phenomenon to understand because they produce large-scale wind damage areas,
varying from 20 – 200 km in width to hundreds of kilometers long. This award
will allow a multidisciplinary scientific team (i.e., atmospheric scientists,
remote sensing experts, wind and structural engineers) to perform high-
resolution numerical simulations and detailed damage surveys across multiple
spatial scales to investigate storm processes in derechos. Relating detailed
documentation of high-wind damage with storm processes can provide vital
information on extreme wind production in derechos and storm damage potential,
leading to improved understanding of severe-storm processes, radar
interpretation, and risk communication associated with warnings to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Storm characteristics and near-surface wind flow of
10 August 2020 derecho will be investigated through 1) high-resolution
simulations of the event using a state-of-the-art numerical modeling system as a
proxy for the real event, and 2) detailed comparisons of radar signatures to
damage information provided by 2D and 3D analyses of unpiloted aerial systems
(UAS) data, satellite imagery, and ground truth surveys. Simulations that best
depict the evolution of the derecho will be analyzed to explore the mechanisms
responsible for the unique physical characteristics of this event that were
responsible for the extreme wind production. The large-scale character of the
damaging winds over vegetation and crops susceptible to long-term damage and
passage of the derecho’s core close to Des Moines and Davenport National Weather
Service radars in Iowa provide a unique opportunity to better connect damage
information to velocity structures sampled by radar. The detailed analysis of
wind damage produced in this study will provide an unprecedented validation
dataset for the high-resolution numerical simulations. This unusually
comprehensive dataset will be used to understand the physical processes
responsible for extreme wind damage. Additionally, detailed damage documentation
can also be used to calibrate satellite-based assessments in future high-wind
events and could enable the development of additional damage descriptors based
to vegetation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.