* 2054513
* Combinatorial Group Actions and Applications to Geometry, Knot Theory, and Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Julianna Tymoczko, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 286,576.00

Rotating a molecule without changing the chemical bonds it can form; braiding
strands of hair, which is how quantum mechanics describes the structure of
certain elementary particles; rearranging the nucleotides that make up the
building blocks of a strand of DNA. All of these—rotations, braids,
rearrangements—are examples of group actions, namely families of symmetries
satisfying structural constraints that arise from the context of each
application. This project studies group actions using combinatorial tools,
including graphs and Young tableaux, in order to characterize their underlying
algebraic structures. Applications include other areas of mathematics (like knot
theory and algebraic geometry) and other fields (like mathematical biology). The
broader impacts of the project include continued leadership of the Center for
Women in Math at Smith College, mentoring of students at all levels through the
PI's Math Research Lab as well as professional development for graduate students
and continued career advice for alumni of the Center for Women in
Math.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, this project addresses a set of
interconnected questions about two graph-theoretic actions of permutations: 1) a
skein-type action of permutations on a family of graphs called webs (of which
noncrossing matchings are the best-known example), and 2) a representation
constructed from graph automorphisms for a family of subgraphs of the Cayley
graph of the permutation group. Each action is the nexus between several
mathematical fields, giving rise to a cycle of related questions. In the first
case, these are: combinatorially analyzing the transition matrices between two
important bases of irreducible symmetric-group representations; describing the
geometry and topology of components of Springer fibers; and constructing a basis
for a vector space arising from questions in knot- and representation-theory. In
the second case, they are: attacking the Stanley-Stembridge conjecture in
combinatorics using a newly-established geometric correspondence; computing the
(equivariant) cohomology rings of Hessenberg varieties; and describing
generalized splines for different edge-labeled graphs. Recent work of Brosnan
and Chow, Rhoades, and others mean that the field is poised for new advances.
The project exploits a synergistic strategy by attacking these interrelated
questions simultaneously, and uses computational aspects of the work to
incorporate mentoring and practical training of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.