* 2054604
* Collaborative Research: Noncovalently Bound Molecular Trimers: High-dimensional and Fully Coupled Quantum Calculations of their Vibrational Levels
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Peter Felker, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2024
* USD 95,940.00

Bacic (NYU) and Felker (UCLA) are supported by an award from the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of Chemistry to
develop and implement a novel and powerful methodology for accurate high-
dimensional and fully coupled quantum calculations of the vibrational
eigenstates of hydrogen-bonded and van der Waals molecular trimers. They will
focus on realistic molecular complexes of considerable practical and fundamental
importance and amenable to spectroscopic investigations, allowing for direct
comparison between theory and experiment. Their studies will lead to more
accurate description of the noncovalent intermolecular interactions, which play
a major role in bulk liquids, molecular solids, and atmospheric chemistry, and
the processes that occur in these environments. Bacic and Felker will continue
to foster inclusivity by mentoring diverse and gender-balanced groups of
graduate and undergraduate students, as well as postdoctoral researchers. They
will engage in a variety of outreach activities, including popular science
presentations, to underrepresented high-school minority students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacic and Felker will introduce a general approach that
will enable, for the first time, high-dimensional fully coupled quantum
calculations of the vibrational levels of noncovalently bound molecular trimers,
for either flexible or rigid monomers. They will develop rigorous quantum bound-
state methodologies aimed at the following three classes of paradigmatic
hydrogen-bonded molecular trimers. (1) Trimers of flexible diatomic molecules,
e.g., (HF)3 and (HCl)3, in 12D. (2) Trimers of rigid small polyatomic molecules,
e.g., (H2O)3, in 12D. (3) Two types of mixed trimers of rigid molecules,
exemplified by (HCl)(H2O)2 and the halide dihydrate complexes X-(H2O)2 (X = Cl,
Br, I), in 11D and 9D, respectively. Through comparison between the computed
vibrational levels and the transitions observed in the infrared (IR) spectra of
the trimers, they will assess the accuracy of the ab initio calculated
nonadditive three-body interactions incorporated in the trimer potential energy
surfaces (PESs). Moreover, such a comparison will help them greatly with the
assignment of the measured IR spectra, which for fluxional complexes is heavily
reliant on theory. The intermolecular PESs of many molecular trimers, e.g.,
(H2O)3 and X-(H2O)2 (X = Cl, Br, I), exhibit multiple low-barrier tunneling
pathways connecting the degenerate minima, which give rise to intricate patterns
of tunneling splittings, observable in the measured spectra. The fully coupled
quantum calculations by Bacic and Felker of the intermolecular vibrational
states of the trimers will for the first time yield the tunneling splittings in
the excited vibrational states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.