* 2054927
* Microbial processes of pelagic anaerobic methane cycling in oxygen minimum zones
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Frank Stewart, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 02/28/2022
* USD 17,657.00

The overarching goal of this research is to understand how bacteria in marine
oxygen minimum zones (OMZs) control interactions between the ocean methane and
nitrogen cycles. OMZs constitute the largest pool of methane in the ocean water
column, and also serve as sites where anaerobic microbes convert the essential
element nitrogen from a form that can be used by organisms to a gaseous form
(N2) that can be lost from the ocean. Recent studies, predominantly in
freshwater environments, have discovered novel bacteria that link methane
consumption to pathways of nitrogen loss. These researchers have recently shown
that such bacteria also occur in OMZs. However, the contributions of these
bacteria to ocean methane and nitrogen flux remain unknown. Here, the
researchers will use a combination of genomics and biochemical measurements to
characterize the metabolic potential and diversity of these bacteria in OMZs and
to quantify their contribution to methane and nitrogen transformations. Meeting
this goal is critical for constraining bulk fluxes of these chemicals in the
open ocean and for predictive models of climate change, notably given the
importance of methane as a potent greenhouse gas and the prediction that OMZs
will expand with global warming. This project is also committed to enhancing
knowledge of marine microbiology in the public arena and educational
communities. The investigators will incorporate results and concepts from this
research into instructional modules for use in the Summer Workshop in Marine
Science (SWiMS) at Georgia Tech (https://swimsgatech.wordpress.com/), an annual
workshop to train middle and high school educators in marine science using
lectures and lab exercises. This project will also involve training of
undergraduate students, a postdoc, and local high school teachers through the
Georgia Tech GIFT Program. Through the combined research and educational
activities, this research will determine how low-oxygen conditions in the ocean
regulate pelagic microbial diversity and methane cycling, as well as inform,
engage, and excite scientific and general audiences about marine microbiology
and biogeochemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses specifically on
bacteria conducting nitrite-dependent anaerobic methane oxidation (n-damo). This
process has been described in bacteria of the NC10 division, in which a
dismutation reaction generates both N2 and O2 gas, with the O2 used for intra-
aerobic methane oxidation. Although NC10 bacteria have been described primarily
from nitrite-rich freshwater and marine sediments, recent evidence indicates
that NC10 are also present in anoxic OMZs. Given that OMZs contain substantial
pools of the n-damo substrates nitrite and methane, it is hypothesized that OMZs
harbor an anaerobic methane cycle coupled to nitrogen loss, and that this
coupling is mediated by n-damo NC10 bacteria that occur as ubiquitous components
in diverse OMZs. To test this hypothesis, the researchers will 1) quantify the
contribution of n-damo to OMZ methane oxidation, N2 production, and oxygen
production rates, 2) characterize the diversity and ecophysiology of OMZ NC10
isolates through enrichments and single-cell genomics, and 3) survey the
abundance, diversity, and activity of NC10 bacteria across distinct OMZ systems.