* 2054729
* I-Corps: A Novel Knee Sleeve that Provides Dynamic Motion Restraint to Abnormal Loading
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2022
* Sandra Shultz, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of evidence-based interventions to reduce the risk of
musculoskeletal injury associated with greater knee joint laxity. Knee injuries
account for ~50% of all acute musculoskeletal injuries in physically active
individuals and military personnel and can result in substantial health care
costs and reduced quality of life. Individuals (particularly young females) who
have greater knee joint laxity have more difficulty in stabilizing the knee
during sport activity and have a greater risk of knee ligament injury. Thus,
therapeutic interventions that enhance functional joint stability in those with
excessive joint laxity are critically needed from both an injury prevention and
rehabilitation standpoint. The proposed innovation is intended to fulfill this
critical need by designing an external knee support to enhance joint protection
and ensure safe motion limits are not exceeded during physical activity. When
injury does occur, the technology also may be used to protect and support the
knee while ligaments are healing. The technology may function as a stand-alone
protective device but, ideally, would be used in conjunction with a
comprehensive injury prevention or rehabilitation neuromuscular training program
designed to increase functional stability of the knee.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a knee
support that is customized to an individualâ€™s knee laxity profile to provide
dynamic motion limits when prescribed thresholds are reached. While external
knee supports are readily available on the market, initial customer discovery
research suggests a gap in the market for devices focused on injury prevention
and the treatment of excessive knee joint laxity. Project activities will: 1)
test the hypothesis that the proposed technology addresses an important gap in
injury prevention and rehabilitation, 2) solidify the target market and
customers who would most benefit from the technology, and 3) refine the value
proposition of external knee supports, including what the pain points are, and
what the desired features and performance characteristics are that would enhance
the perceived value. This effort also will advance knowledge of the knee brace
industry including key manufacturers, modes of distribution, and potential price
points based on other devices customers currently purchase or recommend or are
prescribed to them. The potential to apply this innovation to other joints of
the body also will be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.