* 2054685
* Plasmodesmata and chloroplasts in integrative defense signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jung-Youn Lee, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 06/30/2024
* USD 911,830.00

One of the most effective ways to stop spreading a contagious disease is self-
isolation. However, when self-isolation does not happen at the right timing, the
spread of disease could go unruly. This is also true at the cellular level
whether it concerns an animal or plant system. Upon a successful recognition of
invading pathogen, host cells deploy defense programs to fight off pathogens.
This often involves a phenomenon called programmed cell death, which is an
effective immune response. However, if a cell or group of cells undergo cell
death without appropriately communicating for neighboring cells to survive, it
could result in an unwanted death of the whole organism. Therefore,
understanding how cells regulate the relay of cell death or health signal is not
only critical to advance our knowledge but also to help engineer new ways to
boost host immunity. In plants, various immune signals are produced in
chloroplasts, and it is known that both chloroplasts and the intercellular
bridges called plasmodesmata are vital for plant defense. Through multi-
disciplinary research proposed in this project, the research team aims to
investigate how infected cells in plants might deliver chloroplastic immune
signals to plasmodesmata and communicate with their surrounding cells to
differentially relay death and health signals at the right time and right place.
These investigations will be performed using state-of-the-art live-cell imaging
techniques and genetically encoded fluorescent sensors introduced into mutant
plants that are altered in chloroplasts mobility or plasmodesmal
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Upon pathogen infection, plants can elicit the
hypersensitive response (HR), triggering programmed cell death (PCD) of the
infected cells while preserving the health of the surrounding cells. HR-PCD is a
highly effective form of plant immunity that can potentially lead to new
solutions for boosting agricultural productivity without relying heavily on
biocides. However, it remains unknown how HR-PCD is contained to just those
cells within and near the infection sites. Here, the research team proposes to
explore the signal relay between the HR-PCD cells and the healthy cells
bordering them. Specifically, they will focus on hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), which
is a key type of reactive oxygen species (ROS) required for HR-PCD. The team
will track how the H2O2 burst from intracellular chloroplasts is delivered to
restrict molecular movement through the plasmodesmata connecting cells within
the HR-PCD site and healthy cells surrounding it. Major research aims include:
1) Establishing the timeline between H2O2 burst and PD status; 2) Investigating
the potential of a localized H2O2 burst at PD; 3) Exploring the modes of PD
regulation within and outside HR-PCD cells. The research team envisions
delivering, for the first time, a high-resolution, real-time plasmodesmal
permeability map displaying how chloroplast-plasmodesmata interactions may occur
at the intra- and intercellular levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.