* 2054990
* Establishing a Hub to Support Education of Biomanufacturing Technicians in Cell Therapy and Immunotherapy
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Thomas Hamilton, Shoreline Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 04/30/2024
* USD 426,886.00

Recent innovations have enabled development of new therapies that reengineer the
body’s immune system. These therapies include medical treatments with
bioengineered cells (cell therapy) and medical treatments with drugs or other
molecules that alter immune system function (immunotherapy). With the rapid
development of these therapies, the U.S. biopharmaceutical industry has made
major advancements toward curing some of society’s most devastating cancers and
diseases. Manufacture of these therapies requires large numbers of skilled
biomanufacturing technicians. Yet, due to the relative novelty of the relevant
manufacturing processes, there are few community college training programs that
focus on biomanufacturing of cell/immunotherapies. As a result, the U.S. has a
significant workforce shortage for biomanufacturing technicians with these
skills. With this award, Shoreline Community College proposes to develop a
Cell/Immunotherapy Hub, with the goal of increasing the number of skilled
biomanufacturing technicians in this sector. These technicians will help fill
regional and national workforce shortages in the rapidly expanding field of
cell/immunotherapy production. This workforce is essential for maintaining
national health, security, and economic growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
team will build on knowledge generated from its past initiatives to advance the
groundbreaking innovations in cell and immunotherapies. The project has three
goals: 1) develop comprehensive labor market and skills-gap analysis of
cell/immunotherapy technicians on a national level; 2) develop best-practices
for outreach and pipeline development to include people from underrepresented
groups and high school students in these careers; and 3) become a knowledge-
source and catalyst for other community colleges to develop cell/immunotherapy
technician education programs and curriculum. These efforts will contribute to a
diverse biomanufacturing workforce equipped with the knowledge and expertise to
meet the demands of the cell/immunotherapy biomanufacturing industry. The
project will deliver high school teacher workshops to ensure that youth are
aware of the technologies and related career opportunities. It intends to
produce outreach and recruitment materials focused on individuals from groups
that have been disproportionally impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The project
will disseminate findings to high schools, community colleges, and industry
stakeholders nationally. Not only will this work improve the skills and
advancement opportunities for technicians in the biomanufacturing industry, but
it has the potential to accelerate the competitiveness of the rapidly growing
U.S. cell/immunotherapy sector and the production of curative medicines for
deadly diseases. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.