* 2054758
* FET: CAREER: Algorithms, cryptography and complexity meet quantum reductions
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Fang Song, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 03/31/2025
* USD 418,959.00

New problems are often solved by (implicitly) converting them into familiar
problems that people already know how to solve. Mathematicians and computer
scientists formalize this methodology as reductions. This project will revisit
reductions, i.e., the converting procedures, by equipping them with the emerging
technology of quantum computing. After developing the basic toolkit, quantum
reductions will be employed in two major directions: basing cryptography on the
better-understood NP-hard problems and the like, and designing new algorithms.
The impacts include strengthening the foundation for secure communication and
computation, boosting the power of successful quantum algorithmic framework to
produce new algorithmic techniques, as well as developing insights and finer
picture into the fundamental capabilities of quantum and classical computation.
The research will be intertwined with a concerted effort in education and
outreach. New courses and strategies will be exercised, and activities such as
quantum workshops and programming contests will be organized. All will serve the
goal of inviting more students in quantum information science and training a
diverse workforce in quantum and STEM. Advising will be conducted towards a
broad group of students at various levels, which will be combined with building
connections with industry and research labs to enhance research dissemination
and the career success of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project approaches
the fundamental pursuit of understanding the strengths and limits of quantum
computing and making it accessible via a novel route, reductions, which are
procedures that effectively relate one problem to another. A systematic
investigation will be conducted on algorithm design, cryptography and complexity
theory under quantum reductions. The major objectives are: 1) pinning down
formal definitions of quantum reductions based on the classical counterparts
(e.g., Karp and Turing reductions), and finding their general properties; 2)
revisiting average-case hardness under quantum reductions, focusing on the
inquiry of basing cryptography on worst-case hardness, and the reducibility
between cryptographic primitives; and 3) using quantum reductions to design new
algorithms and establish (worst-case) hardness results, and depicting a finer
picture of the capabilities of quantum and classical computation. A concerted
effort in education, mentoring and outreach will be integrated into the research
plan, which can train a new generation of workforce in quantum computation and
further broaden the participation in computing, STEM more generally, from a
diverse group of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.