* 2054657
* CRII: SaTC: Securing Containers in Multi-Tenant Environment via Augmenting Linux Control Groups
* CSE,CNS
* 08/16/2020,05/31/2024
* Xing Gao, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 05/31/2024
* USD 152,097.00

Container technology provides a lightweight operating system level virtual
hosting environment. It has been broadly adopted in various computation
scenarios, including edge computing, serverless computing, and commercial
clouds. Containers depend on multiple building blocks in the Linux kernel for
resource isolation and control. Particularly, Linux Control Groups (i.e.,
cgroups) are leveraged to apply resource limits and account for resource usage
for containers. However, those features in the Linux kernel may not provide the
same level of security guarantees as conventional virtual machines. For example,
breaking the resource control of cgroups would not only cause unfair resource
sharing among multiple container instances, but also significantly reduce
containers’ performance. This project intends to secure containers by
systematically investigating security implications in cgroups and developing new
defending systems to mitigate potential security threats in multi-tenant
container environments. The research is expected to identify and address new
security challenges in containers, and thus benefit both container service
providers and customers. Educational and outreach activities include curriculum
development in systems programming and cloud security, and research experience
opportunities for women and minority students as well as for high school
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project would systematically explore methods
to break the resource rein of the existing cgroups mechanism, and
comprehensively understand the security impacts on Linux containers. It develops
a set of exploiting strategies to generate out-of-band workloads to escape
cgroups. Novel kernel code analysis techniques are developed that use a
combination of data flow, control flow and program dependency graphs to
automatically uncover feasible exploitation cases available inside unprivileged
containers with a set of cgroup resource controllers enabled. All potential
exploits are quantitatively evaluated on multiple testbeds in realistic
container environments under various attack scenarios. Specifically, a variety
of real-world workloads are evaluated to understand the impact and severity of
vulnerabilities. With better knowledge of the inadequacies in existing cgroup
mechanism and related exploitations, the project develops lightweight defense
mechanisms to secure containers and mitigate potential security threats. The
proposed system is evaluated in terms of multiple aspects including performance
and security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.