* 2054522
* Experimental constraints on the rheology of the mantle lithosphere at the base of the seismogenic zone
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* J. Gregory Hirth, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 04/30/2024
* USD 422,170.00

The largest and most damaging earthquakes occur along plate boundaries where
lithosphere is subducted beneath the continents. Geoscientists have discovered
that a wide range of fault slip processes occur in these regions, and
significant progress has been made understanding these events by integrating
geophysical observations with models and constraints from lab experiments.
However, there are still gaps in our understanding of mechanical properties at
the relevant conditions. Previous work at these conditions has been hindered by
relatively poor resolution of the stresses being imposed on the sample during an
experiment. The investigators have made new modifications to their high-pressure
equipment that will lead to significant improvement in the ability to measure
stress and characterize the fault slip behavior that occurs within the
subduction zone environment. The results will provide new constraints necessary
to understand how earthquake slip initiates and to explain why there is a
limited depth range over which the earthquakes occur. The project will fund two
Ph.D. students (one completing a thesis and another starting a thesis during the
duration of the project). Outreach will be coordinated with the Departmentâ€™s
DEEPS STEP (STEM in Providence Public Schools) program. Engagement in rock
mechanics, with its strong links to engineering, has the potential to bridge a
gap to URM STEM students, who remain dramatically underrepresented in Earth
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves experiments to: (a)
quantify frictional behavior at high-temperature under both dry and wet
conditions; (b) investigate low temperature plasticity of olivine aggregates at
high pressure conditions near the brittle-plastic transition, which is also
relevant for constraining the extrapolation of rate-and-state friction laws to
mantle conditions; (c) constrain the role of dehydration reactions on the
frictional stability of the lithosphere; and (d) determine frictional behavior
and flow law parameters for alteration phases at high pressure to constrain the
strength of altered lithosphere (and stress state prior to dehydration). The
improvements to the investigator's apparatus enhances the ability to: (a)
conduct creep tests, which will allow acquisition of better data to constrain
flow law parameters; and (b) resolve transient deformation, which significantly
improves the ability to quantify rate-and-state friction parameters at the high
pressure conditions where seismicity occurs. The results will provide
constraints for a wide range of scientists interested in the diverse fields of
metamorphism, geodynamics, seismology, the physics of earthquakes, and fluid
transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.