* 2054939
* RCN: Patterns, Places, People: A Network for Scalable Airborne Observation of Socio-Environmental Systems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Elsa Ordway, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Addressing many of the challenges society faces, including climate change, food
and water insecurity, and biodiversity loss, requires a better understanding of
the interactions between people and their environment. Important interactions
depend on scale (e.g., individuals, communities, government) and environmental
conditions, suggesting the value in a landscape perspective. Landscapes include
people with diverse perspectives and experiences, and there are many different
fields of research relevant to understanding how humans and their non-human
counterparts interact with changing environments. For this reason, the study of
Socio-Environmental Systems (SES) can benefit from transdisciplinary cooperation
that engages stakeholders in the development of scientific research that
recognizes and leverages the social and behavioral dynamics of ecological
systems. This Research Coordination Network (RCN) project will develop the
Landscape Exchange Network for Socio-environmental systems research (LENS),
which will leverage detailed observations from the National Ecological
Observatory Network’s Airborne Observation Platform (NEON AOP) to study SES
across the United States. LENS will build a network of researchers and
stakeholders with interest in the NEON sites currently observed by the AOP. LENS
will collaboratively work to understand the variability in SES across NEON sites
and to address environmental outcomes of societal concern to LENS membership.
Broader impacts of this project will include training a graduate student and
engaging approximately 1 million people that live within or in close proximity
to NEON AOP landscapes. Addressing privacy and ethical concerns, issues of
environmental justice, and other concerns of large- and small-holder land-owners
and -managers within these landscapes will be central to the work of the
RCN.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To improve capacity for SES research, societal
understanding of SES, and environmental outcomes, this project will initiate and
coordinate an RCN for Socio-environmental systems research. LENS will (Objective
#1) characterize SES represented in the landscapes surveyed by the NEON AOP. As
these SES are characterized, and in collaboration with NEON domain managers,
LENS will identify and engage stakeholders in network activities from AOP
landscapes. With scientist and stakeholder members, LENS will (Objective #2)
develop strategies that support an effective translational ecology approach in
these landscapes. In doing so, LENS will (Objective #3) develop and communicate
methods for using AOP data in SES research using the translational ecology
approach. These objectives will be met through a combination of virtual and in-
person meetings, data discovery and sharing, development of an online repository
of AOP-related computational tools, and production of communication products.
The network will create and openly share an accessible, curated and
transdisciplinary repository of data relevant to SES in the AOP landscapes, and
will strengthen inter-institutional pathways for translational ecology employing
AOP. These broader impacts will be a new model for engagement of the public in
scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded
by the Macrosystems Biology &amp; NEON-Enabled Science and the Human-Environment
&amp; Geographical Sciences programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.