* 2054182
* Descriptive Set Theory and Computability
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Andrew Marks, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 347,167.00

An important problem encountered throughout mathematics is to completely
classify some type of mathematical object by invariants. The field of
descriptive set theory gives a general framework for studying these types of
classification problems and comparing their relative difficulties. The PI
proposes research in descriptive set theory and its connections with other
mathematical fields including computability, operator algebras, topological
dynamics, and ergodic theory. The PI will continue facilitating connections with
these mathematical communities, and engaging with graduate students and young
researchers. The project will support the training of graduate students at
UCLA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes research on Weiss's question on
amenability and hyperfiniteness using tools from Gromov's theory of asymptotic
dimension. This approach to Weiss's question has already greatly extended and
simplified prior results on the problem and clarified their proofs. This
investigation has applications to topological dynamics and operator algebras.
The PI also proposes research on classical geometrical paradoxes such as the
Banach-Tarski paradox and Tarski's circle squaring problem. Recent advances in
measurable combinatorics have led to new theorems giving measurable solutions to
these problems using combinatorial techniques from the study of flows and
matching problems on Borel graphs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.