* 2054068
* Fourier Analysis in Convex Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Alexander Koldobsky, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 264,017.00

This project is focused on the study of geometric properties of solids based on
information about their sections and projections. This branch of convex geometry
is called geometric tomography. One of the examples is x-ray tomography, which
has numerous applications in science, medicine and engineering. The PI recently
discovered that important problems of geometric tomography can be solved using
the most popular tool of harmonic analysis, the Fourier transform. This tool
allows one to decompose the data into a simple combination of harmonics,
functions with periodically repeating values, and, by doing this, one can reduce
geometric problems to computations related to the harmonics, the theory of which
is well developed. This approach has led to solutions of the 1956 Busemann-Petty
problem on sections of convex bodies, the 1938 Schoenberg's problem on positive
definite functions, the slicing problem for arbitrary functions. The PI plans to
further develop the Fourier approach and apply it to a range of problems at the
interface between convex geometry, functional analysis, probability theory and
algebra. For example, can one find an algebraic equation whose solutions are
sections of a given solid? Can one estimate the volume of a solid from data
involving areas of certain sets of sections or projections of this solid? Which
random variables are stable, that is, have the property that the sums of several
copies of these variables always reproduce the same variable up to a constant?
An important part of the project is the involvement and training of graduate
students and postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problems considered connect
several areas of mathematics - convex geometry, functional analysis, probability
and algebra. However, the strategy of solution is common for most of the results
- the question is translated into the language of the Fourier transform and then
treated as a problem from harmonic analysis. The PI plans to develop further
connections between convex geometry and algebra by considering the problem of
Arnold, going back to Lemma 28 from Newton's "Principia." The problem is to
characterize those convex domains whose cut-off area is an algebraic function of
the parameters of the cutting plane. The classical slicing problem of Bourgain
asks whether every symmetric convex body of volume one has a hyperplane section
with area greater than an absolute constant. The PI plans to study the lower-
dimensional and non-symmetric versions of the Busemann-Petty problem asking
whether a convex body with uniformly smaller areas of plane sections necessarily
has smaller volume. Another direction is to study the general properties of the
Radon transform associated with volumetric results about convex bodies. A
connection with functional analysis is the study of distances between convex
bodies, embedding and duality problems. The question about positive definite
functions and embeddings in Lebesgue spaces is related to an old problem in
probability theory asking for a characterization of stable random
vectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.