* 2054997
* Preparing Students for Technical Careers in Autonomous Technologies for Commercial Trucks and Off-Highway Vehicles
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Chris Hadfield, Dakota County Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 03/31/2024
* USD 466,267.00

To increase safety and reduce costs, autonomous technologies are rapidly growing
in commercial trucking fleets and off-highway vehicles. Autonomous technologies
require a variety of devices, including radar, lidar, video camera systems,
communication systems, and differential global positioning systems. Truck
service technicians need to be trained to troubleshoot, diagnose, repair, and
calibrate these devices and vehicle control systems. However, technician
training programs have not kept pace with the new technologies or the increasing
demand for technicians with these skills. To address these needs, this project
will offer training workshops for instructors in diesel and truck technician
training programs. These workshops will help instructors enhance their training
programs to include the knowledge, skills, and abilities needed for maintaining
autonomous technologies in vehicles. The project is led by the Minnesota State
Transportation Center of Excellence, a consortium of public post-secondary
colleges with transportation programs. The project will provide consortium
members with shared access to vehicles with autonomous technologies. These
vehicles will be used for the new training programs, as well as outreach. This
project intends to prepare students for technical careers in a growing field
that requires new skills and understanding of autonomous technologies for
vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Minnesota State Transportation Center of
Excellence serves as a resource hub for autonomous technologies in
transportation, providing curriculum resources and subject matter experts for
secondary and post-secondary educators. The goal of this project is to advance
the knowledge of autonomous technologies in truck service technician programs
and, thus, address the growing need for qualified, knowledgeable technicians
with the ability to maintain and repair these technologies. To do so, the
project will: (1) develop awareness of career opportunities and advances in
autonomous technologies for secondary students, transitional workers, and
veterans; (2) enhance existing technician programs through professional
development for educators and curriculum development; and (3) support the
technician training community with shared resources that will include a set of
vehicles equipped with the latest autonomous technologies. Using faculty and
student surveys, focus groups, and interviews, the project will assess the
impact of career awareness activities on students, the impact of the
professional development workshops on faculty, and the impact of the new
training equipment on students and faculty. The project outcomes will be
disseminated through national conferences and professional transportation-
related associations. Educational resources developed during this project will
be made available to the public through the centerâ€™s website. This project is
funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.