* 2054306
* DMS/NIGMS 1: Design and Analysis of Machine Learning Approaches for Long Timescale Prediction from Short Trajectory Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Aaron Dinner, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2024
* USD 401,027.00

Events like the changes in molecular interactions underlying functions in our
bodies, or the extremely intense hurricanes that cause devastating damage to our
coastal cities, are difficult to study computationally because they occur very
infrequently on feasible simulation timescales. Remarkably, it is theoretically
possible to bypass this issue by appealing to certain high-dimensional equations
characterizing long-timescale statistics in terms of short-timescale properties.
Leveraging these equations and new tools in statistical and machine learning to
solve them, this project introduces algorithms to learn long-time statistics
using a data set consisting of many short simulations. The development of these
algorithms will be informed by mathematical analysis aimed at fully
characterizing their potential utility. The research will complement and support
significant and diverse applications of critical societal interest. Examples
include studies of protein assemblies relevant to treating diabetes and wound
healing and changes in atmospheric conditions that lead to polar vortices and
tropical cyclones. Because the methods developed in this project avoid the need
to make simplifying assumptions when formulating the models, they promise to
reveal the underlying physical mechanisms of these and other processes in
unprecedented detail. The project will provide opportunities to graduate
students to be involved in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
concerns the development and analysis of a family of algorithms that assemble
forecasts of events occurring over extremely long times using only a data set
consisting of short trajectories. In this approach, forecasts (conditional
expectations of future behavior) are cast as solutions to equations involving
the operator determining the statistics of the underlying dynamical system.
Building on significant and promising preliminary efforts employing a basis
expansion approximation of the target predictive functions, this project will
develop more expressive approximations that remain robust and reliable. A first
aim will explore kernelized extensions of the basis expansion approach, which
will allow careful control of the degree of approximation flexibility. A second
aim will explore variational representations, allowing the introduction of
neural network approximations and their extreme expressive power. Introducing
this higher level of approximation flexibility while maintaining reliability and
reproducibility will be a significant challenge. A third but parallel thrust
will provide a careful and complete mathematical analysis of the basis expansion
and kernel-based methods with an emphasis on building a theory that informs even
the more complicated neural network-based approaches. All computational
approaches will be extensively validated on a benchmark protein
folding/unfolding data set. Their development will be accompanied by careful
mathematical error analysis aimed at understanding the effect of various design
choices such as the measure with respect to which the data is sampled and the
length of the short simulations in the data set.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.