* 2054926
* CSEDI Collaborative Proposal: a multi-disciplinary investigation of slab deformation and resulting seismic anisotropy from the transition zone to the base of the mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Mingming Li, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2024
* USD 181,493.00

Over geological time scales, rocks in Earth’s deep interior flow like fluids.
The deformation and advection of rocks within the Earth are concrete expressions
of mantle thermal convection. Mantle convection drives plate tectonics near
Earth’s surface and controls the long-term evolution of the planet. For this
project, a team of scientists from different research fields - including
seismology, mineral physics, and geodynamics - collaborate to better understand
the nature of mantle convection. When earthquakes happen, the energy propagates
through Earth’s interior in the form of seismic waves. The speed of seismic
waves traveling through rocks in one direction is often different from that in
another direction. This phenomenon is called seismic anisotropy. Seismic
anisotropy of rocks is controlled by their mineral structure and the nature of
the surrounding mantle flows. Here, the researchers use super-computers to
simulate mantle flow fields. They perform mineral physics experiments to study
the deformation mechanisms of mantle minerals. They analyze seismic waves to
understand mantle seismic anisotropy. The predicted mantle flow fields are
combined with new understanding of mineral deformation to predict seismic
anisotropy, which is then compared with observations. The aim is to provide new
insight into the structure and dynamics of Earth’s deep interior. This project
fosters inter-disciplinary collaboration and provides support to 3 graduate
students, 1 postdoctoral associate and 1 early-career scientist. Teaching
materials will be produced, which will be used in undergraduate and graduate
classes and in educational outreach to the public through outreach events and
via the internet. Analytical and modeling software will become available to
general users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past few decades, seismic
anisotropy has been observed mainly in Earth’s uppermost and lowermost mantle.
Yet, accumulating evidence suggests the presence of significant seismic
anisotropy in the transition zone and the uppermost lower mantle. The nature of
uppermost mantle seismic anisotropy is relatively well established, and some
consensus exists to first order on the large-scale distribution of anisotropy in
D". There is, however, little consensus on the character and strength of seismic
anisotropy in the mantle transition zone and the uppermost lower mantle. It
remains unclear at these depths how seismic anisotropy is related to mantle flow
and the deformation mechanisms of mantle minerals. Interpreting seismic
observations in the context of mantle dynamics requires input from mineral
physicists and geodynamicists; they can relate the seismic velocities and
anisotropy to temperature, composition, and deformation of the corresponding
materials. Here an interdisciplinary team of seismologists, geodynamicists, and
mineral physicists aim to further advance the understanding of the seismic and
viscosity structures, and the nature of mantle flow in two regions: 1) the D"
layer, in continuation of their previous works; (2) the extended transition zone
located at depths ranging from ~400 to 1000 km within the
Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.