* 2054195
* Tissue-specific regulation of RNA-based enzymes by their protein subunits
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jernej Murn, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,065,302.00

Although most enzymes are proteins, there are a few, known as ribozymes, that
are multi-subunit complexes containing both protein and RNA. Ribozymes typically
catalyze essential processes without which cells could not use or inherit
genetic information correctly. This project will investigate two different
ribozymes known as RNase P and RNase MRP. Their normal function is to modify
other RNA molecules that are themselves are essential for protein synthesis.
Both of these ribozymes are comprised of multiple protein subunits and an RNA
molecule. The proposed work will use a combination of biochemistry, genetics,
and cell biology to ascertain the functional significance of each of the protein
subunits, focusing on mammalian cells. The broader impacts of this work include
better understanding of ribozymes found in all cells. The project also aims to
broaden participation in science by providing mentored research experiences to
graduate students and first-year undergraduates, some of whom are from groups
under-represented in science, technology, engineering and mathematics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RNases P and MRP are essential endonucleases critical for
maturation of tRNAs and rRNAs, respectively. All components of RNases P and MRP,
including the catalytic RNA and several associated proteins, are considered
essential for life, and mutations in the genes encoding them can cause disease.
Nevertheless, the roles of the protein subunits of these RNA-based enzymes are
poorly understood. Several fundamental questions remain open: How do individual
subunits impact enzymatic function? Why are so many protein subunits found in
eukaryotes but just one in bacteria? What are the roles of subunit variants in
animals? This study will expand our understanding of the molecular and cellular
roles of RNase P/MRP protein subunits by focusing on their variants. A
particular emphasis will be on two alternative subunit variants that display
tissue-specific expression and non-redundant cellular functions. Understanding
how alternative subunit composition might allow for functional diversification
of metazoan RNases P and MRP will be of widespread significance across
biological sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the
Directorate of Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.