* 2054124
* EAGER:Predictive Surrogate Modeling and Analysis of Radiative Heat transfer in Porous Media
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Shima Hajimirza, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2022
* USD 143,725.00

Radiative heat transfer in porous media is complex and ambiguous; yet, measuring
the radiative properties of a target porous media is of vital importance.
Measurement and prediction of the radiative properties is critical for
simulation and design of energy technologies that involve porous material
structures, including pebble beds in nuclear reactors, selective laser sintering
technology, solar absorbers, solar thermochemical reactors, biological tissues,
thermal barriers for jet engines and space vehicles, ceramic foams for catalytic
combustion and many more. At present, predicting radiative properties of
randomly packed beds requires large time-consuming ray-tracing simulations. This
project replaces these computations with efficient machine learning based
methods to revolutionize a wide range of related applications and underlying
technologies.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This transformative project demonstrates
that surrogate models can approximate and predict the probability distribution
functions of radiative properties of randomly packed structures reliably and
efficiently. Large time-consuming ray-tracing Monte Carlo simulations are
replaced by predictive models based on machine learning methods. The inputs to
the models are statistics of a wide range of variables pertaining to the
physical configurations of void, solid, boundary conditions and dimensions and
the medium shape. Various learning models are studied for data fitting, and an
analysis of accuracy versus the cost of computation is performed for each. Data
sampling, model selection and model fitting are all engineered to render
surrogate models that are accurate, efficient, scalable and generalizable.
Sampling, design of experiment and model fitting is studied for each surrogate
model to reduce the computational load while minimizing the cost of data
collection and learning. The practical accuracy of the proposed models is
validated based on comparison with direct Monte Carlo simulations and previously
established laboratory-based experiments. The proposed predictive models are
applied in computed tomography for inference of porous media structures in
various applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.