* 2054935
* RAPID: Waiting to Exhale:  Quantifying Tropical Storm-Induced Increased Flux of Coastal Wetland Carbon into the Atmosphere?
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/2020,10/31/2022
* John White, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 10/31/2022
* USD 100,937.00

In the summer and fall of 2020, the coastal bays of Louisiana have experienced
impacts from a number of tropical storms/hurricanes in close procession.
Tropical storm Marco, Hurricanes Laura, Sally and Beta made their closest
approaches to Barataria Bay from 81 km for Marco, up to 379 km for Beta. Storm
erosion can lead to carbon from coastal soils being released to the atmosphere
as carbon dioxide (CO2). Scientists rarely have the opportunity to assess the
impact of tropical storms on the conversion of wetland soil carbon to CO2
release to the atmosphere, because they don’t have detailed measurements from
before the storms to compare with post-storm data. This project has an
opportunity to benefit from an existing NSF grant with four years of extensive
measurements. RAPID-response funding will support intensive sampling of
Barataria Bay in the immediate aftermath of the 2020 storms, and up to a year
afterwards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite no direct strikes to the coastal
basin, marsh edge erosion rates were up to 60 times higher than the 4-year long-
term average. This is already an important finding since most measurements focus
on coastlines with direct strikes but clearly, substantial wetland erosion
occurs from tropical storms imparting wind fields driving wave energy at
substantial distances. Consequently, a particularly active tropical storm season
has led to significant carbon-rich wetland soil being dumped into the shallow,
aerobic waters of the Barataria Bay in a relatively short period of time. The
primary questions to be addressed by this project are whether and how
accelerated erosion from the 2020 storm season will lead to a significant
increase in CO2 outgassing from the bay to the atmosphere, and for how long the
effects will persist. The team of investigators will continue to measure marsh
edge erosion over the next year correlated to twice a month water sampling of
bay surface waters for determination of dissolved inorganic and organic carbon,
and dissolved CO2. Sampling will be conducted along transects running from close
proximity to the wetland erosion stations out in the open bay. Air-sea CO2 flux
will be estimated using a model and correlated to the wetland erosion rates. The
team will compare the storm event-induced “bay respiration” rate with that of
next year. This RAPID project will yield several important outcomes: 1)
Determination of the increase and temporal impact of wetland carbon loss to the
atmosphere from a number of significant storms, similar to what is expected for
the future under a changing climate; 2) Understanding if the organic C breakdown
to CO2 will increase coastal acidification within the coastal
bay.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.