* 2054274
* Significant Enhancement of Structural Integrity of Shape Memory Ceramics in High Cycle Fatigue
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Cristian Ciobanu, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 406,500.00

Although shape memory ceramics have shown good performance in low cycle fatigue,
their significant deterioration in high cycle fatigue has stalled their
applications. This award supports fundamental research to understand the
mechanisms of nano and microscale fracture in shape memory ceramics and to study
how engineered defects can impede facture under high cycle fatigue. These new
scientific insights are important for the development and use of shape memory
ceramics in applications requiring high-temperature and corrosion-resistant
actuators and may propel the U.S. into the forefront of advanced shape memory
ceramic technology. The award will provide training and education at several
levels: a graduate student and a postdoctoral research associate will be
recruited to perform the research, supported by undergraduate research interns,
and K-12 students will be introduced to concepts in advanced computational
research. Lastly, a professional development course for graduate students will
be further developed and the research will be integrated in a core graduate-
level course on computational mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fracture in high
cycle fatigue has been one of the main drawbacks of shape memory ceramics. Until
now, most efforts have focused on eliminating defect structures in the
manufacturing of these ceramics to enable their use in applications that do not
take advantage of the shape memory effect. Matristic phase transformation that
mediates the thermo-mechanical shape memory behavior of ceramics is associated
with a nanoscale volume expansion aiding the nanoscale fracture. This research
will fundamentally study how engineering defects into the nano and
microstructures of shape memory ceramics can accommodate the volume expansion
and mitigate both interface and grain boundary fracture and unwanted amorphous
phase formation during high cycle fatigue. The mechanisms of nanoscale cracking
during the first few fatigue cycles will be studied by petascale atomistic
simulations. And at the microscale, the effects of engineered defects on high
cycle fatigue fracture will be studied by coupling the physics and
thermodynamics of shape memory behavior in ceramics with those of the fatigue
and fracture under a phase field modeling framework. Verification and validation
of models and simulation data along with uncertainty quantification will be done
with experimental data available in the literature. The findings will be used to
propose new fatigue lifetime prediction functions that account for the volume
fraction and size of the defects and other nano and microstructural
features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.