* 2054438
* Collaborative Research: Promoting or Suppressing Solid-State Phase Transformation via Interface Control
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,01/31/2022
* Yue Qi, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 01/31/2022
* USD 72,466.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The renewable energy future, from electric vehicles
to rechargeable personal devices, strongly depends on Li-ion energy storage
technology. This project focuses on understanding and controlling processes in
electrode materials that can allow for greater storage capacities but typically
suffer from severe degradation due to changes in their solid-state structures.
Most of the research, which involves both experimental and computational
approaches, is designed to promote or suppress the solid-state phase change of
the electrode by depositing a coating layer to impose chemical and mechanical
constraints. The specific findings from this project, especially on suppressing
the phase change, will enable low-cost, abundant, cobalt-free, high-capacity
conversion electrodes with long cycle life for lithium-based batteries that are
used in a variety of applications. The scientific advancement will stimulate the
broader materials research community to explore the influence of interfacial
controls on phase competition for many materials systems. Knowledge transfer is
occurring through both public dissemination and direct interactions with
industrial and national lab partners through the PIs’ research network.
Furthermore, these research activities serve as an educational platform for
students at all levels and from different backgrounds to develop
interdisciplinary expertise by directly experiencing both computational and
experimental methods through this collaborative research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Pursuing both high lithium storage
capacity and reversibility is a dilemma but also a crucial need as the renewable
energy future, from electric vehicles to renewable power, strongly depends on
Li-ion energy storage technology. This project will explore a new design
principle to extend reversible intercalation reactions to higher lithium
capacity by using surface modification and conformal coatings to suppress the
irreversible solid-state phase transformations. Efforts at Michigan State
University focus on developing a Density Functional Theory (DFT)-based
multiscale modeling method to accurately predict phase evolution in the coated
electrode. Efforts at University of Maryland will precisely control the surface
layer with atomic layer deposition (ALD) to vary its chemistry, modulus, and
thickness and perform electrochemical characterization. The collaborative
efforts will determine atomistic origins of the competition between conversion
and intercalation reactions during lithiation of conversion cathode materials
and determine the coupled chemical-mechanical effect of the nanoscale coating
layer on the competition of the two reactions. The scientific impact of this
project goes beyond improved life and performance of conversion-type materials
to the fundamental opportunity to understand how a material’s bulk reactions can
be modulated through carefully designed interfacial control layers. Faculty from
both Universities are working with students at all levels and from different
backgrounds to expand educational outcomes to a broader research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.