* 2054942
* Materials and Interface Engineering for Highly Efficient and Stable 2D/3D Tin Pseudohalide Perovskite Solar Cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Qiuming Yu, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 04/30/2024
* USD 396,498.00

Photovoltaic (PV) technology is sustainable, clean source of energy with the
capacity to fulfill our growing energy needs. Hybrid organic-inorganic lead
halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have emerged in the past decade as a
promising low-cost, thin film solar cell with high efficiency and roll-to-roll
printing processability, which could encourage a transition into a clean energy
economy. However, the use of lead raises the concerns for commercialization
because of the potential environmental contamination and human health problems.
It is important to carefully find an environmentally benign and efficient
replacement for lead with a focus on keeping the excellent properties ascribed
to its presence in perovskite materials. Tin perovskite is regarded as an ideal
candidate to replace lead perovskite with the theoretical PCE of tin PSCs close
to 30% according to Shockley-Queisser limit. Despite progress having been made,
the efficiency and stability of tin PSCs are still inferior to their lead
counterparts. This project will apply a synergetic approach via materials and
interface engineering with the goal to reduce defects, suppress tin oxidization,
enhance charge extraction and transport, and reduce energy losses, hence, to
increase the efficiency and stability of tin PSCs. Success in this project will
advance the knowledge of ionic semiconducting materials and device physics of
thin film solar cells, which could lead to a transition into a clean energy
economy because of potential commercialization of lead-free, highly efficient
and stable PSCs fabricated with low-temperature, large-area, high-throughput
processes. Graduate and undergraduate students from underrepresented groups will
receive training in this highly interdisciplinary research project. The
knowledge gained from this work will be disseminated through the workshop that
the PI group will offer to the annual event of Expanding Your Horizons at
Cornell campus and Ithaca Sciencenter by providing hands-on activities and
demonstrations for young students and their families. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
challenge with tin-based PSCs is primarily due to tin-defects, resulting in the
undesirable nonradiative recombination of photocarriers and metallic
conductivity, and the attendant loss of open-circuit voltage. Additionally, the
dangling bonds on the surface and at the grain boundaries introduce trap states,
which act as the centers of nonradiative recombination and degradation sites.
The research team aims to (1) develop novel Dion-Jacobson (DJ) phase two-
dimensional and three-dimensional (2D/3D) tin pseudohalide perovskites to reduce
tin defects and passivate defects at the grain boundaries and surfaces; (2)
synthesize new hole transport materials by introducing functional groups to
guide perovskite growth and reduce interface trap states; and (3) deploy new
hole and electron transport materials in tin PSCs to increase device efficiency
and stability. Forming DJ phase 2D/3D hybrid tin perovskites represents a
paradigm shift in tackling the challenge of efficiency and stability of tin-
based PSCs. The intellectual merit is driven by our hypotheses: (1) the defects
can be significantly reduced and the tin oxidation can be effectively suppressed
by adopting large A’-site divalent cations and pseudohalide anions to form 2D/3D
bulk and planar heterojunction tin perovskites; and (2) the energy losses can be
significantly reduced and the device stability can be greatly enhanced by
utilizing newly developed hole and electron transport materials to guide
perovskite growth and passivate defects, respectively. By fundamentally
understanding the structural and optoelectronic properties of DJ phase 2D/3D tin
pseudohalide perovskites, the effect of functionalized hole transport layer on
the growth of perovskites, and the non-fullerene acceptor interaction with
perovskites, the general principles to guide the development of highly
efficient, stable tin PSCs can be elucidated, which could lead to the
transformation of clean energy techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.