* 2054885
* EAGER: Towards establishing trait-based phenotypes for Symbiodiniaceae algae within reef corals - A low-cost approach using an open-source instrument platform.
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Kenneth Hoadley, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 02/29/2024
* USD 290,214.00

As worldwide coral bleaching events continue to increase in severity and
frequency, new techniques are desperately needed to help us better understand
how individual Symbiodiniaceae species are functionally different from one
another and how this contributes to the current patterns of thermal
susceptibility and tolerance observed across reef systems. The PI’s newly
developed prototype instrument would enable researchers to exploit differences
in the relative abundance and use of photopigments, and their response to
fluctuating light to resolve species-specific functional traits within algae.
The need for standardized tools that help predict bleaching vulnerability and
improve our understanding of thermal tolerance was highlighted in a NSF
sponsored coral bleaching workshop held in July of
2016.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs request funding use the PI’s prototype
fluorometer to assess photo-physiological differences across over 30 different
species of coral currently grown within land-based nurseries. Production of a
large data set which matches phenotype to genotype is critical for ground
truthing the instruments ability to resolve functional differences across
Symbiodiniaceae species. The PI will also further optimize the instrument for
underwater deployment so that coral/algal symbioses may be queried in-situ. The
end product would be a highly versatile and low-cost instrument platform readily
accessible to both researchers and conservation/restoration focused
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.