* 2054361
* Establishing a Subauroral Geophysical Observatory for Space Physics and Radio Science at Gakona, Alaska
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2026
* Mark Conde, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Roman Makarevich
* 03/31/2026
* USD 5,570,180.00

This project supports the NSF space physics and aeronomy community in their
effort to observe and actively probe Earth’s upper atmosphere and geospace
environment, in the subauroral and auroral zones. Instruments and infrastructure
for these studies are already established, and together comprise a world class
year-round observatory that is located at Gakona, Alaska, at an L-value of
roughly five. The centerpiece of this observatory is the High-frequency Active
Auroral Research Program (HAARP), the most capable and powerful HF transmitter
in the world. The location in Gakona, Alaska - at 62°23’N (63.44° magnetic N),
145°09’W, and about 2.5° south of Fairbanks - is southward of the auroral zone
most of the time, but frequently is directly under the active aurora. The
location is ideal for ionospheric modification studies of the generation of ELF
and VLF radio emissions by modulating the auroral electrojet, and for studies of
the injection of these waves into the magnetosphere to observe their interaction
with energetic particles in the radiation-belts. This Subauroral Geophysical
Observatory (SAGO) will be operated as a community research facility with
routine operation of scientific diagnostic instrumentation and with the HAARP
transmitters running in campaign mode periodically for a few days at a time.
Support is requested here for a baseline of 200 hours of HAARP operation per
year, with unrestricted additional time available for externally funded studies.
In addition to support for observatory operations, travel support is requested
for investigators to travel to Gakona to participate in experimental campaigns,
each with an allocation of transmitter time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.