* 2054308
* Negative Ion Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Atomic, Molecular and Cluster Anions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Kit Bowen, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 05/31/2024
* USD 652,035.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Kit Bowen and his group at Johns
Hopkins University are studying the negative ions that form when an extra
electron is attached to an atom, molecule, or cluster. The addition of electrons
to chemical systems can make the unexpected occur, enticing seemingly impossible
processes to take place. For example, electrons drive, direct, induce, and
initiate an astonishing variety of transformations, including DNA damage, proton
transfer, molecular activation, and a vast array of electrochemical reactions.
The negative ions that result from electron attachment are also crucial actors
in chemical reaction mechanisms, playing key roles in organic chemistry,
electrochemistry, and radiation biology. Electron-influenced processes in
complex environments are ubiquitous. For these reasons, a microscopic
understanding of basic phenomena involving excess electrons is essential. To
probe these phenomena, Dr. Bowen and his group use a technique called negative
ion photoelectron spectroscopy to measure how tightly electrons are bound to
negatively charged atoms, molecules, and clusters. The experiments reveal
detailed information about both the ions and their neutral counterparts, while
also providing important benchmarks for computational chemistry. Considering the
wide-ranging importance of electron-driven processes, the work in Dr. Bowen’s
lab has interdisciplinary appeal, with impact ranging across fields as diverse
as atmospheric chemistry, catalysis, radiation chemistry and biology,
astrochemistry, and mass spectrometry. Dr. Bowen’s work also makes strong
contributions to education and human resource development by mentoring graduate
students who will become the scientists of tomorrow, by providing undergraduates
from Johns Hopkins and other colleges and universities an opportunity to
participate in cutting-edge research, and by giving high school, middle school,
and elementary school students a glimpse into scientific research. The outreach
efforts encourage participation from groups that are underrepresented in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Bowen’s research examines electron-induced
proton transfer (EIPT) reactions, weakly-bound (diffuse) excess electron states
of atoms and molecules, and the properties of transient molecular anions. For
example, the research team is exploring the role of EIPT in cluster anions,
where they expect the internal interactions to be governed by the excess
electron. EIPT is a wide-spread, perhaps even ubiquitous electron-assisted
process. The team is also examining the relationship between EIPT in ground-
state molecular anions and the process of excited-state intra-molecular proton
transfer (ESIPT) in neutral molecules. Dr. Bowen’s research on weakly-bound
(diffuse) excess electron states examines some of the most subtle interactions
in chemistry; those between electrons and atoms or molecules. In this area, the
research team is studying the formation and characterization of polarizability-
bound electrons in xenon atomic cluster anions and in ground state anions of
buckminsterfullerene; quadrupole-bound electrons in electronically metastable
atomic metal anions; and multiple Rydberg electrons in metal-ammonia cluster
anions. Although the electrons are weakly bound in each of these cases, they
represent steps on a staircase of progressively stronger interactions. Finally,
the research team is studying transient molecular anions using a unique
approach, developed by Dr. Bowen, that combines Rydberg electron transfer with
anion photoelectron spectroscopy (RET-aPES). The research team uses the RET-aPES
technique to form and characterize valence anions of nucleobase molecules, the
Criegee intermediate, and the hydrogen iodide molecule. They are also using RET-
aPES to explore the barely studied, yet fundamentally important process of
Penning electron detachment. These studies foster a deeper understanding of the
earliest stages of electron damage to DNA, the electrophilic properties of
important atmospheric intermediates, the unexpected stability of HI anion, and
collisional anion destruction processes in energetic gaseous environments, such
as flames and solar atmospheres. The outcomes from this broad research project
are expected to have widespread impact across many fields of science.
Additionally, the project provides advanced training opportunities for graduate
and undergraduate research students, while also engaging K-12 students through
Dr. Bowen's outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.