* 2054129
* Combinatorics and its Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Alexander Postnikov, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Combinatorics is the area of mathematics that studies discrete structures. This
area has close links with many other fields of pure and applied mathematics and
with other sciences such as physics and biology. This project is dedicated to
several problems in combinatorics and their applications to algebra, geometry,
and theoretical physics. The project will lead to a better understanding of
fundamental mathematical concepts and constructions and will have an impact in
many other areas of research. The results will be disseminated among specialists
in the field as well as to broader audiences. Special cases of some problems
will be used for undergraduate and high school research projects. Graduate
students will be involved in the research. This project will promote the general
public knowledge and appreciation of mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
problems in this project revolve around special classes of polytopes and other
polytope-like structures, such as permutohedra, root polytopes, positroids, and
the positive Grassmannian. Several problems are concerned with generalized
permutohedra. These problems involve an extension of the Tutte polynomial to
hypergraphs and polymatroids, as well as mirror duality for generalized
permutohedra. These problems have links with low-dimensional topology,
specifically knot invariants, with tropical geometry, and with toric geometry.
Several problems are related to the positive Grassmannian, which is a beautiful
geometrical object with rich combinatorial structure. The combinatorial
constructions and techniques developed in the study of the positive Grassmannian
have surfaced in many other areas: inverse boundary problems, matroid theory,
convex geometry, toric geometry, statistical mechanics, the theory of solitons,
Fomin-Zelevinsky's cluster algebras, symmetric functions, affine Schubert
calculus, Lusztig's canonical bases, matrix completion problems, and Schur
positivity problems, as well as the study of scattering amplitudes of elementary
particles. This project will study new links between the positive Grassmannian
and geometry of polyhedral subdivisions. The project also includes problems on
the purity phenomenon for oriented matroids, chip-firing games for root systems,
algebras of Chern forms, and power ideals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.