* 2054869
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Practical private information retrieval
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Henry Corrigan-Gibbs, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Private information retrieval (PIR) allows a client to query a database without
revealing its query to the database server. In theory, private-information-
retrieval systems would let a client search an online medical encyclopedia
without revealing her search terms, or to browse an online news site without
revealing which articles she is reading, or to execute a Web-search query
without revealing her query to the search engine. In practice, today's schemes
for private information retrieval are far too computationally expensive to
deploy at scale, and they lack much of the functionality that standard databases
support and that are critical for real-world database-backed applications. The
goals of this project are to: reduce the server-side computational cost of
private-information retrieval protocols, increase the power of existing PIR
protocols, and build large-scale data-retrieval systems that use PIR to protect
user privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To reduce the server-side computation cost of
PIR, this project will build on two techniques from the literature: batching
(having the server process multiple queries at once) and preprocessing (have the
server store the database in a form that allows it to answer queries more
quickly). This project will revisit these classic ideas to reducing the server-
side cost of PIR with new cryptographic tools, including recent work on
offline/online private information retrieval and developments in locally
decodable codes. The second component of this project will be to extend PIR
systems to handle more interesting query types, such as private full-text
searches or even private queries. This will require new security definitions,
new cryptographic protocols, and careful implementation work. Finally, this
project will build PIR technology into open-source software systems. The project
aims to design a private key server (for WhatsApp, Signal, etc.) that allows
clients to map phone numbers to public keys without revealing their address book
to the server, a private domain-name system resolver that allows clients to
privately map domain names to Internet-protocol addresses, and a Wikipedia clone
that supports private search and article download. Bringing PIR to such
applications will require the new techniques developed in the first parts of
this project, as well as substantial systems-level work on optimizations and
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.