* 2054636
* Eavesdropping behavior and sound localization: Lessons from a small auditory specialist
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Ximena Bernal, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 06/30/2024
* USD 631,404.00

Being able to localize sound sources is critical for animals to respond to
stimuli in their environment. Indeed, identifying the location from where sound
originates is often relevant for successfully finding mates, acquiring food and
escaping predators. Determining where a sound is produced, however, is no simple
task or fully understood. For animals that hear with their antennae, for
instance, it is unclear how they can identify the location of a sound. In
addition, due to physical and biological reasons, the challenge of localizing a
sound source is particularly difficult for small organisms. Given that many
organisms that use their antennae to hear are small, it is thus particularly
puzzling how they can achieve accurate sound localization. By investigating
mosquitos that eavesdrop on the calls of frogs to attack them, the researchers
will examine the behavior and underlying neurophysiological mechanisms of small
animals that hear with their antennae. This work will reveal the sensory
strategies associated with highly sensitive, small ears that allow mosquitos to
exploit the communication system of frogs. These findings will increase our
understanding of how small animals can pinpoint where a sound is produced which
has implications for developing small, artificial hearing sensors. In addition,
as part of this project, a team of diverse, young scientists will be trained in
cutting-edge techniques in acoustics, animal behavior and neurophysiology. A
variety of outreach activities for the community in general will be performed to
generate interest and enthusiasm about animal behavior and, more generally, the
nature of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, the researchers will
address the challenge of sound localization by small organisms using flagellar
ears by investigating a frog-biting mosquito (Uranotaenia lowii). In this
species, females are interspecific eavesdroppers specialized on using frog calls
to obtain blood meals to support egg production. This species provides a highly
tractable system in which multiple levels of analysis (ethological, acoustical,
biomechanical, and neurophysiological) can be integrated to comprehensively
investigate sound localization in the context of eavesdropping behavior. Three
essential aspects of sound localization will be examined. First, the phonotaxis
behavior of frog-biting mosquitoes to natural variation in the calls they
exploit will be investigated. The localization accuracy and behavioral rules
followed by mosquitoes approaching frog calls will be determined. In part 2, the
ability of mosquitoes to localize sound will be related to the biomechanical
response of the antennae. The movement of the antenna individually, and as a
paired system, in response to sounds broadcast at different azimuth will be
examined. Finally, in part 3, the neurophysiological mechanism allowing encoding
information about sound source location will be determined. The results of parts
2 and 3 will provide proximate explanations of behaviors observed in the wild
and carefully characterized in part 1. Ultimately, this work will determine
critical adaptations for sound localization providing insights about the sensory
ecology of eavesdropping in frog-biting mosquitoes. Overall, this research will
increase our understanding of the mechanisms underlying the use of flagellar
ears providing insights about how sound localization challenges are overcame by
tiny organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.