* 2054085
* MODULUS: Data-Driven Structured Population Modeling for Prediction of Complex Photosynthetic Phenotypes
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* David Bortz, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2024
* USD 787,000.00

Populations can be divided based on the properties of individual members,
including features such as size and age. Mathematical models describing how
features are spread across a population are called “structured population
models” and are widespread in the biological sciences. In this project
investigators will develop a novel algorithm and software to automatically
create structured population models. Mathematical models will be used to study
photosynthesis in bacteria with the goal of improving photosynthetic efficiency.
This work could potentially lead to substantial improvements in bioreactors,
water treatment, and biofuel production. As part of the Broader Impact
activities investigators will provide training opportunities for postdoctoral,
graduate and undergraduate students. Outreach activities for high school
students and the larger community will also be conducted through their
institution’s Summer Multicultural Access to Research Training (SMART) program
and in partnership with the CU Society for Women in Engineering(SWE)
organizat&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in sparse-regression based data-
driven modeling allow for the creation of mathematical models directly from
data, reducing reliance on conventional single candidate model creation,
simulation, and validation methodologies. A central premise of this research is
that the applied framework will yield novel structured models, leading to
biological insight into population-driven adaptations that impact the use of
light energy for the conversion of CO2 into biomolecules critical for life on
earth. The investigators will extend the data-driven framework to create a
rigorous methodology for the discovery of structured population models in
photosynthetic cyanobacteria. Advances in computational tools and models will
inform the development of experimental studies to investigate the relationship
between population structure and complex photosynthetic phenotypes yielding
maximal bacterial growth. Experimental studies will leverage mutant strains and
use long-term time-lapse imaging and carboxysome tracking to investigate
hypotheses. Research-driven Broader Impact activities will include
interdisciplinary training of students and outreach to high school students and
the broader community through institutional and professional society (SWE)
partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Systems and
Synthetic Biology program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
and the Mathematical Biology program in the Division of Mathematical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.