* 2054697
* Process-oriented Investigation of Double InterTropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) Biases in National Center for Atmospheric Research Community Earth System Model (NCAR CESM)
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Guang Zhang, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2024
* USD 680,406.00

The intertropical convergence zone (ITCZ) is a narrow band of deep convective
clouds and heavy rain that extends across the tropical oceans just north of the
equator. It gets its name from the convergence of the trade winds from the
Northern and Southern Hemispheres, which promotes rising motions and cloud
formation where the winds come together. An unfortunate feature of most climate
models is that they generate a spurious secondary ITCZ, running parallel to the
real ITCZ across the Pacific ocean just south of the equator. This "double-ITCZ"
bias, which has been a persistent feature of model simulations for at least two
decades, is generally ascribed to deficiencies in the representation of
convective clouds. Convective clouds are too small to simulate explicitly on
typical climate model grids and thus they have to be represented indirectly
through parameterization schemes. Recently the Principal Investigators (PIs) of
this project made improvements to the commonly used Zhang-McFarlane (ZM)
convective parameterization scheme which substantially reduced the double-ITCZ
bias in simulations of the Community Earth System Model (CESM, in particular
CESM1). The goal of this project is to explain why these changes reduced the
bias, and to indentify more generally the atmospheric and oceanic mechanisms
through which inadequacies in the representation of convection lead to the
formation of a secondary ITCZ.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamentally, deep
convection occurs in response to the build-up of convective available potential
energy (CAPE) in an atmospheric column, and the vertical exchange of thermal
energy in cloud updrafts removes the CAPE and stabilizes the column to further
vertical motions. But convective parameterizations which enforce this process
too strictly tend to produce frequent and persistent weak convection instead of
the more sporadic and intense convection seen in the real world. The revised ZM
scheme replaces CAPE with dynamic CAPE (dCAPE), meaning CAPE generated above the
planetary boundary layer (PBL, the lowest kilometer or two of the atmosphere
which directly feels the effect of the surface). Physically, the use of dCAPE
assumes that the CAPE generated in the PBL, in particular the CAPE generated by
surface heating and evaporation, is largely consumed by shallow convection in
the PBL and thus does not directly initiate deep convection. This formulation
has been shown to produce a more realistic diurnal cycle of convection over
land. Other changes to the ZM scheme involve the respresentation of cloud
dynamics, in particular the representation of entrainment, meaning the mixing of
moist air within clouds with the drier environmental air surrounding the cloud.
It is not surprising that changes in entrainment can have substantial effects on
simulated circulation and climate but the effects are difficult to anticipate
and explain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of experiments are conducted to
examine the effects of cloud changes on the double-ITCZ bias. Some involve
looking at each change in parameterization separately to understand its
contribution to ameliorating the bias. Others look at the effects of air-sea
interactions in reducing the bias. Preliminary work shows that the simulated sea
surface temperature (SST) in the region of the spurious ITCZ is relatively cold,
which is counterintuitive since convection usually occurs over warmer SST. The
PIs thus hypothesize that convection is promoted over the colder SSTs due to the
non-local effect of even colder SSTs to the north, and model experiments with
imposed SSTs and surface wind stress are performed to test this
hypothesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ITCZ bias is a practical concern as well as
a scientific problem, as the bias affects most models used to inform decision-
making in the face of climate change. An understanding of how the properties of
simulated convection contribute to the bias would also benefit the worldwide
research community which depends on climate models as tools for understanding
the climate system. Improvements to CESM have a direct benefit as it is the most
widely used climate model in the world. In addition, the project supports a
postdoctoral fellow, thereby developing the scientific workforce in this area.
Summer internships for undergraduate are also provided through the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.