* 2054807
* I-Corps:  Determining occupant load and location through machine vision with on-device image processing
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Yezhou Yang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of smart cameras with on-board processing. The proposed technology
will be used as a part of building and smart city management systems. Building
heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) accounts for 13% of all energy
usage in the United States and nearly 40% of buildings' energy. Accurate
occupancy detection may reduce energy use in HVAC systems by as much as 30%.
However, there are concerns regarding occupancy detection when assessing
accurate detection and privacy. The proposed technology may solve these concerns
by relying on the camera's vision to provide precise information and on-device
analysis to ensure no image privacy data is transmitted. The proposed technology
also may be used to improve traffic light planning. Pedestrians congregating at
an intersection may cause safety issues for vehicles and people. The proposed
technology allows for the counting of people, cars, and bikes and the
integration of this information. Additional analysis may be performed by
providing count data and if pedestrian counts are not changing, there may be a
need to modify traffic patterns or alert first
responders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of embedded devices to run object-detection algorithms. Object
detection using deep neural networks (DNNs) involves a large amount of
computation, which impedes its implementation on resource/energy-limited, user-
end devices. The reason for the success of DNNs is due to having knowledge over
different domains of observed environments. However, only a limited knowledge of
the observed environment at inference time is required, which may be learned
using a shallow neural network (SHNN). The TKD (Temporal Knowledge Distillation)
is a system-level design that is proposed to improve the energy consumption of
object detection on the user-end device. An SHNN is deployed on the user-end
device to detect objects in the observing environment. Also, a knowledge
transfer mechanism is implemented to update the SHNN model using the DNN
knowledge when there is a change in the object domain. Experiments demonstrate
that the user-end device's energy consumption and the inference time can be
improved by 78% and 71% compared with running the deep model on the user-end
device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.