* 2054409
* Collaborative Research: Designer Microstructures by Additive Manufacturing of Functional Emulsions
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Michael Bartlett, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2024
* USD 375,542.00

Functional emulsions are an emerging material architecture for creating highly
functional elastomer composites that are soft and elastically deformable.
However, techniques to control local composition and microstructure of the
composite material in emulsions, which ultimately govern material properties and
performance of the cured elastomer composite, are lacking. This award supports
fundamental research to develop an additive manufacturing technique to control
liquid inclusion microstructure in emulsions to achieve unprecedented
combinations of thermal, electrical, and mechanical functionalities in elastomer
composites. By developing the material and manufacturing knowledge to program
inclusion microstructure, new paradigms in composite architecture for next
generation functional materials are enabled leading to new applications in
electronics and robotics, which benefits the U.S. economy and society. Through a
collection of ‘behind the research’ videos generated by team members and a
manufacturing workshop for 9-12 grade students, the project provides inspiration
and training for future leaders in the emerging fields of additive manufacturing
and soft robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project establishes the processing-
structure-property relationships of additively manufactured functional emulsions
that can be cured into an elastomer composite of complex geometry. This is
achieved by creating model emulsion inks, processing methods, and in-situ
process monitoring to determine how material composition and printing conditions
influence material microstructure. These fundamental processing and material
insights are combined with new theoretical models for emulsion extrusion to
predict the microstructure of liquid phase inclusions throughout a manufactured
part. Liquid metal and glycerol liquid phase inclusions are examined as they
present distinctly different fundamental properties, but both offer broad
applicability in the field of soft matter engineering. In contrast to rigid
carbon black, copper, or silica particle fillers that have fixed shape and size,
the on-demand control of liquid inclusion morphology via direct ink write
processing provides a new and efficient method to manufacture elastomeric
composites. During the manufacturing process, the local material composition and
liquid inclusion microstructure are actively tailored to control the electrical,
thermal, and mechanical properties of elastomeric composites. By combining
printing ink properties and process control with tool design and modeling this
work provides new fundamental knowledge to create scalable manufacturing
strategies for processing emulsions. This leads to novel model material systems
with programmable processing-structure-property relationships to determine
physics-based properties of multi-component soft
matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.