* 2055178
* CEDAR: Modification of Ionosphere by Lightning ElectroMagnetic Pulse (LEMP): Dependence on Lightning Type, Stroke Order, and Other Factors
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Vladimir Rakov, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Shikha Raizada
* 05/31/2024
* USD 399,885.00

Atmospheric lightning is a very familiar phenomenon seen during thunderstorms.
However, it is not well-known that lightning strokes seen in the lower
atmosphere could also travel upward as an electromagnetic pulse, modifying the
properties of the upper atmosphere. The study of lightnings is especially useful
for the understanding of the ionosphere, which is the layer of atmosphere above
50 miles altitude that has abundance of charged particles such as ions and
electrons. Cumulative effects of lightnings could potentially modify the
ionosphere, which in turn affect radio communication and global navigation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will carry out a cross-disciplinary study of
the modification of ionosphere by Lightning Electro Magnetic Pulse (LEMP). The
atmospheric conductivity profile that largely determines the apparent
ionospheric reflection height is expected to be modified as a result of
ionization caused by LEMP. This modification will be detected via comparison of
conductivity profiles inferred from electromagnetic field signatures (including
skywaves) of individual lightning strokes occurring within the same flash. There
is some evidence of cumulative effect of multiple strokes in lowering the
apparent ionospheric reflection height. For the first time, ionospheric
reflection heights estimated using in-cloud lightning pulses (elevated sources)
and return-stroke pulses in cloud-to-ground flashes (CGs) (near-ground-level
sources) of different polarity will be compared. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will attempt to answer the following new scientific questions (SQs) that
are relevant to the primary objective of the CEDAR Program, with emphasis on
perturbations (LEMPs) that propagate upward from the lower atmosphere:
&lt;br/&gt;1. How is the atmospheric conductivity profile changing on the time
scale of individual lightning flash? &lt;br/&gt;2. What are the limits of
applicability of the Hetzian dipole model that is widely used in studying
lightning interaction with the ionosphere?&lt;br/&gt;3. Why is the apparent
ionospheric reflection height for positive lightning larger than for negative
lightning in the same thunderstorm? &lt;br/&gt;4. How important are lightning
processes other than negative return strokes in CGs in disturbing the lower
ionosphere? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wideband LEMPs will be recorded at the well-
established facilities (Lightning Observatory in Gainesville and Golf Course
Station) in Florida, at distances ranging from 50 to 500 km, in different
seasons, over land and over sea, under both daytime and nighttime conditions.
Data acquired will be used to address SQs 1, 3 and 4. A Finite-Difference Time-
Domain (FDTD) model of LEMP propagation in the Earth-ionosphere waveguide in the
spherical coordinate system will be used to address SQs 1 to 3. An optimization
procedure to find best-fit parameters of equivalent exponential atmospheric
conductivity profile from measured LEMP waveforms (including skywaves) produced
by individual strokes of a flash will be used for SQ 1. The model will employ
realistic lightning sources and cover an essentially full frequency bandwidth of
interest (up to hundreds of kilohertz). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research results
will be used in the popular University of Florida senior undergraduate/graduate
course “Lightning”. The project researchers will remain committed to high-school
science education and to enhancement of public awareness of lightning hazards.
The studies will continue to foster international collaboration on FDTD
modeling. The results of this project will have implications for other
disciplines, including radio communication, ionospheric remote sensing,
assessment of methods for artificial modification of the ionosphere, ionospheric
chemistry, and ionospheric plasma physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.