* 2055064
* TEA Center: Sitting Bull College’s Native American Prairie Ecosystems Research Center (PERC)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Gary Halvorson, Sitting Bull College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 06/30/2026
* USD 3,500,000.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
intellectual leadership of TCUP institutions so that they can address scientific
or engineering needs or interests, specifically for their tribes or communities,
or broadly for the Nation. The TCU Enterprise Advancement Centers (TEA Centers)
strand allows TCUP institutions to capitalize on their investments in STEM
instructional and research capacity. This project aligns directly with that
goal, and moreover will have a direct impact on tribal communities in areas
related to prairie ecosystem services, ecology, and restoration. Sitting Bull
College’s (SBC) Prairie Ecosystems Research Center (PERC) leverages diverse
research expertise and local Indigenous ecological knowledge to research
solutions to community-identified ecosystem problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PERC
leverages the resources and faculty of SBC and local reservation communities to
solve issues that arise in the community using grounded practices that align
with cultural traditions and have a direct impact on tribal communities in the
Great Plains. The center will serve as the primary repository for Indigenous
information and knowledge about the plains region and will deliver a database on
the ecology of the plains environment for use by both scientists and the
community. PERC will develop a solutions platform, using scientific research to
address environmental and natural resource issues of importance to tribal
communities while institutionalizing research opportunities for undergraduate
students, graduate students, and faculty. A multidisciplinary team will
contribute to advancing knowledge in a variety of fields including soil science,
water quality, genetics, wildlife and plant ecology, microbiology, molecular
ecology, and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.