* 2055051
* Preparing Skilled Technicians in Geographical Information Systems for Agricultural and Land Management Fields
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Crystal Sims, Cossatot Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,635.00

Technological innovations and advancements in geographic information systems
(GIS) enable better management of land resources. For example, GIS-based
agricultural practices enable farmers to increase production and reduce costs by
providing tools for monitoring soil properties and crop health. GIS technologies
are also used by public land managers to track invasive species and to plan
maintenance activities such as controlled burns. The emerging applications of
GIS technologies in agroindustry and land management has resulted in the need
for technicians with a variety of GIS skills such as ArcGIS, remote data
collection, and spatial data presentation. This project at the Cossatot
Community College of the University of Arkansas intends to address the need for
GIS-trained technicians in southwest Arkansas. This area is dominated by
farmland, interspersed with local, state, and federal public lands.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Baseline surveys of regional employers indicated that
their employees require training in GIS skills, which they use daily on the job.
The employers also indicated that they would give hiring priority to individuals
with GIS training. To meet this workforce need, the project team and faculty
will work with an industry advisory board to develop a new Introduction to GIS
Technology lab course. This board will also help to design experiential learning
opportunities in GIS, including internships with local industry. The project
will provide professional development to help faculty incorporate GIS activities
into their teaching, including novice, advanced, and expert GIS skill
applications. The project will also create two new courses in GIS and establish
a new Certificate of Proficiency in GIS Technology. UA Cossatot is a Hispanic
Service Institution. Consequently, the project plans to increase participation
of Hispanic students in GIS programs by supporting bilingual career coaches and
faculty professional development regarding strategies to support diverse
students. The project will develop a website to highlight student internships,
job shadowing, and career opportunities that require GIS training. It is
expected that this model can be adopted and adapted by other community colleges
in areas with similar workforce needs. The assessment and evaluation will inform
stakeholders in education, agriculture, and the public. This project is funded
by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.