* 2055271
* Analysis of Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations in Free Boundary Fluid Dynamics, Mathematical Biology, and Kinetic Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Robert Strain, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2024
* USD 346,661.00

This project aims to develop new methods to advance the current level of
scientific knowledge on a diverse collection of recognized questions in two
different areas of the mathematical analysis of nonlinear partial differential
equations (PDE) and to develop new mathematical methods to study these systems.
The first part of the project concerns basic questions in the analysis of
partial differential equations in Mathematical Biology. The second part of this
project concerns the study of partial differential equations from kinetic theory
in the presence of the physical kinetic boundary conditions. This project will
involve training in research and teaching of postdoctoral researchers, graduate
students, and undergraduate students from the University of Pennsylvania and
other Universities. The project will also involve outreach to undergraduate
students through the University of Pennsylvania Center for Undergraduate
Research &amp; Fellowships program. The principal investigator (PI) is fully
committed to facilitating the training and education of these students through
teaching courses, regular direct mentoring, and running regular research
seminars. The PI is actively working to develop new innovative mathematics
courses at the University of Pennsylvania in order to further the goal of
developing a diverse and globally competitive STEM workforce and to improve STEM
education at the collegiate level. The PI is engaging in outreach activities to
groups that are traditionally underrepresented in mathematics, and these
activities will continue over the course of this project. The PI is further
consistently working to increase the scientific knowledge of the community by
giving national and international research presentations. The results of this
project will be further disseminated through publication in journal articles and
they will be posted on the PI's website. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Problems in
which an elastic structure interacts with the surrounding fluid, called Fluid-
Structure Interaction (FSI) problems, are plentiful in science and engineering.
These problems have many applications in Physics, Biology, and the Medical
Sciences. Such FSI problems include the mathematical modeling of the flying of
birds, the swimming of fish, and blood flow through the heart and blood vessels.
FSI models have been intensively studied using computational methods. Many
numerical algorithms have been developed for such problems, and the scientific
computing of FSI problems continues to be a very active area of research.
Despite their importance, these computational methods are poorly understood from
an analytical standpoint. A major impediment for numerical analysis has been the
lack of analytical understanding of the underlying nonlinear partial
differential equations. A better theoretical understanding of the analytical
aspects of these PDE should lead to improved computational algorithms for FSI
problems. The PI seeks to address these issues by focusing on a set of canonical
analytical FSI problems in the Stokes flow. The second part of this project is
in kinetic theory. The Landau equation with Coulomb potential and the non-cutoff
Boltzmann equation for the long-range interaction potentials are two fundamental
mathematical models in collisional kinetic theory which describe the dynamics of
a non-equilibrium rarefied gas and a dilute hot plasma. Plasmas appear in
fundamental physical problems from Astrophysics, Nuclear fusion, and Tokamaks.
The Boltzmann equation has been used as a mathematical model in a wide variety
of places, for instance in high atmosphere aerodynamics, where the air is a very
rarefied gas and fluid equations are probably not sufficient. Further, the study
of boundary effects for these kinetic equations is physically very important
because they describe the interaction, in the form of drag and heat transfer,
between gas or plasma and a solid body. The objective of this research in both
parts of the project is to fully understand the local-in-time well-posedness for
large initial data, and the global-in-time well-posedness in a close to
equilibrium setting, for several different fundamental physical models in
nonlinear PDE. We expect that the techniques developed as part of this project
will be useful for future mathematical and physical
developments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.