* 2055061
* Hybrid Curriculum for Upskilling Photonics Technicians in Advanced Optics and Quantum Research Enabled Technologies
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Chrys Panayiotou, Indian River State College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 485,842.00

A significant gap exists between the state of quantum science and its practical
uses in industry. Part of the gap results from the lack of the advanced
technical workforce needed to implement quantum technologies. The people best
poised to enter the new quantum technological workforce are incumbent photonics
technicians. Their current qualifications provide a foundation on which to build
the new quantum-related competencies. This project aims to produce a freely
available curriculum that will enable photonics technicians to acquire new
quantum-related competencies. This curriculum will contain a three-course
sequence with freely accessible textbooks, lab manuals, and interactive online
content. Availability of the courses via an open-access educational platform
will reduce geographical barriers between colleges, students, and industry. The
proposed platform can also promote inclusion and diversity in the high-tech
quantum workforce by increasing access to education in quantum technologies. The
proposed quantum technology curriculum is expected to help U.S. businesses
maintain global leadership in advanced laser and quantum technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will pioneer the introduction of quantum
science into advanced technological education. It will do so by developing,
testing, and disseminating a three-course hybrid curriculum in quantum-enabled
technologies. The project will begin with an assessment of the industry demand
for quantum-related skills, continue with curriculum and course development, and
end with establishment of a sustainable learning platform. The three courses
will be designed to meet the highest level of Quality Matters certification. The
curriculum will be promoted by academic and industry collaborators and validated
through data collected via the learning platform in real-time as students
interact with the course material. The open-access learning platform will make
the entire educational content accessible and transferrable to other
institutions. Through these efforts, this project will contribute to the new
quantum STEM workforce development needed to propel quantum technology forward.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.