* 2055251
* RAPID: Flexible, Efficient, and Available Bayesian Computation for Epidemic Models
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/2020,10/31/2021
* Andrew Gelman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 10/31/2021
* USD 187,014.00

Decisions about coronavirus response are necessarily based on statistical models
of prevalence, transmission risks, case fatality rate, projection of future
spread of infection, and estimated effects of medical and social interventions.
Much of this modeling and inference is being done using the Bayesian framework,
an approach to statistics that is well suited to integration of information from
different sources and accounting for uncertainty in predictions that can be
input into decision analysis. This is a project to develop computing tools to
make Bayesian methods more accessible to researchers in quantitative social
science and public health who are studying COVID-19 and epidemic models more
generally. This work promises to advance scientific knowledge by enabling
researchers to fit more flexible and realistic models accounting for multiple
sources of uncertainty in data, and to advance societal goals by facilitating
more accurate and granular estimates of exposure, reproduction rate, and other
aspects of epidemic spread that inform public and private decision making. This
project also provides professional development opportunities for a post-doctoral
researcher, as well as student training.

The research will be done in the open-source programming language Stan, which
has already been used in several influential COVID-19 models as well as in
economics, political science, biology, political science, and many other
application areas. Specifically, the project includes: documentation and
language features to make Stan programs easier to write and evaluate;
continuation and extensions of existing collaborations on mathematical models
for epidemic spread, causal models for estimating policy effects, and survey
adjustment; and improved implementations for differential-equation models, which
serve as the core of models for disease transmission and other diffusive social
and biological processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.