* 2055288
* Enhancing Preparation of Students for Technical Careers in Cloud Computing Technologies
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jeffrey Banham, Wake Technical Community College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 562,150.00

Cloud computing is changing the nature of the information technology (IT)
industry. Instead of purchasing and maintaining a private computing
infrastructure, many businesses are moving to cloud-based computing
infrastructures. Cloud-based solutions allow businesses to efficiently and
economically scale computing services to fit their needs and the needs of their
users. Thus, cloud-based computing is helping businesses save thousands of
dollars on computing infrastructure costs and maintenance. The current demand
for cloud-capable IT technicians is far outpacing the number of graduates
currently entering the workforce with cloud computing skills. The goal of this
project is to create an up-to-date cloud infrastructure training program that
will prepare more students to work in the high-demand area of cloud computing
technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will deliver professional
development for educators via back-to-industry externships intended to enable at
least eight community college faculty to upgrade their skills by learning state-
of-the-art Cloud Infrastructure technologies. The existing Cloud Infrastructure
program at Wake Technical Community College will be improved by enhancing and
validating 15 courses and related educational materials through faculty
externships, advisory board partners, and resources from the National
Convergence Technology Center. The efficacy of the existing program will be
assessed using quantitative and qualitative measures such as student interviews
and industry feedback. A student internship program will be piloted, with the
goal of providing students with opportunities to develop business and
entrepreneurial skills in the workplace. A summative evaluation will address how
well the project achieved its goals, including production of deliverables (e.g.,
faculty professional development), increased industry engagement, and project
replicability and sustainability. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.