* 2055555
* Smart Start to Skilled Technical Careers in Energy Management Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Brooke Holbrook, Northeast Wisconsin Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 489,293.00

The future of energy use is changing as smart technologies integrate with
traditional mechanical systems to control lighting, ventilation, security, and
other functions in residential and industrial buildings. For example, modern
building controls now include devices such as Wi-Fi enabled lighting controls
with daylight sensors, carbon-dioxide sensors to control ventilation rates, and
power load alarms for critical needs like food refrigeration. As a result, the
need for skilled energy technicians has grown and the skills they need are more
complex. In Northeast Wisconsin, the demand for energy management technicians
continues to exceed the supply of qualified applicants. Thus, new strategies are
needed to address shortages and create a workforce of skilled technicians to
manage these technologies. In this project, Northeast Wisconsin Technical
College will partner with local employers to increase the number of skilled
energy management technicians. Specifically, the project intends to develop an
energy management educational program that bridges mechanical equipment
engineering skills with information technology and computational skills. The
program will be designed to prepare a skilled technical workforce that will
address energy management needs in an increasingly internet-connected, global
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty in the existing Energy Management
Technology program and the College’s K-12 relations manager will collaborate
with industry and secondary education representatives to educate students,
instructors, and educational leaders about today’s smart technology-driven
building control systems. Through this partnership, the project plans to: create
an Energy Controls Career Pathway Certificate as an entry-level pathway
credential; increase energy career and education awareness, with attention to
recruiting more women to a field traditionally dominated by men; provide
curriculum, hands-on resources, training, and supports for high school
instructors to deliver a one-credit course in the Certificate; and launch the
full Certificate as an entry-level credential through dual credit delivery for
high school juniors and seniors. This project has the potential to create a
replicable model for meeting employer demand for skilled technicians.
Ultimately, it is anticipated that the project will support reductions in the
cost of smart energy installations and maintenance, benefiting the environment,
as well as consumer health and finances. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.