* 2055049
* Improving Industrial Technology Education with Flexible Learning Options and Student Support Services
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Christopher Miller, Heartland Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 296,356.00

Academic programs in Industrial Technology prepare students for employment in
fields such as robotics, electronics, renewable energy, and battery technology,
all of which have been identified as fast-growing and high-paying opportunities
for an emerging skilled workforce. The central Illinois region has identified an
employment gap with more than 1000 unfilled positions for qualified workers with
high-technology skills. To help meet this need, Heartland Community College
intends to make the Industrial Technology program more accessible to more
students. Specifically, it will revise and redesign the industrial technology
courses for online instruction and offer laboratory experiences using an open-
access laboratory model. The open-access laboratory model will allow students to
schedule and use industrial equipment and trainers during day, evening, or
weekend hours, depending on their individual needs and time constraints. In
addition, the project will combine these curricular improvements with student
supports, including supplemental instruction and peer mentoring. The project
expects that these improvements will increase the number of students completing
the Industrial Technology program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to demonstrate a new model for industrial technology education using an open-
access manufacturing laboratory, flexible content delivery, and student supports
to enhance student access to high-quality Industrial Technology education. To
this end, Heartland Community College will dedicate 2500 square feet and
additional college infrastructure to establish and maintain an open-access
laboratory. The space will be augmented with trained faculty, facilitators, and
peer mentors to provide supportive human interactions. The Industrial Technology
faculty of Heartland Community College will revise their curriculum to allow for
and support flexible learning formats that will compliment an open-access
laboratory. The college will also adopt a formal supplemental instruction model
to give current students opportunities to become peer leaders, which will
augment the leadersâ€™ learning as they help other students. The flexible format
will give students enhanced access to the laboratory and student support
services, providing increased access for students with job and family
obligations. Heartland Community College will share their model through regional
and national Career and Technical Education conferences. This project is funded
by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.