* 2055667
* Continued Investigations of the Structure, Evolution, and Life Cycles of Intraseasonal Fluctuations of the North Pacific Jet Stream
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Jonathan Martin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2024
* USD 846,897.00

The jet stream over the North Pacific exerts a controlling influence on the
procession of winter storms that cross the ocean to make landfall on the US and
Canadian coasts. The role of the jet as a conveyor of storms makes it a topic of
interest for weather forecasters as the paths and intensities of the storms are
sensitive to the various forms of jet variability including extension,
retraction and north-south meandering. Perhaps more importantly, jet variations
can affect a succession of storms, so the influence of jet fluctuations extends
beyond the typical five-day forecast and into the domain of subseasonal
prediction. But the underlying dynamics of Pacific jet variations are not well
understood and fundamental questions remain as to the mechanisms
involved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Pacific sector is unusual in its combination
of middle-latitude jet dynamics, featuring the interplay between the jet and the
weather patterns that move along it, and low-latitude influences from the region
of deep convection over the warm waters of the western Pacfic. In earlier work
one of the Principal Investigators (PIs) used a Linear Inverse Model (LIM) to
identify a mechanism through which tropical influences interact with middle-
latitude dynamics to produce upper-level circulation anomalies. In the present
work the LIM analysis is applied to understand jet fluctuations identified using
Self-Organizing Maps (SOMs). The work focuses on the dynamics of transitions
from one jet state to another and the consequences of the transitions for
downstream weather.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is of societal as well as
scientific interest given its connection to North American weather and relevance
to long-range forecasting, as noted above. In addition, the PIs engage in public
outreach including a monthly show on Wisconsin Public Radio. The project also
provides support and training for two graduate students and two undergraduate
summer interns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.