* 2055344
* Emerging Cloud Hub Opportunities (ECHO)
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Elodie Billionniere, Miami Dade College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 04/30/2024
* USD 599,181.00

The goal of this project is to address local and regional workforce needs by
increasing the number of certified advanced cloud computing technicians from the
region. Cloud computing is a rapidly growing field that continues to change the
nature of the information technology industry. Cloud-based solutions allow
businesses to scale computing services to fit their needs and the needs of their
users, while saving thousands of dollars on computing infrastructure costs and
maintenance. As more businesses transition to cloud-based computing solutions,
there is a critical need for an advanced cloud-computing workforce. To meet
these needs, the project team will develop a new College Credit Certificate with
advanced technical certifications in cloud-based technology. This project will
serve a population of students who are predominantly low-income and minoritized.
As a result, it has the potential to increase the number of certified cloud
computing technicians from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will enhance advanced cloud and multi-cloud technology education by
providing faculty with professional development opportunities that include
obtaining cloud certifications from prominent Cloud platforms, creating a new
advanced college-credit certificate with advanced technical certifications for
students and working technicians, and encouraging collaboration through the
virtual networking summit Cloud on Demand Series. In this project, Miami Dade
College will partner with leading cloud solutions providers such as Amazon Web
Services (AWS), Microsoft Azure, Google Cloud, and IBM Cloud to provide access,
technical support, and training to faculty and students. The project aims to
advance and share knowledge about student success and upskilling of STEM
students at Hispanic-serving institutions. This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.