* 2055708
* Industry Aligned Rural Engineering Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* James Fisher, Imperial Valley College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Diversifying the economic and industrial base of rural communities is
challenging. For example, rural communities can struggle to produce a workforce
aligned with local industry needs. This struggle is especially true for isolated
communities in areas with challenging environmental conditions like those found
in Imperial County, CA, where the temperature can exceed 110 degrees for an
extended period of time in the summer. This area has the second highest poverty
rate and the highest ratio of migrant agricultural workers in the state.
Although the agricultural sector dominates the workforce, a small group of
committed industrial partners has a keen interest in developing a home-grown,
local pipeline of engineering students. These industrial leaders have failed to
attract qualified candidates to the inhospitable region, leaving higher paying
jobs unfilled. The industries represent the energy, water, and mining industries
whose employees have overlapping skill sets. This award will enable Imperial
Valley College, a rural Hispanic Serving Institution, to develop a one-year
Engineering Technology Certificate that will produce the skilled technical
workers needed by these industries. By preparing workers for high paying, stable
jobs in the local economy, this project the potential to help mitigate the
disproportionate impacts of COVID-19 on rural and Hispanic
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The certificate program will provide Imperial
Valley College students with the classes needed to achieve their educational
goals and meet the needs of the local industries. The project builds on three
things: an existing partnership between Imperial Valley College and the
University of California San Diego, a baseline survey of Imperial Valley College
students that indicated a strong interest in an engineering program, and the
commitment of local industry partners. To develop the new certificate program,
Imperial Valley College will create a new makerspace, adopt curriculum from
UCSD, and place students who complete the certificate into internships with
local industries. The new makerspace will help educate students and their
families about high wage technician job opportunities in industry. The
evaluation of this project will inform industry and education stakeholders about
how to effectively build and strengthen a relationship between a community
college and a four-year institution. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.