* 2055689
* NSF-DFG Echem: CAS: Cooperativity Between Immobilized Redox Mediators for Selective Anodic Biomass Valorization
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Wei Zhang, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 448,169.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Adam Holewinski and Wei Zhang of the University of Colorado-Boulder are studying
new designs for catalytic materials. The project also involves collaborators
from Rostock University in Germany. Electrocatalysts facilitate the
interconversion of electrical energy and chemical bonds. These transformations
are increasingly of interest for storage and extraction of renewable electricity
via chemical fuels, as well as for synthesizing high volume chemical products
that rely on large energy inputs. Efficient catalysts such as the enzymes found
in nature often rely on cooperative interactions among multiple chemical
functional groups to steer a reaction toward desired products. This project is
focused on designing cooperative electrocatalysts where two species work
together to drive a reaction with less electrical input than would be required
from either species alone. Work will center on synthesizing catalysts where each
mediator is attached to a polymer such that they remain in close proximity.
While the knowledge to be gained is fundamentally applicable for a wide range of
important chemistries, the project will progress from model reactions (e.g.
selective oxidation of simple alcohols to aldehydes) to reactions involving
higher value substrates. In particular, production of environmentally friendly
monomer compounds for green plastics will be targeted using raw materials
derived from biomass. From an applied perspective, the development of scalable
oxidative processes could alter the economic landscape of electrolysis for
chemical production. Educational integration initiatives will include inclusion
of diverse undergraduates in the research process and continued development of
web-based educational modules. International collaboration with Rostock
University in Germany is a key component of the project and participating
graduate students will have the opportunity for visiting research. The project
was awarded through the "NSF-DFG Lead Agency Activity in Electrosynthesis and
Electrocatalysis (NSF-DFG EChem)" opportunity, a collaborative solicitation that
involves NSF and Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this collaborative research award, Adam
Holewinski and Wei Zhang of the University of Colorado-Boulder will study new
designs for catalytic materials. Designing tailored substrate binding
environments with multiple participant functional groups is difficult to achieve
with homogeneous molecular catalysts, and even more challenging using
heterogeneous catalyst materials. This proposal aims to understand and develop
cooperative electrocatalytic sites, comprised of an organic redox mediator and
redox-active metal center, both performing electron transfer. The work draws on
recent demonstrations of homogeneous redox mediator mechanisms in which a two-
electron oxidation is achieved by extraction of one electron into each of two
mediators, lowering the necessary applied potentials by avoiding higher mediator
oxidation states, normally accessed to achieve two electron oxidation. The
mechanism is fundamentally distinct from more common examples of cooperativity,
such as metal-ligand. The collaborative research team seeks to develop the
fundamental understanding and methodologies needed to effectively immobilize
such cooperative catalysts onto (a) soluble (but easily separated) polymers and
(b) heterogeneous electrodes. These two platforms provide complementary means to
identify constraints imposed by immobilization and understand how best to retain
cooperativity. Mechanistic studies will be used to understand electro-oxidation
cooperativity in probe reactions of variable complexity: (i) selective
conversion of primary alcohols to aldehydes; (ii) oxidation of
5-(hydroxymethyl)-furfural (HMF) to diformylfuran (DFF) (a monomer for green
plastics along with other chemical applications), and (iii) multi-electron
oxidation to generate carboxylic acids—particularly HMF to 2,5-furandicarboxylic
acid (FDCA), another monomer requiring both aldehyde and alcohol group
oxidation. These reactions are critical to the expanding field of biomass
valorization and simultaneously serve as an informative testbed for
understanding the key constraints to realize cooperativity. The work further
addresses widespread issues related to benchmarking of electrocatalytic activity
on complex materials, aiming to establish rigorous precedents for activity
characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.