* 2055379
* Collaborative Research: Effects of Mentoring Relationship Heterogeneity on Student Outcomes among NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Program Participants
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Timothy Collins, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Carrie Hall
* 06/30/2024
* USD 293,423.00

Understanding mentoring relationships is critical to increasing diversity in
STEM fields. Researchers at the University of Texas at El Paso and the
University of Utah propose to study the effects of mentor relationship mismatch
on student outcomes during NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
programs. This project aims to employ a novel approach to studying mentoring by
examining multilevel mentoring and demographics of students and the mentor team.
The project aims to collect data from participating students and mentors from
across the country at the end of the summer research program and during the next
year to gauge outcomes related to STEM interest and persistence and intent to
follow a STEM career pathway. This project aligns with the EHR Core Research
program’s goal of addressing challenges in STEM interest, learning, and
participation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to address three
interrelated research questions, including how mentoring relationship
heterogeneity impacts short-term and mid-term student outcomes, if these effects
can be moderated by interactional dynamics between mentors and mentees, and how
mentoring relationship heterogeneity impacts educational, research, and career
goals immediately after the REU experience and after one year. Mentoring
Relationship Heterogeneity in Context provides a conceptual framework focusing
on how student mentees match with multiple mentors, including graduate students
and post-doctoral researchers. The concept of programmatic heterogeneity will be
used to measure the dissimilarity between students’ demographic background and
the demographic composition of their REU program. Post-REU surveys collected
from the Center for the Improvement of Mentored Experiences in Research (CIMER)
data will be used along with a matrix analysis of semi-structure individual
interview responses. Short-and mid-term student outcomes consist of immediate
gains in working like a scientist, comfort with science skills, science
identity, sense of clarity about career path, research productivity, persistence
in STEM major, and intent to pursue graduate school. The project seeks to
advance knowledge about mentoring relationships and aims to produce mentor and
mentee workshops to positively impact undergraduate research students from
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is funded by the EHR
Core Research program that supports fundamental research focused on STEM
learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM
professional workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.