* 2055609
* Collaborative Research: Computational Modeling for Integrating Science and Engineering Design: Model Construction, Manipulation, and Exploration
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Satabdi Basu, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 05/31/2024
* USD 989,017.00

Computational Modeling for Integrating Science and Engineering Design (CMISE)
will conduct a series of experiments to systematically compare different
computational modeling activities on 5th and 6th grade students’ engineering
design processes, their understanding of engineering, science and computational
thinking concepts, as well as science teachers’ confidence and ability to
implement integrated STEM and computing curricula. Computational modeling
involves a high cognitive load, and research to date is unclear whether the
payoff primarily entails learning computing or whether students’ science and
engineering learning benefit as well. CMISE will investigate how different types
of computational modeling activities promote integrated student learning of
science and engineering. CMISE will have immediate impacts on STEM + Computing
offerings for the Metro Nashville Public School district where the project will
be conducted; broadly it will also help strengthen and grow a diverse STEM
workforce by bringing authentic and compelling science and engineering
opportunities to fifth and sixth grade students. This project will also provide
designers and researchers with empirical evidence for how to effectively
integrate computer modeling with science and engineering learning activities in
different settings. The CMISE curriculum and teacher support materials will be
made freely available through project website, allowing these resources to reach
a wide range of teachers beyond those included in the study.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CMISE will leverage a previously developed and refined
Next Generation Science Standards-aligned curriculum unit that integrates the
Earth Science concept of urban water runoff with a meaningful engineering design
problem for fifth- and sixth grade students to conduct fundamental research to
better understand how different types of computational modeling activities
mediate the connections between science and engineering learning. CMISE will
conduct a series of design experiments to systematically compare the affordances
of three computational modeling activities on students’ engineering design
processes, their understanding of engineering, science and computational
thinking (CT) concepts and practices, as well as science teachers’ confidence
and ability to implement integrated STEM and computing curricula. The three
activities being compared are computational model (CM) construction (where
students model a science phenomenon in a given programming language), CM
manipulation (where students inspect either the code or the simulation for a
given CM of a science phenomenon), and CM exploration (where students explore a
given simulation of a science phenomenon without viewing the underlying code).
CMISE adopts a strong theoretical framing and a systematic design experiment
approach to contribute to the learning theory of how students interact with and
learn using different types of computational modeling activities. It will apply
quantitative and qualitative analysis methods to combine established statistical
analysis methods with novel analytics approaches and derive relations between
students' learning behaviors and performance in the three experimental
conditions. This design experiment studies will disentangle how these conditions
influence the synergistic learning of science, engineering, and
CT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the EHR Core Research
(ECR) and CS for All: Research and RPPs programs. ECR supports work that
advances fundamental research on STEM learning and learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.