* 2055506
* Collaborative Research: HSI ATE Hub 2: Professional Development for Culturally Responsive Technician Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Sarah Belknap, Westchester Community College
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 06/30/2024
* USD 238,123.00

This project aims to better serve and support a diverse population of students
who are pursuing credentials in skilled technical fields. To do so, the project
will guide faculty to adapt and implement Culturally Responsive Instruction in
technician education courses. The project is designed to increase the retention
of Hispanic students in STEM career pathways, particularly in advanced-
technology fields. The project builds on the Hispanic Serving Community College
KickStarter project, the Hispanic Serving Institutions HSI/ATE Hub project, and
the Westchester Community College Photonics and Laser Project. The project team
will develop, pilot test, and disseminate a faculty professional development
model that can help to shift faculty understanding, practice, and mindset from
emphasis on perceived student deficits to asset-based thinking and mutual
respect. The professional development will be organized into three tiers. Tier 1
is designed to establish awareness and support first steps. Tier 2 will focus on
the development, implementation, and testing of Culturally Responsive
Instruction practices in technician education. Tier 3 will focus on creating a
community of instructors and emerging leaders that engages in practice, theory
building, and applied research into effective educational practices. The overall
project goal is to develop faculty knowledge, skills, values, attitudes, and
mindset so that more Hispanic students will complete advanced technology
programs. In doing so, the project can increase the diversity of the technician
workforce and help to mitigate disproportionate impacts of COVID-19 on Hispanic
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaboration includes faculty and
administrators in technician education programs, higher education researchers,
experts in Culturally Responsive Instruction, and industry partners to further
conceptualize, operationalize, and test the validity of Culturally Responsive
Instruction in the skilled technical fields of applied engineering and applied
computing and cyber-security. Additionally, the project will test the hypothesis
that micro-credentials are valuable for incentivizing faculty participation in
project activities and that micro-credentials will be recognized by educational
and industry stakeholders as valuable evidence of expertise and experience. The
mixed method evaluation is process -oriented to facilitate development of a
model and outcomes-oriented to assess faculty and student outcomes that includes
assessment of changes in knowledge/awareness, skills/behavior, and
attitudes/mindset. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation’s economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.