* 2055156
* Small Cap and Large Cap Decoupling
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Ciprian Demeter, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 06/30/2024
* USD 303,999.00

The extent to which waves traveling in different directions interact with each
other is important in many branches of science and applications. Over the last
decade the PI has developed a new set of mathematical tools called decouplings
to measure this extent of interaction. While these tools were initially intended
for certain questions about differential equations, they have also led to
important breakthroughs in number theory. More precisely, Diophantine equations
are systems of polynomial equations involving whole numbers with potentially
complicated solutions. Mathematicians are interested in counting the number of
solutions to such systems. Unlike waves, numbers do not oscillate, at least not
in an obvious manner, but one can think of numbers as frequencies, and thus
associate them to waves. In this way, questions related to counting the number
of solutions to Diophantine systems can be rephrased in the language of
quantifying wave interferences. The project will further extend the scope of
decouplings towards the resolution of fundamental problems in harmonic analysis
and number theory. New tools will be developed that will be accessible and
useful to a large part of the mathematical community. In addition, the Principal
Investigator will organize summer schools and workshops that will educate both
young researchers and experts from other areas of mathematics about the
applicability of decouplings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Decouplings have proved
successful in addressing a wide range of problems in such diverse areas as
number theory, partial differential equations and harmonic analysis. Through the
project a further expansion is planned of the applicability of these methods in
new directions. One important circle of questions that remain to be addressed
concerns the decoupling inequalities for curves on small spatial balls. An
investigation of a new phenomenon called large cap decoupling will further be
sought after. Large cap decoupling is concerned with square root cancellation
for coarser partitions of manifolds. A third part of the project is devoted to
investigating restrictions of exponential sums to submanifolds of
tori.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.