* 2055098
* RUI: Representations of Analytic Functions in Several Variables and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Ryan Tully-Doyle, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 112,341.00

This project sits at the intersection of operator theory and complex analysis,
two areas of mathematics. Complex analysis is concerned with functions involving
complex numbers, which have broad use in mathematics, physics, and engineering
applications. Complex analysis is often used when systems (such as a circuit)
are encoded into a function which is studied as a means of understanding the
system. A common approach in the analysis of functions is to transform them into
more readily accessible objects. In classical analysis, this transformation is
often an integral transform, such as the Fourier transform, where members of the
same family of functions are transformed into a form with a common structure
(called a kernel) and a geometric object that encodes individual behavior
(called a measure). Another approach to studying families of functions
representing systems common in engineering is called realization, which turns a
system into a simple form involving matrices that represent properties of the
system being studied. For functions with more than one input, both approaches
are enveloped by operator theory, which arose from the mathematical foundation
of quantum physics. This project will use operators to study representations of
more general families of functions and apply them to questions in several
complex variables. There are many questions in this project that will be
explored by groups of student researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically,
this project is concerned with representations of functions that are bounded on
certain domains as expressions of operators acting on associated Hilbert spaces
and how the behavior of these functions at the boundary of their domains is
encoded in the representations. Examples include the Pick functions, which play
an important role in interpolation, probability, and engineering, and which
possess well-known and useful representations in one variable (such as the
Nevanlinna representation). One goal of the project is to extend methods of
operator realizations into more general settings, including understanding
concrete formulas for the operators in realizations and detailing the interplay
between operator components and function regularity (in parallel with boundary
measures in the classical theory) for functions that take matrix inputs. A
second topic of the project is boundary problems in two or more variables, such
as analogues of the Denjoy-Wolff problem on iteration of bounded functions on
the complex disk. The connected goals of this project are motivated by the
important historical and continuing interplay between the representation of
functions bounded on special domains and the study of boundary properties. This
research has potential applications in several complex variables and free
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.