* 2055030
* SBIR Phase I:  Artificial Intelligence Enhanced Design Automation for General Engineering Systems
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Connor McClellan, DEEPSIM, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 08/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve the prototyping and verification
pipeline for advanced semiconductor products that require multiphysics
simulations. This will impact the design of multi-chip modules, emerging
semiconductor devices, and novel analog circuits, all of which are likely to
form the basis of next-generation electronics. Current electronic design
automation (EDA) software used by semiconductor companies often cannot be used
to design these technologies as EDA often lacks sufficient modular and detailed
models, such as thermal and mechanical physics. This project will develop a new
EDA software toolset to address these needs, allowing designers to dramatically
reduce development cost/time and open the door to new products that are
currently too challenging to design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop physical modeling
algorithms to link new physics into the electronic design automation (EDA)
pipeline. Existing modeling tools for components, such as transistors in state-
of-the-art technologies, employ either slow finite element analysis or highly
specialized compact models. These limitations will be overcome by developing new
algorithms to convert complex physics into efficient modular models. This
project will produce an EDA tool based on the new algorithms that (1) are
generalizable to a wide range of components without manual tuning, (2) have high
accuracy, and (3) execute fast. This EDA tool will be integrated into the EDA
toolchain, retaining interoperability with existing design and optimization
software. The performance of the integrated EDA tool will then be validated
against circuit simulations of op-amps and finite element analysis simulations
of multi-chip modules in order to demonstrate fast and accurate system
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.