* 2055561
* Developing an Industry-led Data Analytics Technician Program for Upstate South Carolina
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Renee Cramer, Spartanburg Community College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 08/31/2024
* USD 592,598.00

Businesses increasingly use data analytics to make strategic, data-driven
decisions. As data analytics becomes a routine business tool, there is an urgent
need for data analytics technicians who can work in a wide range of job roles.
Currently, only a few Certificate and Associate Degree Programs are available to
students who wish to become data technicians. As a result, the number of
students pursuing a data analytics career is not keeping pace with workforce
demand. This project aims to address the critical need for data technicians in
the upstate South Carolina region. It will do so by establishing a Business and
Industry Leadership Team that will partner with Spartanburg Community College to
define the skills data technicians need to be successful in the workplace.
Working with these industrial partners, the College will design and implement a
Data Analytics Certificate program that will use online educational approaches
to reach students throughout the region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
begin by expanding and maintaining a Business and Industry Leadership Team, and
then perform a Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities (KSA) analysis to determine the
skills required of data technicians. Information from the KSA analysis will be
used to create a certificate program curriculum that can be administered
remotely. Once faculty are trained to teach the new courses, the College will
recruit students into the certificate program, with an emphasis on recruiting
women. Anticipated outcomes of this project include the creation of a new Data
Analytics certificate program that supports remote and online synchronous
participation, training of faculty members in the new curriculum, and increased
recruitment, retention, and graduation of women in data analytics. The results
of this project will be made publicly available to advance data analytics
technician education and the Business and Industry Leadership Team model nation
wide. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program
that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields
that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.