* 2055347
* Excellence in Research: Interoperable Transportation Service Roaming System for Transportation Disadvantaged Populations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Celeste Chavis, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Continuing Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 789,942.00

This Excellence in Research will promote social equality and improve
transportation accessibility for millions of transportation-disadvantaged (TD)
Americans by supporting fundamental research on a novel Interoperable
Transportation Service Roaming (ITS-R) System. This ITS-R system enables
independent mobility service providers to willingly share their vehicle fleets
and demand information in order to reduce their operational costs and improve
service quality for their riders. A diverse research team consisting of
researchers from two HBCUs (Florida A&amp;M University and Morgan State
University) will conduct various research tasks ranging from service
optimization to travel behavior modeling. Research findings will also be
integrated into undergraduate and graduate courses taught at Florida A&amp;M and
Morgan State. Online education games adapted from the research tasks will be
developed to motivate K-12 students to pursue engineering degrees. The
collaboration with a transportation software company will also provide
internship opportunities for the students to further attract them to pursue
their careers in the transportation industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central
research hypothesis is that inter-type and inter-provider barriers in TD
mobility services can be mitigated through coordinated decision-making at the
organizational (service provider) and individual (rider) levels. To test the
hypothesis, five specific research tasks will be conducted, as follows: (1) To
design a set of mechanisms for independent paratransit service providers to
willingly share demand information and vehicle fleets, and for individual TD
riders to shift their travel plans when appropriate external incentives are
given; (2) To develop and test new vehicle routing and scheduling algorithms
that account for demand exchange, fleet sharing, and availability of inclusive
autonomous vehicles (IAVs); (3) To evaluate the implications of fleet automation
on paratransit operations and design optimization algorithms for allocating and
operating IAVs; (4) To understand and model the organizational (service
provider) and individual (rider) behaviors when the ITS-R system is operational;
and (5) To integrate various system modules and demonstrate the effectiveness of
ITS-R through computational experiments based on real-world data. The successful
completion of those research tasks would yield a set of new mechanisms,
optimization methods, and behavioral findings that are critical for TD
population groups to benefit from the ITS-R system. The research findings will
also inform paratransit regulatory agencies in making effective financial and
operational policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.