* 2055578
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Making Crypto Too BIG To Break
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2025
* Yevgeniy Dodis, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

This project aims to build new cryptosystems with strong security guarantees, by
making the secret keys and/or communication large. The unifying technique is to
overwhelm the adversary with information to ensure that it cannot store enough
of it to break the scheme, even given significantly more resources than the
honest users. The project's novelties are new cryptosystems where: (1) security
holds even if an adversary compromises the machine storing the secret key and
exfiltrates large amounts of data, (2) security does not rely on any unproven
mathematical assumptions, but instead just requires either a large key, or large
amounts of communication between the honest participants. The project's impacts
are: (a) the design of more secure systems in the real world, (b) synergizing,
unifying and abstracting techniques from many diverse areas of computer science,
and (c) mentoring undergraduates, graduate students and postdocs with an
emphasis on fostering diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design of
cryptographic schemes and protocols traditionally strives to make secret keys
and communication as small as possible. In this project, the investigators argue
that there are several important settings where it is possible to dramatically
improve security by making secret keys and/or communication large, while still
allowing the resulting scheme to be quite practical. The project focuses on
three such settings. The first setting considers an adversary who breaks a
cryptographic scheme by outright stealing the corresponding secret key. A
promising approach to mitigate against such attacks is to make cryptographic
keys intentionally huge, to prevent an adversary from exfiltrating them in their
entirety. This project suggests novel research directions towards bringing such
schemes closer to reality. The second setting studies cryptosystems with
Information-theoretic (IT) security, that are provably secure even against
attackers with unlimited computational power. While such cryptosystems are known
to require a large key, the project studies how to make them practical by
ensuring that they are stateless and read only small portions of their large
keys at every use. The third setting studies IT-secure protocols, where the
protocol communication is made intentionally large, so that it becomes
infeasible for the attacker to store it all. The honest participants process the
communication in a streaming manner using much less storage than the
adversary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.