* 2055621
* RET Site: WySTACK - Supporting Teachers And Computing Knowledge
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Mike Borowczak, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 600,000.00

As the sole four-year institution in the state of Wyoming, the University of
Wyoming (UW) will partner with twelve school districts, Northwest Community
College faculty, and several industry partners to create a completely virtual
RET site. This virtual approach mirrors the realities of present-day
collaborative research and enables the researchers and educators an opportunity
to identify limitations, needs, and requirements for rural-based engagement in
authentic computer science research. Pandemic-induced infrastructure
modifications coupled with UW’s success in hosting virtual teacher professional
development activities validate the feasibility of UW offering a virtual
research experience. The site will recruit 36 high school STEM teachers and two
community college faculty members to virtually participate in research with four
CS faculty working on a diverse set of projects which all maintain a common
thread of data science–either within Machine Learning, Cybersecurity,
Virtual/Augmented Reality, or High Performance Computing. The project builds
upon existing work by the state to develop a community of practice among
industry, academic, and community partners and has already provided authentic-
inquiry experiences to hundreds of educators allowing them to develop useable
curricular products in their classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of
Wyoming in collaboration with twelve Wyoming school districts, Northwest
(Community) College, and business/industry partners will host a new RET Site to
engage 36 high school teachers and two community college faculty over a 3-year
period. STEM teacher participants will engage in a six-week authentic summer
virtual research experience focused on addressing rural issues through authentic
applications and societal impacts of advanced computing research with academic
year follow-up sessions. Through a common thread of data science, specific
project research areas include 1) AI and high-performance computing, 2) Machine
learning for security,3) Virtual and augmented reality, and 4) Attacking and
creating secure and resilient rural infrastructure. The educators will then
translate their research experiences and newly gained content knowledge into
their classrooms through the creation and dissemination of course materials and
reusable curricular modules developed in collaboration with the research team
and community college participants. These engagements will contribute to the
development and support of a larger community of practice, WyCS, that is
coalescing in Wyoming between a variety of industry, academic, and community
partners (uwyo.edu/wycs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.