* 2055169
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Mixed Distribution Models for Encrypted Data Stores
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2025
* Thomas Ristenpart, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2025
* USD 666,666.00

Many organizations today capture and store an immense amount of data in cloud
storage systems. Unfortunately, simply storing the data in an encrypted form is
insufficient to ensure security: an adversary can launch powerful attacks that
use data access patterns and data lengths to learn damaging information about
the data. Existing countermeasures against these attacks remain impractical at
the scale of modern storage systems due to large bandwidth and/or storage
overheads. This state of affairs leave organizations with two equally expensive
and painful options: (1) encrypted but insecure systems; or (2) secure systems
but with orders-of-magnitude higher operational costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project breaks the above impasse by exploring a fundamentally new mixed
distribution model that has the potential to both enable secure and high-
performance data stores, as well as to provide new insights about the less-
explored tradeoff between adversarial strength and performance limits of cloud
storage systems. Thus, this project enables the design of cloud storage systems
that resist important adversaries in practice, getting both formal security
analyses and efficiency. This project has broad ramifications for how
practitioners navigate the security-performance tradeoff while building cloud
storage systems; for many scenarios, the project enables breaking the
(unfortunate) choice between security and performance offered by existing
solutions, paving the path for finally addressing security flaws that have
typically required orders-of-magnitude higher operational costs. The project
outcomes are open-source research artifacts, and broader community impact via
educational and technology transfer activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.