* 2055485
* RET in Engineering and Computer Science SITE: Research Experience for Teachers on Cyber-Enabled Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Niki Pissinou, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 02/29/2024
* USD 600,000.00

Cyber-enabled technologies are increasingly more critical for addressing
national challenges like security, economic competitiveness, and innovation. It
is therefore imperative that current and future generations of teachers are
prepared to meet the needs of a diverse, cyber-saavy workforce. This renewal RET
Site at Florida International University will continue providing opportunities
that nurture teachers’ unrealized research potential while meeting the need to
increase diversity in this rapidly growing field. The site has already hosted 78
high school STEM teachers, representing 42 schools across the Miami-Dade
district, and aims to prepare an additional 49 teachers with this renewal award.
Through the immersive 6-week summer program, high school STEM teachers will be
paired with faculty mentors to conduct cutting-edge research that will deepen
their content knowledge, build related curriculum and classroom activities, and
support their students’ career choices in this area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports the renewal of a Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Site
focused on cyber-enabled technologies at Florida International University (FIU).
The primary goals of the RET site are to (1) build long-term collaborative
partnerships between K-12 STEM teachers and the research community; (2) increase
K-12 teachers’ knowledge of cyber-enabled technologies; (3) increase K-12
teachers’ technology competency through research and professional development
programs; and (4) assist teachers in developing class curriculum based on this
experience. This site will provide participants an opportunity to engage in
high-quality cutting-edge research during a six-week summer program under the
mentorship of faculty. The program will serve 49 STEM teachers who teach grades
9-12 and live within commuting distance of FIU. Research projects are centered
on emerging cyber-enabled technologies, including internet of things,
adversarial machine learning, social networks, and security. An important
objective of the program is for the teachers to transfer their research
experience to their classrooms. To accomplish this, teachers meet weekly and
work closely with faculty, staff, students, and each other to collectively
consider ways to communicate the concepts and research process used during the
summer to their students, and to develop educational modules based on their
exposure through the summer. Other career development program activities include
weekly seminars, field trips, workshops, and academic year follow-
ups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.