* 2055451
* NSF-DFG Echem: CAS: Hydrofunctionalization of Alkenes by non-Redox Paired Electrocatalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Song Lin, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 450,656.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Song Lin of Cornell University is studying the enantioselective
hydrofunctionalization of alkenes by non-redox paired electrocatalysis along
with collaborators at Carl von Ossietzky University Oldenburg in Germany. The
Lin research group aims to develop electrocatalytic processes for the synthesis
of value-added organic compounds. The long-term objective of this research
program is to facilitate the development of a generalizable electrocatalytic
process or wide impact in synthetic chemistry, with possible application in the
stereocontrolled synthesis of building blocks for new pharmaceuticals,
agrochemicals, and catalysts. Many of these important compounds contain carbon-
halogen and carbon-carbon bonds. The goal of this research is to establish
efficient, selective, and sustainable reaction technologies that will promote
the formation of carbon-halogen and carbon-carbon bonds using abundant feedstock
chemicals. Electrochemistry—a process that directly uses electricity to drive
chemical reactions—is an intrinsically efficient, selective, and sustainable
technology. The introduction of catalysis can further augment the energy
efficiency of electrochemical reactions and offer opportunities to control the
yield and identity of the end product. The project lies at the interface of
organic synthesis, catalysis, and electrochemistry. Therefore, it is also well
suited for the education of scientists at all levels. In addition to
contributing to the advancement of scientific knowledge and improving fine
chemical manufacturing, the project will also exert broader impacts on the
training of students through research and international collaboration with the
German team. The project is being funded through the "NSF-DFG Lead Agency
Activity in Electrosynthesis and Electrocatalysis (NSF-DFG EChem)" opportunity,
a collaborative solicitation that involves NSF and Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Together with collaborators
at Carl von Ossietzky University Oldenburg in Germany, Song Lin of Cornell
University is developing electrocatalytic methods for the hydrofunctionalization
of alkenes. The proposed research will enlist the combination of paired
electrolysis with redox-active metal catalysis to enable the generation of dual
catalytic intermediates to achieve the desired hydrofunctionalization reactions.
Two objectives will be pursued simultaneously, including (i) establishing non-
redox paired electrocatalysis in the context of hydrochlorination and (ii)
mechanistic investigation of non-redox paired electrocatalysis using
electroanalytical and spectroscopic tools. Upon obtaining initial proof of
principle, the new catalytic strategy will be further expanded to other types of
hydrofunctionalization reactions beyond hydrochlorination. Finally, the Lin team
will develop an electrochemical short course that aims to educate organic
chemists with little electrochemistry experience and provide them with the
knowledge and guidance needed to set up their own electrolysis
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.