* 2055549
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Understanding, Analyzing, and Improving Password Authentication Practices across the Web
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Frank Li, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

For decades, passwords have served as a cornerstone of online authentication,
and will likely remain so for the foreseeable future. As a consequence, the
security of the web ecosystem, its billions of users, and the global economy are
critically dependent on how websites manage password authentication. Yet each
year, attackers successfully hijack millions of online accounts, highlighting a
salient need to improve real-world password authentication. Towards this end,
prior research has explored understanding and improving user password behavior,
but to date, there has been limited consideration for how websites and their
operators actually handle password authentication. Taking a website-centric
perspective, this project will systematically investigate the password
authentication practices employed by websites to identify root causes of
insecure methods. Drawing on the insights gained, this project will also develop
innovative technical and non-technical approaches for improving the practices
actually adopted by website operators. Ultimately, this research will help
advance online authentication security across the web, by impacting the way web-
site operators manage password related security. This could possibly lead to
better security standards (e.g., web standards or password standards). Research
outcomes will be widely disseminated and integrated into open-source tools that
website developers and administrators can directly use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
achieve these goals, this project will pursue three interconnected thrusts. The
first thrust will develop web crawling and analysis techniques to measure
website password authentication practices at scale and evaluate their
implications, providing new visibility into the state of online authentication
security throughout the web ecosystem. The second thrust will employ user
studies and experiments with website operators to establish a socio-technical
understanding of why insecure practices manifest in reality, considering human,
organizational, policy, legal, and technical factors. Finally, the third thrust
will build on the insights gained from the other two thrusts and develop
practical technical and non-technical solutions for improving how website
operators manage password authentication. These solutions will include hardened
designs and implementations of existing authentication mechanisms, tools that
reduce the barriers to adopting secure practices, and methods of raising
operator awareness of poor practices. Together, these complementary thrusts
serve as a comprehensive effort to improve web authentication in
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.