* 2055483
* I-Corps:  A tool for increased accuracy in analysis of patient outcomes during neuromuscular rehabilitation
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Grace O'Connell, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of adaptive physical therapy and exercise equipment that may be used
by individuals with varying ranges of physical abilities. There is a large gap
in the ability of individuals with mobility impairments, such as neuromuscular
disorders, spinal cord injuries, and strokes, to conduct much needed physical
therapy and exercise on a regular basis. Once the proposed technology is
validated and usable at home, it will significantly increase access to care. The
high frequency physical therapy visits required for individuals with physical
disabilities often impacts their quality of life. A device that can perform
clinically accurate rehabilitation at home or even on the go will enable an
increased level of independence and quality of life by limiting the number of
visits to the clinic. Additionally, the proposed technology may be used as a
research tool during clinical trials of new pharmaceutical therapies for
neuromuscular diseases. An increase in patient outcome accuracy and resolution
would make it easier to develop new and more effective therapies. The device
will be marketed to pharmaceutical companies as a secondary commercial
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a biomimetic and patient-specific human-machine interface that
will increase the comfort of the device during extended use. This will likely
increase patient compliance and lead to better data collection and potentially
better patient outcomes during rehabilitation. Additionally, accurate alignment
of the device will not require a trained professional, enabling the device to be
used in a clinic or at home. This will allow for a significant increase in
flexibility for patients who need to attend frequent physical therapy sessions.
Finally, the device is powered by off-board motors and batteries to reduce
weight and further increase the patient's comfort. Preliminary research and
testing have been successfully conducted with end users with spinal muscular
atrophy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.