* 2055062
* Developing the STEM Workforce: Career Pathways of Math and Science Teachers in Texas and Washington after the COVID-19 Pandemic
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Min Sun, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,482,889.00

The University of Washington is conducting an interdisciplinary research project
that analyzes math and science teacher career pathways using longitudinal
statewide data from Washington and Texas and the Baccalaureate and Beyond
(B&amp;B) Longitudinal Study dataset. There are three project objectives: (1) To
inform evidence-based policies and practices for improving the math and science
teacher workforce by studying the long-term career paths of those who leave
teaching, (2) To build an infrastructure for using “big data” to conduct
rigorous and policy-relevant education research across two parallel statewide
longitudinal data systems, and (3) establish a diverse community of scholars to
carry out data-intensive research. The investigators will implement a set of
studies that explore math and science teacher career paths – tracking teachers
across schools and from education into other sectors of the economy – to provide
a deeper understanding of the factors that affect the development of STEM
teachers. The project will provide empirical evidence to describe K-12 teacher
career pathways and attrition, including attrition resulting from the COVID-19
pandemic, and inform workforce policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators will
use the Roy model of occupational choice to guide the research questions and
analytic approach. The model offers several predictions for the teacher labor
market and competing non-teacher labor markets. The dataset used for the project
will be generated using raw data provided through the University of Texas at
Austin Educational Research Center and the Washington Education Research Data
Center and the B&amp;B datasets. Analyses conducted for the project will include
separate but identical parallel analyses for each state. The research questions
examine (1) patterns in math and science teacher mobility along three
dimensions, (2) the extent to which existing teachers earn higher salaries after
leaving teaching, and (3) the relationships between salaries and perceived
working conditions and teachers’ career path decisions. Data will be analyzed
using descriptive statistics, mapping software to construct interactive maps in
each state, and regression. The findings will be disseminated broadly to key
stakeholders including state policy makers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that
advances fundamental research on STEM learning and learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.