* 2055022
* New Approaches to Questions in Sampling, Counting, and Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2021,10/31/2021
* Prasad Tetali, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pawel Hitczenko
* 10/31/2021
* USD 303,034.00

The project addresses fundamental research directions overlapping with the areas
of probability, combinatorics, statistical mechanics and optimization. The
technical challenges include acceleration of random walks on discrete structures
such as graphs, optimal analysis of classical random walks restricted to special
subsets of lattices, and developing new combinatorial enumeration techniques
from graphs to hypergraphs. The resulting methods have potential for
applications in statistical physics. Some of the applications, such as the
Traveling Fireman Problem, are inspired by practical challenges and would have
important societal impacts. The project provides training opportunities for
students. The PI will continue to host expository lecture series as well as
working group activities that feature and support junior researchers, including
those from underrepresented minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
includes efforts to speed up random walks for faster sampling, inspired by
acceleration techniques in Langevin dynamics and continuous optimization; tight
estimates on the mixing time of constrained random walks on distributive
lattices, a study originally motivated by dynamical aspects of bond percolation
on the square lattice; and the development of cluster expansion and zero-
freeness of independence polynomials arising from hypergraphs. A fundamental
question raised focuses on whether sampling using traditionally first-order
Markov chain dynamics from a discrete finite set with a prescribed distribution
can be accelerated, using certain second-order dynamics. While the initial
investigation suggests such a speed-up of spectral gap is feasible, it is
unclear how to simulate such a process in the context of discrete (or
continuous)-time random walks on a discrete space. A second topic addresses a
quest for a deeper understanding of sampling and counting independent sets in
hypergraphs. As direct counting of these objects is well-known to be
intractable; probabilistic aspects by way of cluster expansion and zeros of
hypergraph polynomials are considered as potentially fruitful
directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.