* 2055582
* Establishing Veteran Career Training for Advanced Manufacturing Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Timothy Cordova, Kentucky Community & Technical College System
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 04/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The Elizabethtown-Fort Knox, Kentucky region has a robust advanced manufacturing
industry that is increasingly using automation and robotics. This industry now
has more than 400 annual openings for Manufacturing Engineers, and it takes an
average of 40 days to fill these positions with a qualified candidate. This
project intends to increase the pool of qualified candidates for these and
related positions. To do so, Elizabethtown Community and Technical College will
partner with the U.S. Army Garrison - Fort Knox to provide educational
opportunities in Advanced Manufacturing to soldiers transitioning to civilian
life. These opportunities will include the high-demand areas of Automation,
Robotics, Industrial Maintenance, and Electrical Technology. The college will
use flexible course options to meet the needs of transitioning soldiers so that
they can use their post-service time to obtain industry-recognized, stackable
credentials, including academic certificates and associate degrees. The result
is expected to be a new career pathway that will expand advanced manufacturing
education to more students. In addition, by redesigning their Advanced
Manufacturing courses to closely align with the skills needed in high-demand
industries in the region, the project can benefit soldiers reentering civilian
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Elizabethtown Community and Technical
College will focus on serving transitioning military personnel and will gain a
better understanding of veteran culture and the necessary services needed to
promote student success. Student services will be combined with portable,
relevant, affordable education in high-demand areas in Advanced Manufacturing.
The college intends to shorten the time to a credential through flexible course
options that include online, hybrid, and face to face instruction, combined with
increased acceptance of experiential credit from military transcripts. The goal
of the project is that at least 90% of the students in each cohort will be
placed in industry or retained for graduation with an Associate degree. The
academic and service model developed by the project will be shared among the 16
colleges in the Kentucky Community and Technical College System. The program
will also disseminate their model and findings nationally, to assist other
colleges that want to serve growing veteran populations that would benefit from
similar academic and career support. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.