* 2055457
* Subcellular interrogation of muscle dynamics with integrated optoelectronic arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Guangyu Xu, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 07/31/2024
* USD 359,998.00

Mechanistic understanding of calcium signaling in muscle contraction and
regeneration will benefit from devices that can interrogate muscle dynamics at
subcellular resolutions. This research project aims to lay the groundwork of
optoelectronic muscle interfacing that can precisely modulate and capture the
calcium dynamics in muscle. The outcome of this research will result in new
muscle interfacing tools and assays, which can help better understand the
mechanisms of muscle physiology, and in the long term offer a possible platform
to develop therapeutics targeted to muscle recovery. The educational objectives
of this proposal are aimed at training and inspiring young engineers and
scientists with the multidisciplinary background required to help define the
future trajectory of regenerative medicine, physical therapy, and kinesiology.
The broader impacts of this project include: 1) advancing transformative muscle
interfacing technologies towards the development of muscle therapeutics; 2)
educating underrepresented undergraduate and graduate researchers to contribute
to the nationâ€™s workforce needs in biotechnology and healthcare, and 3)
promoting muscle science and technology among local senior citizens and support
groups for muscle diseases.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this
proposal is to establish two high-density optoelectronic arrays to interrogate
the dynamics of muscle contraction and regeneration processes at subcellular
precision. To achieve this, these arrays will be built with scalable fabrication
process to offer bi-directional optogenetic control and on-chip fluorescence
recording of intracellular signals, respectively. In the long term, both arrays
can be built along a shank structure to ultimately offer access to deep muscle
tissue. The intellectual merit of the proposed work will be evidenced by the
following scientific contributions: 1) subcellular optogenetic modulation of the
neuromuscular junctions via a high-density light-source array; 2) subcellular
imaging of the Ca2+ and voltage signals in muscle cells via a high-density
photodetector array; and 3) subcellular interrogation of the muscle contraction
and regeneration processes with two optoelectronic arrays, which will shed light
on the development of muscle therapeutics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.