* 2055412
* Enhancing Career Pathways to Green Jobs in High-performance Building Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Robert Gilbert, Sinclair Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 559,624.00

Buildings account for a major portion of the total U.S. energy consumption.
Making buildings more energy efficient is a goal of the high-performance
building technology industry. Achieving this goal requires hiring more building
performance technicians, but the demand for these technicians outstrips the
supply. Building performance technical work includes all aspects of facility
operations and maintenance, including whole-system analysis and energy
management. Thus, success in the building technology workforce requires the
knowledge and skills needed to install, implement, and maintain complex building
systems. This project intends to increase the pipeline of highly skilled
building performance technicians by creating a new stackable certificate
program, offering dual enrollment courses for high school students, providing
training for high school teachers, and conducting outreach activities. By
expanding career pathways into the building performance workforce, the project
aims to broaden participation of women and other groups that are
underrepresented in the building technology workforce and that have been
disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will address a significant and growing demand for entry-level high
performance building technicians in Southwest Ohio. The overall goal of the
project is to expand the pipeline of skilled technicians who have the skills to
reduce energy consumption in buildings. To this end, the project will develop a
stackable short-term certificate with embedded industry-recognized credentials.
Students who earn this credential will be prepared to take industry
certification exams and enter the building performance workforce. Specific aims
of the project include to: (1) create a new postsecondary certificate program
that can be completed by high school students; (2) train high school teachers to
deliver postsecondary course content; (3) pilot an outreach program to raise
awareness of technical career opportunities among youth, particularly from
communities not equitably represented in the building technician workforce; (4)
provide a structured approach to guide high school students and unemployed/
underemployed adults onto building performance career pathways; and (5) improve
student learning by upgrading labs with the latest building technologies. Using
student surveys, student interviews, and institutional data, the project will
assess the impact of the certificate program on student learning and the impact
of outreach activities on recruiting students from communities that are
underrepresented in the technical workforce. This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.