* 2055125
* RUI-CHE: Development of Organometallic Complexes for the Next-Generation of Non-Aqueous Redox Flow Batteries
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Emmanuelle Despagnet-Ayoub, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 225,002.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Emmanuelle Despagnet-Ayoub of Occidental College is studying new redox active
materials for energy storage. Renewable power sources derived from solar energy
are promising and environmentally friendly solutions for generating electric
power. However, their intermittent behavior does not align with the typical
energy demand. Consequently, more efficient energy storage devices need to be
developed. Redox flow batteries are a promising energy storage technology.
However, prior redox-flow technologies have considerable challenges meeting the
performance requirements for grid storage applications due to their low energy
density. This project, carried out primarily by talented undergraduates, aims to
find solutions to overcome these limitations. The research will be carried out
synergistically with other projects promoting diversity in STEM fields at
Occidental College, such as the COSMOS (Creating Opportunities in Science and
Mathematics for Occidental Students, S-STEM grant) and the REAP (Research Early
Access Program, Sherman Fairchild grant)
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emmanuelle Despagnet-Ayoub of Occidental College
is developing new redox active materials for high energy density redox flow
batteries. Indeed, the practical energy density of current redox flow batteries
is typically low (10s of Wh/L) due to the use of aqueous solutions with narrow
potential windows and redox couples with limited solubility. Development of
organometallic complexes with a high solubility in organic solvents and tunable
formal potentials will help advance the field. The PI has recently reported a
strategy to anodically shift the formal potential of metal redox couples by
outer-sphere coordination of Lewis acids. This concept will be further probed
with a variety of complex frameworks and Lewis acids, in order to develop a
relationship map between ligand framework-Lewis acid and their electrochemical
properties. The project will ultimately lead to more exciting systems involving
multiple electron processes at the molecular and macromolecular levels, and the
development of symmetric flow batteries with non-innocent ligands and semi-solid
flow batteries with immobilized redox active species. This research project will
provide research and training opportunities to undergraduates in the fields of
organometallic synthesis and electrochemistry within the larger context of flow
batteries and energy storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.