* 2055356
* BEE:  Evolutionary Responses to Global Change - Linking Genotype with Phenotype to Model Future Demography and Range Expansions
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Carol Lee, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 03/31/2024
* USD 908,569.00

Climate change is causing drastic environmental shifts throughout the globe,
including rapid changes in ocean salinity. This salinity change is caused by
alterations in rainfall patterns and enormous volumes of ice melt dumping into
the seas. At higher latitudes, rapid salinity decline is imposing incredible
amounts of stress on aquatic species, such that many populations are likely to
go extinct. Among aquatic species the most abundant are zooplankton, which are
free floating plankton eaten by fish. Among the zooplankton, copepods (small
crustaceans) are the most abundant and important for providing the food source
for coastal fisheries. This research will examine how copepod populations evolve
and specifically how natural selection may rescue particular populations and
result in the survival of species even in the face of climate change. The goal
of this project is to use genetic data and mathematical predictions to answer
the following questions: (1) How are the genomes of wild populations evolving
when faced with rapid changes in salinity and temperature? (2) How will salinity
and temperature influence reproduction and growth of wild populations? (3) Will
changes in salinity and temperature force populations to migrate or cause them
to go extinct? The researchers will address these questions by conducting
laboratory evolution experiments to determine which genetic variants (alleles)
are favored by natural selection during temperature and salinity change. The
work will also involve mathematical models to understand whether natural
selection favors genetic variants, and if this could rescue a population from
extinction in the wild. The integration of evolution into predictive
mathematical models of demography is crucial for making accurate predictions of
the fate of populations and species. Such research is especially important
because the focal organisms (small crustaceans) are at the base of the food web
and support many important fisheries throughout the world. One postdoctoral
fellow, two graduate students, and several undergraduate students (including
members of under-represented groups) will be trained in conducting integrative
research &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate change is currently driving
rapid changes in ocean salinity throughout the world. Drastic changes in the
global water cycle are causing the freshening of high latitude coastal seas,
with acutely severe impacts on estuaries. In such habitats, by the year 2100,
salinity is projected to decline by up to 5 PSU, while temperatures are expected
to rise by ~2-6Â°C. Thus, rapidly declining salinity is predicted to become a
potent driver threatening coastal populations. Adaptation is critical for
surviving severe environmental stress that exceeds physiological thresholds, but
we lack clear understanding of how responses to natural selection translate to
population growth rate and demography. This proposal focuses on empirically
testing the mostly theoretical concept of evolutionary rescue, where evolution
proceeds with sufficient speed to forestall population decline so extirpation
and extinction do not occur. The research will (1) determine the Response to
Selection, by conducting laboratory natural selection experiments (experimental
evolution) to quantify the genomic responses to salinity and temperature change
(i.e., determine the trajectory of alleles and their selection coefficients) and
then (2) reconstruct the Genotype-Phenotype Map, by performing genetic
association studies, to quantify the effects of beneficial alleles on life
history traits that determine absolute fitness, and finally (3) perform Eco-
Evolutionary Modeling, by incorporating data on evolutionary trajectories of
beneficial alleles (from #1) and fitness effects of those alleles favored by
selection (from #2) into models that predict future population demography,
including range shifts and probability of extinctions in response to climate
change. This study will advance our fundamental understanding of mechanisms of
evolutionary adaptation, by elucidating how candidate genes and their
interactions could affect demography (linking genotype-phenotype-demography) and
by injecting evolutionary data into predictive models of climate change impacts.
Such an integration of evolution into demographic models is crucial for making
accurate predictions on limits to future range shifts and probabilities of local
and global extinctions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.