* 2055668
* Collaborative Research: D3SC: CDS&amp;E:  Predictive Discovery of Porphyrin Molecules and their Response Properties using Smart Objects-Enabled Machine Learning
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Andre Clayborne, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 05/31/2024
* USD 382,932.00

With this award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods
program in the Division of Chemistry, Andre Clayborne (George Mason University)
and Kim Lewis (Howard University) are supported to use artificial intelligence
to predict porphyrin molecules suitable for molecular materials. Porphyrin
molecules have electrical and optical properties that are tailorable for
molecular materials and quantum information technologies. However, time-
consuming experiments and challenges with traditional simulations limit
researchers and industries from wide-spread use of porphyrin-based materials.
The collaborative team will combine cutting-edge conductance experiments and
theoretical calculation techniques along with machine learning and cognitive
computing. The multidisciplinary research project also incorporates summer
industrial immersion experiences for graduate students with Performigence, an
industrial partner, to prepare for careers beyond academia.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research project aims to accelerate the discovery
of porphyrin molecules, their response properties (i.e., conductance, UV-vis
spectra, etc.), and molecular materials using data-centered graph-based neural
networks and cognitive computing. Porphyrins are promising components in
molecular-based devices in quantum information technologies and opto-electronic
devices. Andre Clayborne and Kim Lewis will integrate data from quantum-
mechanical computations, molecular dynamics simulations, scanning tunneling
microscope molecular break junctions, and conductive atomic force microscopy
with artificial intelligence techniques. The highly integrative work will
construct a comprehensive database for porphyrins and metal-porphyrins with
experimental and theoretical values including response functions, such as
conductance curves, and will develop a cognitive computing protocol for
predicting porphyrin molecules and their response properties. In addition, the
research team will develop a web-based application programming interface to use
the Porphyrin Project database with an industrial partner,
Performigence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.