* 2055039
* Collaborative Research: Developing Teacher Learning Theory with Teachers and Students Animating Mathematical Concepts
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Carlos LopezLeiva, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Toya frank
* 07/31/2026
* USD 246,699.00

This project will advance theory for understanding teacher learning as it
relates to mathematics teacher knowledge and student knowledge. The research
team theorizes that teacher knowledge and student knowledge are not distinct.
Specifically, this work challenges the longstanding idea in teacher education
that a knowledge base for teaching pre-exists as a static body of knowledge
awaiting to be discovered by teachers. Instead, this project examines what
happens when teacher and student knowledge bases are conceptualized as
interdependent and capable of generating new knowledge in and for teacher
learning. This project will build theory, grounded in feminist, Indigenous, and
materialist perspectives, that explains how teacher knowledge and student
knowledge interact to generate new knowledge that is relevant in and for
racially, culturally, and linguistically diverse mathematics teaching contexts.
This project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports
work that advances fundamental research on STEM learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop theory regarding a
teacher learning approach that encourages teachers to teachers adopt and
exchange flexible roles with their students as active observers and participants
to contribute to teachers developing their teacher learning as a relational
practice. Drawing on lesson study and Indigenous research design principles,
researchers, teachers, and their students will collaborate to create animated
concepts of mathematical ideas. Animated concepts include how students use
mental images, material objects, and lived experiences that center Black, Native
American, Latina, and newcomer knowledge bases related to mathematical concepts.
Researchers across three sites in Michigan, Virginia, and New Mexico will
immerse two teachers per research location and their students in this process
both during the school year and during a summer program where teachers and
students will collaborate with local artists to produce multimedia projects
representative of their animated concepts. This research has implications for
how mathematical teacher knowledge is conceptualized and how it is addressed via
professional development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.