* 2055375
* Ideological Roadblocks to Diversifying STEM: Resistance and Allyship in STEM Diversity and Inclusion Efforts
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Erin Cech, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 06/30/2024
* USD 559,600.00

Ideological Roadblocks to Diversifying STEM: Resistance and Allyship in STEM
Diversity and Inclusion Efforts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is
to break important ground in STEM inequality research by better understanding
how powerful and privileged groups in STEM respond to diversity, equity, and
inclusion (DEI) efforts in their workplaces and professions. Despite the
millions of dollars invested each year in DEI-related training, recruitment, and
retention efforts, STEM fields have struggled to diversify demographically and
culturally. Much research over the last few decades has sought to understand the
interactional and institutional-level biases that disadvantage women, people of
color, and LGBTQ individuals in STEM. Yet, these biases are not the only ways in
which inequality and under-representation are perpetuated. Central to STEM’s
stalled diversification are sources of resistance to organizational and
institutional changes that seek to advance equity. Such resistance can block
both the effective implementation of existing DEI efforts and the development of
new initiatives that would bring deeper structural and cultural transformations.
This project seeks to investigate resistance to DEI efforts among the population
with the greatest structural and cultural power in STEM. While many individuals
in powerful social groups are personally committed to equity and inclusion,
others may disagree with, and even actively resist, DEI efforts in their
organizations and professions. The goal of this project is to map the wider
landscape of cultural schemas that individuals in powerful social groups use to
make sense of DEI efforts and to express their resistance to or support for
those efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using an innovative combination of analysis
of existing survey data, interviews with a representative sample of individuals
in powerful social groups STEM professionals, and a survey experiment, the
empirical goals of this project are to (1) investigate resistance to and support
for DEI efforts relative to their peers, (2) document the roadblock schemas (or
shared cultural models) that individuals in powerful social groups may use to
frame such resistance to DEI efforts, and (3) test interventions that attempt to
destabilize adherence to these roadblock schemas and, by extension, resistance
to DEI efforts. In doing so, this project would offer critical insights to
assist academic institutions, workplaces, and professional societies in
designing strategies to overcome those roadblocks and promote more effective DEI
efforts. Such an investigation may also contribute to STEM inequality, cultural
sociology, and sociology of professions literatures by illustrating how cultural
norms of professional integrity, which seem on their face to be a degree removed
from issues of inclusion or inequality, can serve as powerful tools of
resistance to diversification within professions. Broadly, understanding the
cultural frameworks that powerful social groups use to defend their privilege
and resist change is vital for overcoming the stalled diversification of STEM
and advancing race, gender, and LGBTQ equality
therein.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the EHR Core Research
(ECR) program, which supports work that advances fundamental research on STEM
learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM
workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.