* 2055728
* Expanding Precision Agriculture Education and Certification to Secondary Students
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jenni Fridgen, Parkland College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2024
* USD 581,377.00

With this award, Parkland College intends to build on the success of two prior
NSF projects in Precision Agriculture and Unmanned Aircraft Systems to develop a
pathway for secondary students to earn a college credential while gaining
industry experience. In coordination with industry leaders, community partners,
and secondary education organizations, the project will create apprenticeship
opportunities and stackable certificates to prepare secondary students for jobs
in precision agriculture and adjacent sectors. The stackable certificates will
combine coursework in Precision Agriculture and Unmanned Aircraft Systems and be
designed specifically for high school students. Participants will complete this
curriculum while obtaining industry experience through apprenticeships with
industry partners. The project will focus on increasing the diversity of the
agriculture workforce by increasing involvement of female and minority secondary
students. Food security and agricultural exports are a major part of the US
economy. Thus, improving training opportunities in agriculture is essential to
continuing the strong presence of US agriculture on the world stage.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are to establish a new Early
College and Career Academy Program; establish work-based learning opportunities
with regional employers; and increase participation of traditionally
underrepresented students in agriculture. The precision agriculture sector
continues to modernize and the importance of well-trained students is becoming
increasingly critical. Many precision agriculture companies struggle to fill
open positions as the workforce ages out and the younger generation is drawn
away from careers in agriculture. Creating new pathways to encourage secondary
students to explore careers as technicians in precision agriculture will ensure
the availability of a robust workforce. Project participants will be well
prepared to enter and advance in the growing precision agriculture industry. By
developing credentials and apprenticeship opportunities for secondary students
the project will be educating future technicians in line with industry needs.
Furthermore, the project's focus on increasing the number of women and
minorities in precision agriculture will strengthen and diversify an important
American industry. The deliverables and best practices developed through the
project will be disseminated through coordination with multiple industry
partners and a statewide secondary education organization. Additionally, the PI
and Co-PI will attend and present at conferences relevant to agriculture
education, agribusiness, and unmanned aircraft systems conferences throughout
the grant period. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.