* 2055538
* RUI: Spectral Theory and Geometric Analysis in Several Complex Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Siqi Fu, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 226,529.00

Complex numbers have long played an important role in mathematics, physics, and
engineering such as in designing electrical circuits. The study of functions
defined on complex numbers has led to several new fields including the area of
several complex variables, which is a major branch of mathematics where algebra,
analysis and geometry intertwine. The principal goal of this project is to
systematically study problems of a geometric nature in several complex
variables. Many of the proposed problems have their roots in the physical
sciences. This project aims to understand how geometric structures interplay
with analytic properties in several complex variables. This project supports
learning and research activities for undergraduate and graduate students,
especially those from underrepresented groups. These learning and research
experiences will better prepare the students for graduate school or a
professional career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main thrust of the proposed
research is the several complex variables analogue of Mark Kac’s problem "Can
one hear the shape of a drum?" That is, to what extend is the geometry of a
complex or CR manifold determined by spectral behavior of the complex Laplacian?
The complex Laplacian could either be the complex Neumann Laplacian on a complex
manifold with boundary or the Kohn Laplacian on a CR manifold. These complex
Laplacians are the natural outgrowth in several complex variables of the
classical Laplace operator with the Neumann boundary condition. Problems to be
studied include positivity, discreteness, and stability of the spectrum. The
spectral theory of the complex Laplacian is intimately related to problems in
quantum mechanics. The principal investigator plans to combine ideas and
techniques from various fields of mathematics and physics to further study these
problems in geometric function theory of several complex
variables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.