* 2055751
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Mining Strong Security from Weak RFID Tags
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Yanchao Zhang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 02/29/2024
* USD 484,644.00

Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) has played and will continue playing
critical roles in the era of the Internet of Things (IoT). Passive ultra-high
frequency (UHF) RFID tags are most popular in the market, but most commercial
off-the-shelf products do not support cryptographic operations and are
particularly vulnerable to spoofing and cloning. Such security concerns severely
hinder the application of off-the-shelf passive UHF RFID tags to security-
sensitive contexts. This project also offers an integrated education platform
for curriculum development, graduate student training, undergraduate research
engagement, broadening participation of female and underrepresented students in
computing, and outreach activities in the IoT and cybersecurity domains.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to boost the applicability of off-the-
shelf passive UHF RFID systems to security-sensitive applications such as user
authentication, access control to protected physical or electronic resources,
and critical asset tracking. The proposed research comprises five integrated
thrusts. Thrust 1 is to develop a novel system to fingerprint RFID tags based on
their unique frequency-dependent backscatter-power profiles over a wide
frequency band. Thrust 2 is to develop a novel two-factor RFID authentication
system based on the user's rhythmic taps on the RFID tag. Thrust 3 is to develop
a smartwatch-aided two-factor RFID authentication system based on the
anticipated strong correlation between the smartwatch and RFID data. Thrust 4 is
to develop a smartwatch-aided continuous authentication system to verify a
user's continuous physical presence in a protected area. Thrust 5 is to
prototype all the proposed techniques and evaluate their security and usability
through IRB-approved user experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.