* 2055326
* RUI: CAS: Alkynyl Complexes of Titanium(IV) and Platinum(II):  Phosphors, Photocatalysts, and Fundamental Photophysics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Paul Wagenknecht, Furman University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2024
* USD 337,383.00

In this RUI project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanism
B Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Paul Wagenknecht of the
Department of Chemistry at Furman University is developing new transition-metal
alkynyl complexes for use as photocatalysts and as phosphors. Transition-metal
photocatalysts are crucial components in organic synthesis and in systems for
the conversion of solar energy into electricity and/or chemical fuels. Professor
Wagenknecht aims to use complexes of earth-abundant elements to replace precious
metal photocatalysts. Transition-metal phosphors are essential components of
organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs). The development of phosphors for OLEDs in
Professor Wagenknecht’s group involves a set of complexes designed to enhance
blue emission, which remains a technical challenge. These complexes also show
promise for the development of single-component white OLEDs (WOLEDs). Students
involved in the proposed activities will be trained in methods directly related
to device chemistry and the conversion of solar energy to stored chemical
energy. This will result in the development of a STEM workforce prepared to
solve problems of serious social significance. Students in the Professor
Wagenknecht’s laboratory are also active in after-hours tutoring programs and/or
providing chemistry demonstrations to local elementary and middle schools. They
are also active in outreach to high school students and high school teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent reports demonstrate that complexes of earth-
abundant metals with ligand-to-metal charge transfer excited states represent a
new class of possible photocatalysts. Titanocenes previously developed in
Professor Wagenknecht’s laboratory have proven to be a synthetically accessible
class of compounds with excited-state redox potentials appropriate for use as
photocatalysts and as dyes for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). New alkynyl-
titanocenes with rigid structures and/or with Cu(I) coordinated between the
alkynes are proposed to have higher stability and longer excited-state lifetimes
and will be compared to those without such modification. This could lead to a
stronger understanding of the photophysical principles necessary to design
first-row transition-metal sensitizers. Professor Wagenknecht’s group has
developed a titanocene precursor with carboxylate anchoring groups so that a
range of titanocenes can be prepared and appended to titanium dioxide to
investigate their possible use as sensitizers in DSSCs and investigate
principles of charge injection. The Pt-alkynyl complexes proposed are being
prepared to mechanistically investigate the role of the trifluoropropynyl ligand
in blue-shifting emission while maintaining high phosphorescence quantum yields.
Furthermore, the interplay between the blue monomer emission and the orange
excimer emission will be investigated for possible applications in WOLED
devices. These activities are supported by a robust computational
component.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.