* 2055253
* Engaging K-12 Teachers to Help Build a Cybersecurity Workforce Pipeline
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Thomas Brown, Forsyth Technical Community College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2024
* USD 326,300.00

This project addresses a growing need for cybersecurity professionals in the
Piedmont Triad region of North Carolina, an expanse of urban and rural
communities anchored by the cities of Winston-Salem, Greensboro and High Point.
The project will focus on bolstering the academic capacity required to expand
the talent pipeline of cybersecurity professionals to serve business and
industry needs across the 12-county region. Local middle school and high school
faculty will be enrolled in a 16 credit-hour program at Forsyth Technical
Community College (FTCC) that will prepare them to integrate cybersecurity
principles into their classrooms. Upon program completion, the teachers will
have the knowledge and skills they need to be effective teachers of dual-
enrolled high school students, which will result in an increase in the number of
students who are prepared and motivated to enroll in a two-year program in
cybersecurity. The teachers will also be prepared to earn cybersecurity
certifications that will qualify them to serve as adjunct faculty at FTCC and
will increase the college’s capacity to provide post-secondary and workforce-
related instruction in cybersecurity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three goals guide the
project team's efforts. First is to increase the number of cybersecurity
professionals in the Piedmont Triad region. Second is to increase the number and
knowledge level of cybersecurity faculty at the secondary and post-secondary
levels. Third is to improve the diversity of the cybersecurity workforce in the
Piedmont Triad region. The project expects to see several outcomes from its
efforts. One is to enable FTCC to increase awareness of cybersecurity first
principles and practices. Another is to develop lasting and effective
partnerships for innovative cybersecurity education. Additionally, the College
envisions keeping the talent pipeline filled with well-educated, multi-skilled,
work-ready graduates who will be able to help satisfy a projected national
shortage of 1.8 million workers by 2022. The project will leverage options
available to North Carolina educators to seamlessly link dual-enrollment
opportunities for high school students with the automatic transfer of credit
awarded by community colleges. Through project’s collaboration with business and
industry leaders, teachers will develop deeper insights into the role of
cybersecurity across academic disciplines. This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.