* 2055223
* Mobile Controlled Environment Agriculture Technician Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Lew Nakamura, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The Hawaiian Islands currently import 90% of its food. Consequently, it needs to
expand local food production. This project aims to address this need by creating
a mobile Controlled Environment Agriculture (CEA) greenhouse and use it to teach
students CEA skills. The mobile greenhouse can be deployed in challenging
environments (e.g., volcanic eruption, hurricane, pandemic), thus improving the
resiliency of Hawaii’s isolated communities. In addition, this mobile CEA
greenhouse will increase participation of native Hawaiian students
underrepresented in STEM fields by linking to ongoing cultural and “aina” (land)
values such as sustainability. The new CEA curriculum will engage students from
agricultural and technology programs in problem-based learning. The hands-on
environment, together with involvement of students from different disciplines,
can enhance students’ critical thinking skills and the ability to work in
multidisciplinary teams. Completion of the CEA curriculum, with its problem-
based learning approach, has the potential improve employability of
participating students across a range of jobs and industries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a new insulated and refrigerated shipping container
with a commercial trailer, Hawaii Community College will work with industry
advisors to design and build the mobile CEA greenhouse and upgrade existing
courses to include CEA knowledge and skills. The CEA curriculum will focus on
building, automating, and optimizing the resources, operations, and yield from
the technology-enabled mobile greenhouse. The greenhouse environment will
provide a strong context for the new PBL pedagogy, which will involve students
from different disciplines with the goal of increasing students’ skills and
employability with a broad range of employers. The mobile green house will be
brought to middle and high schools to enhance visibility of the technology, the
varied employment opportunities available to those with training, and showcase
the potential of integrating agriculture and technology programs in Hawaii.
Results from the project’s annual evaluation reports will be used to adjust
activities and measure success. These results will also inform stakeholders in
education, agriculture, engineering, and the public. This project is funded by
the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.