* 2055501
* Topological and C*-Algebraic Quantum Matter
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Markus Pflaum, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 385,878.00

A series of revolutionary developments across physics reveal that the phenomena
of quantum mechanics not only play a crucial role for very small systems, but
that large systems can also behave in a quantum way. Physicists and
mathematicians are only beginning to understand a vast array of quantum phases
of matter: classes of systems that may look different microscopically but share
common macroscopic properties. This project aims to solidify the connection
between topological phases of matter as thought of by condensed matter
physicists and their conjectured mathematical classification. The intended
approach to this problem is expected to have immediate applications to condensed
matter physics and quantum information science via new examples of topological
phases and the development of new theoretical methods. The award will also
contribute to US workforce development through the training of graduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal scientific goal of this project is
to use algebraic quantum mechanics to develop a framework to study the
relationship between condensed matter physics and topology. In condensed matter
physics quantum systems equipped with a time evolution or Hamiltonian are often
presented using lattice models: these are simplified models of a material at low
temperature. When the energy gap of a quantum system is non-zero, some
properties are robust to deformations of the system, leading to the notion of
equivalence classes of systems known as gapped phases of matter. Some gapped
phases, called invertible, are believed to be well approximated by topological
quantum field theories, although this connection is not understood rigorously.
However, Kitaev has proposed a more fundamental connection between topology and
condensed matter physics, suggesting that invertible gapped phases are
classified by a loop-spectrum in the sense of homotopy theory. The project team
will make this precise by introducing a cohomology theory of invertible gapped
phases. Physically, this corresponds to studying quantum systems with parameters
that are allowed to vary, with some predetermined restrictions and without
changing the fundamental properties of the system. This award supports
investigations aimed toward constructing this theory and answering related
fundamental questions in the mathematical physics of gapped phases of
matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.