* 2055395
* RET Site: Collaborative Research: Sonoran Photovoltaics Laboratory: Energizing the STEM Pipeline through Citizen Science
* ENG,EEC
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Kelly Potter, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 10/31/2024
* USD 207,000.00

Advancing solutions to sustainable energy transitions, creating an informed
citizenry, and building a highly skilled STEM workforce are all elements of
successful energy system transitions for rural and urban communities. Addressing
this grand challenge requires significant and balanced investments in solar
energy research and education alike. Arizona State University and the University
of Arizona will partner to create the Sonoran Photovoltaics Laboratory (SPV Lab)
in order to inspire and enable educators. SPV Lab will promote the progress of
science and engineering through this Research Experiences for Teachers (RET)
Site which will position teachers to advance the energy revolution in two ways.
First, they will directly contribute to research efforts that increase
photovoltaic (PV) performance and resiliency. Second, these educators will
develop and provide educational opportunities about solar energy that, in turn,
inspire and enable the next generation of researchers and knowledgeable
citizens. In relation to research and education, SPV Lab will also (a) broaden
participation by students from racial and ethnic minorities underrepresented in
engineering by engaging them in meaningful STEM learning; (b) create a
sustainable, scalable model of teaching-learning focused on educating students’
understanding of the world’s current energy situation and associated socio-
technical challenges; (c) build prototypes for standardized PV products
implementable in diverse educational settings and data platforms sharable across
school sites; and (d) foster university, school, and industry partnerships to
support and expand K-12 education in photovoltaic systems. Together, these
activities create a pathway to expand equitable and sustainable access to solar
energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy security remains a national priority, and
the Sonoran Photovoltaics Laboratory (SPV Lab) RET aims to contribute to a
national energy transition by increasing PV performance and educating the next
generation of energy researchers and knowledgeable citizens, thereby creating a
pathway to expand equitable and sustainable access to solar energy and to STEM
education and career pathways. The SPV Lab RET will organize a regional approach
to create an interconnected set of site-specific and use-inspired photovoltaic
(PV) research projects for 4th-12th grade STEM teachers located in the Sonoran
Desert region of the United States. SPV Lab faculty and graduate students will
partner with teachers to sustain and spread PV research experiences to schools
serving racial and ethnic minoritized students using shared PV data platforms
and teacher-developed curriculum modules that engage students in PV citizen
science. Each summer’s RET will begin with a 1-week, cohort orientation and PV
bootcamp, followed by 5-week participation in integrated research projects at
one of three laboratory site hosts: ASU’s Solar Power Lab (SPL), UA’s AzRISE/TEP
PV test yard, and the agrivoltaics research center at Biosphere 2. The SPV
program will embed teachers in research projects that seek to better monitor,
characterize, predict, or optimize the performance of PV. These concerted
research experiences will directly engage teachers in research with the
potential to critically impact local investment in renewable energy generation.
Video-conferencing will enable cross-site industry webinars and virtual lab
tours, pedagogical workshops, and co-development of curriculum modules that
transfer research to the classroom using a Citizen Science model. Modules will
be shared broadly (open source) at an annual mid-year professional development
workshop, at professional conferences, and on a project website. Faculty,
students, and industry partners will mentor teachers and students across the
year, helping them contribute to research and develop related community energy
engineering projects that demonstrate the social value of improving PV
performance for their local neighborhoods. The SPV Lab will: (a) advance the
science, technology and sustainability of PV through research projects in which
teachers participate, (b) function as a pilot for a sustainable, scalable model
of teacher professional development in PV engineering education, and (c) foster
a culture of citizen science in which student are active contributors to PV
engineering research promoting critical, connected and collective engagement
using theories and practices that support transformative
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.