* 2055717
* Expanding Regional Capacity for Training in Engineering Technology and Data Center Operations
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Josh Labrie, Northern Virginia Community College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 467,184.00

Common software systems, such as those based on artificial intelligence, often
require a cloud-based computing infrastructure. As cloud-based computing has
expanded, so has the need for the data center infrastructure needed to support
it. Data centers require significant capital investment, as well as ongoing
operational maintenance. Because of tax incentives enacted by the state
legislature, data centers are expanding rapidly in Virginia. As data center
capacity expands, a trained engineering technology workforce is required to run
these data centers. To address this urgent need, this project will expand the
engineering technology program at Northern Virginia Community College by
improving the recruitment and education of qualified technicians. By fostering a
community of practice between industry, secondary educators, and college
faculty, the project team plans to improve the workforce pipeline for
engineering technology in the northern Virginia region and ensure that students
have the skills required to be successfully employed in the data center
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project intends to advance understanding
about the efficacy of bridge programs to promote recruitment of underrepresented
minorities into higher education. It will also examine the efficacy of bridge
programs and internship preparation for improving student career attitudes and
readiness. It expects to increase the regional supply of engineering technology
technicians through the following activities: (1) a two-week summer bridge
program focused on career exploration and hands-on learning; (2) an internship
preparatory program designed to support students in developing career readiness;
(3) an externship for high school educators and industry professionals to
develop first-hand knowledge of regional career pathways for engineering
technology; and, (5) a veterans outreach program to inform military-connected
students about the College’s engineering technology programs. This project is
funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.