* 2055714
* Increasing Student Access to Industrial and Scientific Equipment Training through Authentic Remote Learning Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Arif Sirinterlikci, Community College of Allegheny County Allegheny Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 03/31/2024
* USD 523,766.00

An important part of preparing students for the technical workforce is training
on engineering technologies that are currently used in industry. However, due to
high equipment costs and other limitations, providing students with access to
industrial equipment can be challenging for many community colleges. Even when
such equipment is available, it is in lab facilities that have limited
availability and little flexibility to accommodate students’ work and family
schedules. These limitations were spotlighted by the COVID-19 pandemic, which
forced lab facilities to close altogether. As a result, students had even less
access to the lab equipment and training, preventing course completion for many
students. Although remote instruction and distance education are not new
concepts, providing an authentic remote experience for equipment training
remains an open problem. Computer simulations have been used to lower the costs
for training using industrial equipment. However, these tools tend to
oversimplify the equipment, with resulting limits in students’ ability to gain
skills in operating the equipment and troubleshooting problems. This project
will develop and assess new remote access tools that allow students to control
physical industrial equipment over the internet. This approach will provide a
new capability for sharing resources amongst colleges. In addition, these tools
will give students experience with working on distributed teams, helping prepare
them for the technical workforce. By expanding access to technical courses for
students living in rural locations or in other situations that limit access to
lab facilities, the project will help broaden participation in the technical
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lab facilities at the Community College of
Allegheny County currently provide students with in-person training on
industrial equipment including robots, programmable logic controllers, and
mechatronic devices. The goal of this project is to create a new remote
capability for controlling equipment in the lab facilities and evaluate the
impact of this capability on student learning. Remote capability will enable
students to access physical equipment and view the results of their control
actions and control programs in an immersive environment on a computer at
another location. Stereo cameras will transmit a three-dimensional view of a
work cell in the lab facility. Students will be able to remotely trigger
actuators over the internet to achieve a desired behavior and view the results
of their actions in near-real-time. This project will: (1) implement and test
new hardware and software interfaces for lab equipment; (2) develop lab
exercises using the remote capability, lesson plans for instructors, and
instructional materials for students; (3) evaluate student learning in on-line
courses and compare it to concurrent in-person courses; and (4) expand the
implementation to multiple institutions and multiple course offerings. Using a
mixed methods approach, the project evaluation will use focus groups, student
surveys, and pre- and post-tests to assess the impact of the new remote
capability on students’ comprehension of the technologies and their confidence
in their ability to use the equipment. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.