* 2055343
* Understanding When Diversity, Equity and Inclusion (DEI) Work "Counts" in Faculty Evaluation
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Kerry Ann O'Meara, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 07/31/2024
* USD 987,764.00

This study aims to increase diversity in STEM academic workplaces by testing
“nudge” interventions to help diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) work matter
in promotion and tenure decision-making. Nudges refer to deliberate changes to
the decision-making context aimed at guiding people toward a particular
behavior, which in this case is valuing DEI work. Many institutions have tried
to reform the tenure process to reward DEI work, but there is little concrete
evidence that any of these initiatives have shaped tenure decisions. Despite
widespread use in organizations and education, nudge science has rarely been
applied to faculty evaluation decisions. The study will use an experimental
vignette methodology (EVM) in which faculty participants will make an explicit
decision about a fictional applicant. Faculty participants will be recruited
from biology (specifically ecology and evolutionary biology) and engineering.
Knowledge from the project’s findings will provide useful information to
university leaders seeking to reform promotion and tenure to value DEI work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many faculty members, including a disproportionate number
of Black, Brown, and women faculty, engage in DEI work, but consistently report
that when it comes to tenure and promotion, they are not sure whether and how
their DEI work counted in decisions made. This work will examine whether three
different “nudge” interventions (a) providing an equity charge encouraging
participants to value DEI work, (b) having the tenure candidate emphasize their
DEI efforts in separated sections of their CV and personal statement, and (c)
having participants use a rubric in which DEI is one of the criteria listed, are
more influential than the others in shaping tenure decisions. An experimental
vignette methodology (EVM) will be used in which faculty participants will make
an explicit decision about a fictional applicant. Faculty participants will be
recruited from biology (specifically ecology and evolutionary biology) and
engineering. Participants will be randomly assigned a dossier that includes the
evaluation criteria, a curriculum vitae, and a personal statement. The main
outcome variable is the recommendation from the participant regarding faculty
tenure. This study is the first to use an experimental design to test faculty
weighting of DEI in tenure decisions in a STEM field. This project will advance
knowledge about which kinds of nudges are more likely to work within faculty
evaluation settings, and whether interventions have a different impact depending
on the perceived identities of the candidates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work
that advances fundamental research on STEM learning and learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.