* 2055499
* Spectroscopic Investigations of Molecular Quantum Materials. Probing Spin-Phonon Couplings and Intermolecular Magnetic Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Ziling Xue, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Ziling Xue of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Tennessee is investigating molecular quantum
materials with potential applications in ultra-high density data storage,
quantum computation, and cryogenic magnetic refrigeration. Such materials are
expected to have much larger storage capacities than the current storage
materials, potentially leading to much more efficient computers and
refrigeration devices. The specific goal of this project is to probe properties
of the materials to identify the factors responsible for their performance. The
project is interdisciplinary, covering inorganic, physical, and materials
chemistries. It offers students unusual opportunities to conduct research at a
national laboratory, which serves to broaden their educational background and
training. The PI also works to attract high school students to consider pursuing
studies in science with a particular emphasis on potential first generation
college students from low income families .&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Slow magnetic
relaxation is a critical property in applications related to molecular quantum
materials. Current research efforts have been mostly focused on the design and
preparation of compounds with large anisotropies and slow relaxation. There is
relatively little understanding of the nature of spin-phonon couplings and
intermolecular magnetic interactions, which are also main factors contributing
to magnetic relaxation. In this project, molecular quantum materials will be
studied using several unconventional spectroscopies to answer the following
questions: (i) Can four-dimensional (4D) inelastic neutron scattering (INS)
reveal spin-phonon coupling in molecular compounds? (ii) Can a magnetic peakâ€™s
unique dependence on the neutron scattering vector in INS be used to probe
intermolecular magnetic interactions? (iii) To what degree can the combined use
of far-infrared (IR), Raman, high-field electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR),
pulsed EPR, and INS be used to study spin-phonon coupling? (iv) What are unique
spin-spin relaxation properties are needed to develop effective quantum bits
(qubits)? Progress in addressing these fundamental questions is expected to be
an important step in the effort of the chemistry to develop new systems that
have the potential to serve as quantum bits for quantum computing or related
quantum materials applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.