* 2055696
* Industry 4.0 Seminar Series
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2023
* Jill Thiede, Northeast Wisconsin Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 05/31/2023
* USD 69,481.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving the teaching
practices of manufacturing educators to implement evidence- and industry-based
practices on the adoption of Industry 4.0 technologies in regional manufacturing
businesses. Northeast Wisconsin Technical College (NWTC), a two-year technical
college, aims to prepare incumbent and new technicians with the skillsets needed
to support a diverse, evolving technological infrastructure by building the
knowledge of post-secondary educators on emerging technologies utilized in
industry. The future of manufacturing and employer economic competitiveness is
dependent on the use of technologies that bridge the mechanical and digital
worlds on the manufacturing floor. The concepts of Industry 4.0 were first
introduced less than a decade ago and are quickly making waves across
manufacturing, creating skills gaps not only among the incumbent workforce but
also in higher education where instructor advanced education and “real world”
experiences pre-date this arrival. New strategies are needed to address this
knowledge gap and produce rigorous curricular updates to ensure industry has the
IT and manufacturing skillsets needed to operate in this smart environment. The
Industry 4.0 Seminar Series project will demonstrate a model for adapting post-
secondary program content to upskill technicians that can be implemented in
manufacturing-dominate regions of the nation, as well as in non-manufacturing
industry sectors, such as transportation and logistics, building design, energy,
healthcare, and public safety, where Industry 4.0 technologies are increasingly
being adopted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Industry 4.0 Seminar Series conference
and meetings project will convene regional post-secondary educators from the
fields of Information Technology (IT) and Manufacturing, Industry 4.0 technology
subject-matter-experts, business representatives, and instructional designers.
Three questions will be addressed through the multi-session seminar series: What
technologies are currently and/or anticipated to be adopted by regional/state
employers? How is industry applying this technology? And, how can higher
education translate the skillsets of these technologies into new and existing
certificate, technical diploma, and associate degree programs to produce
graduates trained to meet the changing needs of industry? The results of this
seminar series will be used to inform new teaching practices that better align
with workforce needs in relation to emerging and evolving technologies, ensuring
that new and incumbent workers have the necessary IT and manufacturing
skillsets. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.