* 2055260
* RESEARCH-PGR: Mechanisms of Haploid Induction in Potato
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Luca Comai, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kan Wang
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,400,000.00

A critical step in plant breeding is the production of inbreds, plants that have
the same two DNA sequences at each gene and therefore breed “true”. Inbreds may
be sold directly as varietal seed or used to make consistent F1 hybrids. The
most efficient method to produce inbreds is through a cross to a specialized
variety called a haploid inducer. This cross yields haploids, progeny with a
single parental chromosome set that can be easily doubled to produce perfect
inbreds. Natural haploid inducers are available for maize and for potato.
Although the maize haploid inducer genes have been characterized, they are not
easily adapted for efficient use in broad leaf crops such as tomato, canola, and
soybean. Deciphering the potato haploid inducer system will provide a much
needed alternative. This project will map and characterize the responsible genes
in potato. This knowledge will then enable private and public breeding programs
to manipulate the corresponding genes and achieve similar or even better haploid
induction systems in other crops. In each crop system, easy production of
haploids will accelerate breeding cycles by several years, ultimately providing
increased power and flexibility in addressing emerging challenges to crop, such
as disease or drought stress. With respect to training and outreach, the project
will familiarize young students from underrepresented communities with science
studies and careers and train advanced students and professionals in genomic
approaches applicable to plant breeding using a combination of activities
including production and dissemination of learning
videos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Haploid induction is an important, but poorly
understood process. It could result from parthenogenesis, the progression to
embryogenesis by an unfertilized egg cell; by genome elimination, the shedding
of one parental genome from the embryo; or, from yet uncharacterized defects of
fertilization. In all cases, the molecular events that lead to this outcome are
central to the regulation of sexual development and genome maintenance. The goal
of this project is to identify the genetic factors controlling haploid induction
in potato and decipher their mode of action. Previously, an extensive mapping
population was developed and used to identify candidate quantitative trait loci
for haploid induction. The specific objectives of this project are to: 1)
identify the underlying candidate genes by a combination of fine genetic mapping
and genetic analyses; 2) characterize the mechanisms underlying haploid
induction by comparing the cytology and gene expression in pollen as well as the
genomic states in pollen and seed; and 3) test and characterize the action of
prioritized candidate genes in heterologous species. All data and resources
generated by this project will be made freely accessible through long-term
public data and genetic repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.