* 2055432
* Excellence in Research: Nano-Structured Functional Ferromagnets
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Manfred Wuttig, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2024
* USD 332,003.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetostrictive materials are those
that can elongate or contract when exposed to an external magnetic field. Highly
magnetostrictive materials with a reversible magnetic character are highly
suited for applications in modern technology such as sensors, actuators, and
underwater communication devices. This research advances scientific knowledge of
nanostructured ferromagnets that display a large mechanical response under small
magnetic fields. A variety of magnetic materials are studied, including metallic
alloys and ceramics in the bulk and thin film forms. This research program
offers unique opportunities in the education and training of graduate and
undergraduate students in materials synthesis and state-of-the-art
characterization techniques. These efforts increase the competitiveness of
minority students in the Science and Engineering disciplines and expand the pool
of talented African-American scientists and engineers, thereby enhancing the
high-technology minority workforce. The outreach to Maryland high schools
engages and encourages high-school students in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports research on magnetic materials combining small magnetocrystalline
anisotropy with large magnetostriction. The hypothesis is that the fundamental
mechanism giving rise to this unusual combination of properties consists of
breaking the theoretical spin-orbit coupling link valid for single-phase solids
via a two-phase nanostructures. The systems of study include Fe-Ga,Al,Ge solid
solutions and nanostructured cobalt ferrite in the form of nano-chessboard whose
properties are probed by magnetic characterization techniques. Diffraction
techniques using x-ray and neutron radiation determine the underlying
nanostructures. Transmission electron microscopy of these model materials under
stress in situ are also crucial experiments to elucidate the role of the
nanostructure in magnetostriction. These activities aim at the development of a
common science foundation for this materials class. The engagement of both
undergraduate and graduate students in this research builds research experience
and expertise in the field of magnetic materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.