* 2055302
* The AGEP Florida Alliance Model: Improving Minority Women Success in STEM Faculty Careers
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2026
* Allyson Watson, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,472,738.00

The AGEP Florida Alliance Model was created in response to the NSF's Alliances
for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) program solicitation (NSF
16-552). The AGEP program seeks to advance knowledge about models to improve
pathways to the professoriate and success of URM graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows and faculty in specific STEM disciplines and/or STEM education research
fields. AGEP Alliances develop, replicate or reproduce, implement, and study,
via integrated educational and social science research, Alliance Models to
transform the dissertation phase of doctoral education, postdoctoral training
and/or faculty advancement, and transitions within and across the pathway
levels, for URMs in STEM and/or STEM education research careers. This
collaborative research project brings together the University of South Florida,
Florida Memorial University, Bethune-Cookman University, Florida International
University and Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University to form the AGEP
Florida Alliance Model project. The Alliance team is developing, implementing,
studying, evaluating, disseminating and sustaining an AGEP Alliance Model to
successfully advance STEM faculty career outcomes for historically
underrepresented minority (URM) women doctoral students, postdoctoral
researchers and early-career faculty. The project focuses interventions on
professional development training via research boot camp experiences, mentoring
and coaching by tenured women STEM faculty, and accessing support networks and
programs through the National Center for Faculty Development and Diversity.
Additionally, the Alliance team is engaging campus administrators and leadership
to address systemic institutional barriers that are limiting the success of URM
women in STEM faculty careers. The targeted outcomes of this AGEP Florida
Alliance project include a large group of URM women publishing scholarly work in
their STEM disciplines, securing faculty positions and earning tenure. The
project's vision is to see the collaborative work sustained at the partnering
universities and to see other institutions in our country adapt, adopt and
reproduce this AGEP Alliance Model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the nation addresses
a STEM achievement gap between URM and non-URM undergraduate and graduate
students, our universities and colleges struggle to recruit, retain and promote
URM STEM faculty who serve as role models and academic leaders for students to
learn from, work with and emulate. Recent NSF reports indicate that URM STEM
associate and full professors occupy only 8% of senior faculty positions at all
four-year colleges and universities, and only about 6% of those positions at the
nation's most research-intensive institutions. The AGEP Florida Alliance has the
potential to advance a model to improve the success of female URM doctoral
students and postdoctoral researchers as they enter STEM faculty careers, and to
advance URM women early-career STEM faculty through tenure and promotion.
Advancing the careers of URM women faculty ultimately leads to improved academic
mentorship for undergraduate and graduate students in STEM fields. The
integrated education research being conducted by this AGEP Alliance team
investigates the underlying personal, interpersonal, organizational and
professional issues and experiences that facilitate or inhibit URM women STEM
faculty career entrance, persistence and advancement. The research team is also
investigating ways that URM women in STEM build skills, knowledge and
competencies to successfully enter and persist in faculty careers. There is a
Research Advisory Board that provides feedback to the AGEP Florida Alliance
research team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AGEP Florida Alliance Model institutions
are working with an independent external evaluator who is conducting formative
and summative evaluations. This AGEP Alliance also engages two advisory boards -
an AGEP Florida Alliance Model External Advisory Board and an institutional
Executive Leadership Board - that provide feedback to the institutions and the
project team, and that suggest adjustments to project management about model
development, implementation, testing, evaluation, dissemination, sustainability
and reproduction potential. The institutional Executive Leadership Board is also
addressing the institutional barriers that warrant change to successfully
advance women URM STEM students, postdoctoral researchers and early-career
faculty in their transitions into and through faculty professions. The project
team is disseminating findings from their research, and from their work on the
AGEP Florida Alliance Model's development, implementation, self-study,
evaluation, dissemination, sustainability and reproduction potential, by
presenting at national conferences of STEM professional societies and publishing
peer-reviewed articles in professional journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.