* 2055117
* Advancing the Cognitive Science of Instruction:  Testing the Role of Pedagogical Sequences, Scaffolding, and Prior Knowledge
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Paula Lemons, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2024
* USD 681,542.00

With support from NSF’s EHR Core Research (ECR) program, this project seeks to
serve the national interest by identifying effective instructional methods to
support student understanding of core science concepts. This project will study
learning in the biological sciences among introductory and advanced
undergraduates. Science educators and policy makers aim to facilitate students’
development of deep conceptual understanding and the ability to solve novel
problems in the classroom and the real world. Unfortunately, even the most well-
informed and diligent instructors struggle to choose pedagogies that support
robust learning because of outstanding questions in instructional science.
Researchers do not know whether explicit instruction should precede or follow
problem solving practice, or whether problem solving practice should be
scaffolded or unscaffolded. Researchers also do not know whether the optimal
pedagogical sequence and level of scaffolding depends on students’ level of
prior knowledge. Finally, conventional assessments likely fail to capture the
full impact of different pedagogical approaches on students’ application of
learning, also known as transfer. These unknowns are important because currently
thousands of students leave science with inert knowledge, unprepared to use
scientific concepts and practices in subsequent courses, critical day-to-day
decisions about healthcare, public health, and the environment, and ultimately
their professions. Thus, answering these unknowns will provide immediate
guidance to educators, policy makers, and change agents to create science
classrooms that prepare students to use their knowledge. The goal of the
proposed research is to resolve fundamental questions concerning when and how to
provide instruction and opportunities for problem solving about challenging
fundamental concepts in the biological
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers in cognitive science and educational
psychology continue to debate how to design instruction that maximizes transfer.
Central to this debate is determining when, how, and for whom to provide
explicit instruction and opportunities to engage in problem solving. This
project seeks to make progress in resolving these contentious issues through a
series of controlled experiments that compare high-fidelity implementations of
competing instructional approaches with undergraduates at the University of
Georgia (UGA). Specifically, the proposed research will determine how different
instructional sequences and levels of scaffolding for problem-solving practice
(Objective 1) impact understanding of a core biology concept for students with
different levels of prior knowledge (Objective 2). In addition to conventional
measures of transfer, the research will involve collecting qualitative data via
semi-structured interviews to examine unexpected ways in which different
instructional approaches affect knowledge transfer (Objective 3). The findings
will provide insight into competing theoretical perspectives concerning how
instruction affects cognitive processing and transfer. The proposed project will
bring about several broader impacts. First, the project will promote improved
teaching, training, and learning. Science educators are often told instruction
should be “active,” but it is not clear which forms of active instruction are
most effective and for whom. This project will provide instructors with clear
guidelines for how to balance phases of explicit instruction and opportunities
for (scaffolded or unscaffolded) problem-solving practice when teaching complex
science concepts. It will also determine which instructional sequences and
levels of scaffolding are most appropriate for students with different levels of
background knowledge, such as students taking introductory versus upper-level
science courses. By pinpointing specific ways to support transfer of science
concepts, our findings will address the inert knowledge problem that is so
pervasive among students taking science courses. The PIs will facilitate the
propagation of their findings to educators by offering workshops and
disciplinary meetings. Second, this project will contribute to broadening the
participation of students of color in science by working with UGA’s Peach State
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (PSLSAMP) to involve students
of color as undergraduate research assistants. Third, the findings of this
project will impact educators outside of academia and the public through broad
dissemination of findings on social media. This project is funded by the EHR
Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances fundamental
research on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in
STEM, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.