* 2055705
* RET Site: The University of Texas at Arlington (UTA) RET Site on Sustainable and Resilient Infrastructure for Urban Communities
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Nur Yazdani, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 11/30/2024
* USD 596,380.00

This Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) project will advance knowledge
within and across engineering disciplines, physics, education/assessment, and
unique challenges of sustainable and resilient urban infrastructure, by finding
solutions for critical issues. This is important with the deteriorating
infrastructure, its widespread failures and extensive human, economic and
societal effects, increased worldwide occurrence of hazards, and the critical
need for economic and environmental conservation in urban settings, such as in
the Dallas-Fort Worth (DFW) Metroplex with a population of seven million.
Teachers will be immersed in hands on cutting-edge research under expert
mentoring and intellectual collaboration, designed to broaden their educational
experience and student learning. Addressing original research questions for each
project will enable teachers to find transformative solutions with potential for
practical applications. Teachers will be engaged in research activities and
provided with financial, mentoring, and other supports to transfer the research
into their school curricula. They will integrate engineering topics and
innovatively address state education standards. Significant student fractions in
the target school districts are underrepresented minorities, economically
disadvantaged or at risk of dropping out. Allowing teachers to tailor curricular
modules in STEM courses related to solutions of real-world engineering problems
will improve student engagement. Further, teachers will employ universal design
for learning in their teaching and assessment, improving education opportunities
for all students. Increased student engagement in STEM courses and exposure to
practical applications is expected to increase student interest in engineering
education and careers. The societal benefits of sustainable and resilient
infrastructure will enhance this impact, considering the nation’s failing
infrastructure and recent challenges in extreme events. The project will enhance
long-term collaboration among pre- and in-service teachers, university
faculty/students and industrial/academic mentors. Strong societal impacts from
improved public safety, health, and welfare, through investigating and devising
solutions to challenges of urban infrastructure are
expected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a new RET Site with seven participating
school districts, as follows: Arlington, Duncanville, Everman, Grand Prairie,
Irving, Kennedale, and Mansfield, all in the DFW metroplex. The main and sub-
fields of the research are infrastructure sustainability and resiliency,
engineering (civil, industrial, electrical); science (physics), education and
assessment. The project involves participation of 12 high school level STEM
teachers in the summer RET Site. Teachers will actively participate in six
summer projects over six weeks each summer. The RET Site is designed to improve:
(1) teachers’ ability to include engineering topics into their course modules;
(2) high school students’ perceptions of and interest in STEM majors and
careers; and (3) high school student engagement. The project will provide pre-
service and in-service high school teachers, primarily from inner city and other
high-needs schools, with stipends/support for engagement in research with
faculty/students, industrial/academic advisors and prior RET teachers. Summer
activities include curricular module development, workshops, webinars, mentoring
and site visits. Follow-up during the academic year includes a workshop to share
developed modules with non-RET teachers, classroom visitations, evaluation, and
dissemination. The teachers will be tracked for five years post the RET program.
An external evaluator will perform formative/summative process and outcome
evaluations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.