* 2055734
* NSF-DFG EChem: Surface Stability and Oxygen Defect Chemistry of Pyrochlore and Related High-Performing Electrocatalysts for Oxygen Evolution Reaction
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Hong Yang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,001.00

When hydrogen is used as fuel for transportation and stationary power
applications, water is the only major byproduct. Thus, hydrogen as a small
molecule fuel can play an important role in our nation’s and global energy
transitions to carbon-neutral, sustainable societies. Hydrogen is also a
commodity chemical to make a range of products, such as ammonia, which is used
as fertilizer for food production and other applications. Currently, production
of hydrogen through splitting water molecules using electricity is energy
intense and not cost effective. Major technological advancement is required to
reduce the energy burden of producing hydrogen. The goal of this proposal is to
address the technical challenges through understanding the detailed principles
of how water-splitting reactions occur and how to design electrode materials for
the generation of green hydrogen. To achieve this goal, the team will examine
how the catalyst materials used in the device work under hydrogen production
conditions and what structural changes occur within the electrode materials.
These results will help to create new materials with enhanced efficiency for
hydrogen production using less electricity and at scale. This project will also
train students with diverse backgrounds through the Illinois Scholars
Undergraduate Research and other programs to increase their retention in STEM
fields and ensure they will have the technical expertise to be part of the
highly skilled future workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of precious
metal-free, stable, and active electrocatalysts is needed for electrochemical
generation of hydrogen through direct water splitting by low-temperature polymer
electrolyte membrane (PEM)-based electrolyzers. There are several key
challenges, and at its core, the issue lies in the lack of understanding of
surface atomic and electronic structures and their impacts on the
electrocatalysis, especially under reactive conditions. The interdisciplinary
team from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and Technical
University of Darmstadt in Germany will tackle this critical issue. The project
encompasses the following three focused areas: 1) examining the structure-
property relationships of OER electrocatalysts made of pyrochlore oxides, 2)
developing a new framework for studying in situ electrocatalysts using X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) under realistic reaction conditions, and 3)
studying the defect chemistry and its effect on electrocatalytic properties. The
project will uncover new structure-property relationships; reveal new design
principles for making stable, active OER electrocatalysts; and train able
students in multidisciplinary environments with skills for global
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was awarded through the “NSF-DFG
Lead Agency Activity in Electrosynthesis and Electrocatalysis (NSF-DFG EChem)"
opportunity, a collaborative solicitation that involves the National Science
Foundation and Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.