* 2055411
* Expanding the Data Analytics Technician Pipeline from High School into College and High Demand Jobs in Southwest Ohio
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Paul Hansford, Sinclair Community College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 576,315.00

Data analytics is having an enormous impact on society and the economy. As the
field of data analytics evolves, there will be an increasing need for
technicians with skills in data analytics who can work in a wide range of job
roles. Unfortunately, the number of students pursuing careers in data analytics
is not keeping pace with workforce demand, particularly among populations
underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. This
project aims to prepare the future workforce by establishing pathways that
generate interest in data analytics careers, support the transfer of data
literate high school students into postsecondary programs, and prepare them to
fill the growing demand for data analytics technicians. Project activities will
provide multiple opportunities for high school students to explore and begin a
data analytics pathway. The project will leverage several strategies for
attracting and retaining populations typically underrepresented in STEM careers
and support student success. These strategies include equitable and inclusive
instructional design, experiential learning, accelerated credential completion,
affordability, and comprehensive student support. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, Sinclair Community College will partner with local industry in
southwest Ohio to develop a data analytics technician pathway for students that
will facilitate their transfer into college and support their postsecondary
credential completion in preparation for careers in data analytics. A stackable
certificate model will be developed to prepare students for entry-level data
analytics jobs and be beneficial to those who need to earn a credential quickly
to enter the job market. The model will also provide clear pathways to further
education that can lead to higher-paying jobs. The project will share data
literacy concepts and information about data science careers with high school
students and teachers. Dual high school/college credit courses will be offered
to accelerate college credential completion while students are still in high
school. The project will engage high school teachers in data literacy
professional development opportunities to increase learning in statistics using
R and Python for data analytics. College students will benefit from enhanced
experiential learning opportunities designed to increase data career-related
technical skills and connections with potential
employers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.