* 2055335
* Theoretical and Experimental Investigations of Photoheterolysis Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Arthur Winter, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 460,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanisms-B program is
supporting fundamental research in the field of photochemistry, carried out by
Arthur Winter at Iowa State University. The absorption of light by molecules can
lead to cleavage of chemical bonds but it is often difficult to understand why
or how specific bonds break. Dr. Winter and his students seek to understand the
structure-reactivity principles for one general type of bond cleavage,
specifically photochemical heterolysis of bonds between carbon and a leaving
group. Heterolysis represents one of the possible ways in which a chemical bond
can break, with both of the two electrons in the bond being given to one of the
departing groups. Photoheterolysis reactions are important in biology, materials
science and environmental chemistry. The long-term goal in this project is to
create a predictive theoretical framework, which can relate chemical structure
to excited state reactivity, thereby providing new guiding mechanistic
principles that direct photochemical reactions. Among broader impacts
activities, Professor Winter will also be involved with a Freshman Research
Initiative that involves first year college students in an early
multidisciplinary research experience. He will also continue to recruit
undergraduates and students from underrepresented groups into his lab.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To study these photoheterolysis reactions, the PI will
employ a combined theoretical/experimental approach. High-level computational
methods will be used to map excited state transition states and surface crossing
topologies in model systems. Experimentally, spectroscopy will determine the
effect of structure on the rates and mechanisms of photorelease in model
systems. In particular, ultrafast femtosecond-resolved transient absorption
spectroscopy will be used to determine the rates and mechanisms of
photoheterolysis reactions on selected substrates, while high-level excited
state calculations will be used to provide a mechanistic rationale. This
research will provide a broad range of training for undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.