* 2055536
* Collaborative Research: Urban Watershed Evolution - Novel Temporal Perspectives on the Hydrologic Impacts and Positive Unintended Consequences of Failing Municipal Infrastructure
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Jay Banner, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 06/30/2024
* USD 618,686.00

Municipalities are increasingly challenged to use aged and failing
infrastructure to deliver a continuous supply of clean water, and to return and
treat wastewater, yet little is known about when, where, and how infrastructure
failures were initiated or how they progressed. This project has three main
scientific goals including: 1) determining the fate of municipal water after it
leaves the engineered system and enters the natural hydrologic system, 2)
unravel when, and under what conditions, infrastructure failure began, and 3)
understanding how this failure and its impacts on water resources have
progressed over time. The primary project activities comprise using naturally-
occurring chemical tracers in stream water and trees to reconstruct a history of
water quality, and using historical data to reconstruct a history of
infrastructure development. We expect our approach will be transferrable to
other urban systems with aging infrastructure. Most broadly, this project will
leverage our network of stakeholders to help inform city-level planning efforts
to implement resilient infrastructure while accommodating rapid expansion of
urban populations in the 21st century. Results from this project will be
incorporated across the sustainability curriculum at the University of Texas at
Austin, which includes interdisciplinary degrees and 24 courses that emphasize
field experiences and engage 800 students per year in on-campus environmental
research along one of the proposed stream study sites, as well as geoscience
graduate programs at UT Austin and the University of Arizona. Graduate and
undergraduate student training will emphasize inclusion of underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the onset of infrastructure failure in each
Austin watershed, municipal water was introduced by leakage into relatively
pristine natural hydrologic systems. We hypothesize that the distinct chemical
compositions of these anthropogenic water sources were recorded in bald cypress
trees at the onset of failure and in subsequent years as failure progressed.
This project comprises a novel application of natural isotopic tracers to
examine the impacts of urbanization on natural hydrology and stream ecology in
three watersheds in the same hydrogeologic terrain. The primary variable among
the watersheds is the extent of urbanization. We will analyze elemental, and Sr
isotope variations in stream water, and develop methods for high resolution
measurements of the Sr isotopes in the growth rings of bald cypress trees
growing adjacent to those streams. We posit that the growth rate and isotopic
composition of the tree rings encode a hydrologic history of the progressive
failure of infrastructure. We will apply these data using hydrogeochemical
models to: 1) trace the evolution of municipal water during its transmission
through the natural hydrologic cycle in anthropogenically compromised
watersheds; and 2) use dendrochemical variations to reconstruct decadally-
resolved temporal changes in municipal water input to streams. These results
will be used to identify, for the first time, both the timing of the onset of
infrastructure failure and temporal changes in the magnitude and impacts of the
failure. We will compare this temporal record of municipal water input with the
history of urban development in the same watersheds to determine the threshold
for the extent of urbanization, above which hydrologic and ecological impacts of
failing infrastructure are manifested. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-
funded by the Hydrologic Sciences, Environmental Sustainability, and
Environmental Engineering programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.