* 2055529
* Collaborative Research: Controlling the Microstructure for Improved Mechanical Properties of Large-scale Polymer Composite Structures Made by Big Area Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Chad Duty, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 02/29/2024
* USD 457,671.00

This grant supports research that contributes to new knowledge related to a
manufacturing process, thus promoting the progress of science, national
prosperity, and national defense. Additive manufacturing, more commonly known as
three-dimensional printing, is a method of making virtually any shape from a
digital computer model. Although desktop three-dimensional printers have become
quite popular, they are often limited to smaller objects without sufficient
strength for structural applications. This research focuses on a relatively new
class of additive manufacturing that is capable of making large-scale structures
such as full-size cars and houses. This project conducts fundamental research to
better understand big area additive manufacturing (BAAM) of extruded carbon-
fiber reinforced polymer materials to produce higher strength components that
can be used in the automotive, aerospace, energy, construction and defense
sectors. This is a collaborative research effort between two universities that
exposes a wide and diverse group of students, including women and minorities, to
new manufacturing technologies and provide opportunities to engage in hands-on
activities that encourage them to pursue a career in STEM-related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the development of big area additive
manufacturing (BAAM) of large-scale polymer structures has moved quickly, a
basic understanding of the unique microstructure within an extruded fiber-
reinforced polymer composite has not kept pace. The majority of recent efforts
to improve the mechanical performance of 3D-printed materials has focused on
interfacial properties and addressing meso-structural defects, such as voids
between beads due to incomplete filling. However, there are significant
opportunities for improving the mechanical performance of 3D printed structures
by controlling the internal microstructure of the extruded bead. Specifically,
the goal of this research is to maximize the mechanical performance of an
extruded polymer composite by controlling the size, orientation, and
distribution of reinforcing fibers and voids that define its internal
microstructure. This is accomplished by altering the flow path and resulting
shear strain fields within the single-screw extruder and optimizing processing
parameters such as flow rate, pressure, and temperature profile. Research tasks
seek to establish new finite element models for deposition flow as polymer melt
passes through the screw and nozzle, in addition to constitutive models defined
by differential equations that provide unique insight into fiber orientation,
void formation, fiber breakage and particle migration during processing. The
resulting knowledge and database of material properties enable the printing of
tailored microstructures within BAAM parts and
components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.