* 2055486
* Collaborative Research: BEE: Niche evolution and the assembly of replicate island lizard faunas
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Luke Frishkoff, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 10/31/2024
* USD 1,102,014.00

Why do some species dominate communities while others are rare? What determines
such ecological success is a fundamental question in biology. Differences in
species’ specialization are often used to explain success. Species can either
specialize on a few resources (e.g., one type of food), or employ a generalist
strategy, and try to use many. However, a single species might specialize on one
food type, but be a generalist in terms of the habitats that it’s found in.
Because of this complexity it’s still unclear when a specialist strategy is
beneficial. This project seeks to understand the conditions that favor
specialists by examining lizard communities on islands in the West Indies. Sites
in the West Indies communities contain one to eight species, with different
species on each island. First the researchers will gauge how successful species
are by quantifying lizard abundances. Second, they will measure lizard
specialization with regards to their diets, the temperatures they tolerate, and
the habitats they use. Third, the researchers will look to the evolutionary
relationships between species, to assess how fast specialists evolve. Finally,
they will measure how common food resources, temperatures, and habitats are. The
research program will support undergraduate and graduate student training and
promote science education in high schools. Further, it will explore new ways to
communicate science by working with an artist to create art based on the
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role of specialization in determining
ecological and evolutionary success has been long debated. Do trade-offs render
generalists ‘jacks-of-all-trade but masters-of-none’—relegated to footnotes in
ecological communities? Or, are specialists restricted to rare or less desirable
resources, such that generalists are numerically dominant? Likewise, it is
unclear how specialists evolve. Is niche expansion and contraction labile over
macroevolutionary time? Or does the stage of a fauna’s evolution matter, such
that during adaptive radiations early speciation events are more likely to
produce generalists, with specialists only forming in late-stage, species-
saturated communities? To answer these questions this research examines the
Anolis lizard adaptive radiation in the Greater Antilles. The researchers use
mark-recapture to quantify the structure of local communities on Jamaica, Puerto
Rico, and two geographically distinct faunas on Hispaniola. Each islands’ fauna
is evolutionarily independent, but has nevertheless repeatedly evolved many
species with qualitatively similar ecologies. The researchers will quantify
ecological similarities by measuring the niche positions (e.g. most frequently
used resource) and breadths (e.g. span of resources used) of each species along
thermal, vegetation structural, and dietary axes. Doing so allows the
researchers to test the hypothesis that niche breadth corresponds to dominance
in ecological communities. By combining niche information with phylogenetic
relationships, the researchers will then address how labile niche breadths are
over macroevolutionary time. Lastly, the researchers will quantify available
thermal, structural, and dietary niche space availability in each community and
island to assess whether generalists are more successful in younger and less
diverse communities with ample unused niche space. This project will provide
novel insights into the ecological underpinnings of the evolution of
specialization, testing long held hypotheses and offering insights into the
generality of these hypotheses across evolutionarily replicated
faunas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.