* 2055544
* Oscillatory Integrals and Falconer's Conjecture
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,08/31/2021
* Hong Wang, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 08/31/2021
* USD 179,348.00

The project is on the restriction theory in Fourier analysis. This field is
concerns functions with Fourier transform (frequencies) supported (non-zero at
most) on some curved objects such as a sphere or a cone. Such functions appear
naturally in several areas of science and mathematics: in the study of
Schrödinger equations, wave equations and number theory. For instance, a
solution to the linear wave equation can be represented as a function with
Fourier transform supported on a cone. Investigating these functions allows one
to understand how waves evolve in time. In number theory, one can count the
number of integer solutions to some Diophantine equations (polynomial equations
with integer coefficients) by estimating such functions. Namely, if the
corresponding functions are concentrated, then one expects the Diophantine
equation to have many integer solutions. And an upper bound on the number of
solutions can be given in terms of how spread out the functions are. This
project will be focused on how the curvature of the Fourier support prevents the
functions from being concentrated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will be
concentrated on oscillatory integrals and related to Falconer's conjecture. The
latter is an unsolved question concerning the sets of Euclidean distances
between points in compact d-dimensional spaces. The projects on oscillatory
integrals concern the restriction conjecture, the Hormander operator, and
decoupling questions. For the restriction conjecture, Stein's restriction
conjecture will be studied in higher dimensions and in dimension three. For the
Hörmander operator the Bochner-Riesz conjecture will be investigated by
considering it as a Hörmander operator not satisfying Bourgain's "generic
failure" condition. Work will be done on the dimension of radial projections
with applications surrounding Falconer's conjecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.