* 2055259
* Training for Mechatronics Engineering Technicians in Colorado
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Chris Gorrie, Arapahoe Community College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,998.00

Many manufacturing sectors are incorporating new technologies to enhance their
competitiveness and efficiency. As a result, significant skills gaps have
emerged within advanced manufacturing industries. These industries need multi-
functional engineering technicians who have both manufacturing and engineering
skillsets. Such skills are embedded in mechatronics, an engineering discipline
that integrates mechanical, electrical, and programmable engineering
technologies. Mirroring national trends, the Denver metropolitan area has seen a
significant increase in the number of advanced manufacturing employers. This
project aims to help meet this regional workforce need for qualified
mechatronics technicians. To do so, the project will update its current
Associate of Applied Science in Mechatronics Engineering Technology to be more
responsive to industry needs. It will also launch new efforts to increase
recruitment and success of students in this degree
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to improve the Mechatronics
degree program and expand the number of students earning the degree and entering
the regional workforce. To do so, the project team will collaborate with its
Business and Industry Leadership Team to guide experiential learning and align
the curriculum more closely with industry needs. It will expand access to the
program by developing concurrent enrollment opportunities for high school
students and recruiting from partnering workforce centers. A new position called
“Navigator” will lead recruitment efforts, as well as provide mechatronics
students with advising, support, and career connections. The project team will
use materials from the National Alliance for Partnerships in Equity to guide
their recruitment and retention strategies. Recognizing the need for faculty to
be leaders in this effort, the project will support faculty members to earn
industry-recognized certifications in mechatronics and related fields. Results
from the project’s evaluation will inform stakeholders in engineering,
manufacturing, education, and the public. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.