* 2055052
* SBIR Phase I:  Leveraging Building Information Modeling (BIM) for More Accurate Indoor Positioning
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Marjan Sadeghi, VIATECHNIK LLC
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 11/30/2022
* USD 255,997.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the ability for case investigation and
contact tracing as core disease control measures during times of viral outbreak.
This technology enables facilities to track and adhere to capacity limits for
indoor spaces. The data generated will allow facilities to ensure a higher
degree of safety during instances of high viral transmission risk as seen during
the COVID-19 pandemic. This technology is marketable as one of the many advances
possible in newly built or renovated “smart buildings” as it will offer
innovations in mobile computing, the Internet of Things, and cyber-physical
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project proposes a more accurate indoor positioning method, utilizing
the numerical propagation model, semantic model, and Building Information
Modeling (BIM) to solve multi-objective optimization problems. Currently
available tracking models cannot accurately ascertain the number and location of
occupants in a given space. The research objectives of this proposal involve
using environmental information stored within 3D models including wall and floor
location, materials composition, dimensional analysis, and furniture layouts to
detect occupants accurately. The semantic information will be gathered based on
the building configuration and user profiles. Three parameters: physical
obstacles, previous positions, and job functions will be used to calculate the
probability of the target being in a given location. The anticipated technical
result will be the creation of a 3D probability map that can search the
environment for real-time indoor positioning. This will enable building managers
to track how many occupants are in any given location to more accurately comply
with capacity restrictions, especially in times of severe viral
outbreaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.