* 2055119
* RUI: Theoretical Studies of Non-Covalent Interactions and Chemical Bonding Transitions Across Phases in Inorganic Systems, and Investigations of Other Modes of Weak Bonding
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Kelling Donald, University of Richmond
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 04/30/2024
* USD 376,067.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanisms-A
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Kelling Donald of the
University of Richmond is using theoretical methods to understand the
interactions between molecules in chemical systems where particularly weak
interactions are important. It is well-known in modern chemistry that atoms and
molecules can interact with each other in very strong ways to form new compounds
and in weak ways that can be more readily reversed or disrupted. For the latter
case, however, even though the interactions are relatively weak, they can be
very important. Weak interactions allow geckos to climb walls, for instance, and
have other demonstrable effects in nature, and in research laboratories. This
project investigates classes of chemical systems where weak interactions are
crucial. Such systems include compounds of the metal halide class that form
solids stabilized by weak interactions, in some cases, but not in other cases.
The project is dedicated in part to elucidating why the solids of some metal
halides are held together only by weak interactions in certain cases, but those
weak interactions are overtaken by much more powerful forces in other metal
halides. The focus is on using mathematical and computational tools to further
our understanding of how weak interactions transition to strong chemical bonding
and, in turn, to better predict new and interesting materials properties. This
project will engage undergraduates and post-baccalaureate students in faculty-
guided research and provide high school students from diverse backgrounds with
mentored research experiences, and help them to acquire academic skills that are
crucial for success in college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project under the
guidance of Professor Kelling Donald at the University of Richmond (UR) aims to
rationalize the bonding transition phenomenon in which chemical systems such as
the binary dihalide mercury difluoride, move during the oligomerization process
from weak van der Waals-type bonding in clusters to polar covalent inter-monomer
bonding, eventually converging upon an ionic solid structure. These studies are
aimed at elucidating the fundamental basis and the evolution of this phenomenon
where it exists among the halides, hydrides, and oxides of other heavy main
group and d-block metals. The Donald group will also examine the role of
relativistic effects in these phenomena. Another class of weak interactions
under examination here is halogen bonding and other so-called sigma hole
interactions, which continue to be implicated in biology and in the crystal
engineering of organohalides. A goal in this work is to advance understanding of
that phenomenon for organic and inorganic halides, and other unusual bonding
modes in systems such as fluxional organometallic and potential ouroboric ring
compounds. Professor Donaldâ€™s undergraduate students will perform the majority
of the proposed work, and high school students from diverse backgrounds will
participate in a research/mentoring program devised by Professor Donald, which
will focus on attracting high school juniors from underrepresented groups and
potential first-generation college students for (i) hands-on activities in
research labs at UR, (ii) direct discussions with UR professionals on study
skills, stress management, and other key competencies, and (iii) summer research
fellowships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.