* 2055291
* Broadening Participation in Plant/Agricultural Biotechnology through Stackable Credentials Leading to an Associate in Science Degree
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Erin Krier, Allan Hancock College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 04/30/2024
* USD 538,451.00

In response to changing agriculture priorities, the plant/agricultural
biotechnology industry is growing in the California Central Coast region.
Individuals from Hispanic communities continue to be underrepresented in
biotechnology. This project is led by Alan Hancock College, a rural, federally
designated Hispanic Serving Institution in central California. The project is
designed to increase the participation of individuals from Hispanic communities
in plant/agricultural biotechnology. To do so, the project team will develop
stackable credentials that prepare students to enter the regionâ€™s
plant/agricultural biotechnology workforce and can lead to an new associate
degree in plant/agriculture biotechnology. This degree program will be designed
in collaboration with local industry partners and stakeholders in K- 14
education. The project will train local high school teachers in biotechnology
skills aligned with the new curriculum, thus creating a pathway from high school
into plant/agricultural biotechnology. The project expects this approach will
increase the interest and success in the skilled biotechnology workforce for
second-generation Hispanic youth. As a result, the project has the potential to
help diversify the STEM technical workforce and ensure that students of color
become members of the next generation of scientists. In doing so, the project
can help to mitigate the disproportionate impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on
the communities it will serve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using evidence-based
strategies identified for Hispanic Serving Institutions, the project will: 1)
develop two stackable certificates, based on courses in biotechnology, plant
tissue culture, and genetics, that lead to an associate of science degree in
plant/agricultural biotechnoloy; 2) provide high school faculty with
professional development and create a pipeline of prospective students into the
associate degree program by increasing awareness and providing hands-on
experience in biotechnology; 3) offer institutional, student-centric support and
engage students in work-based learning experiences in plant/agricultural
biotechnology; 4) expand collaboration and partnerships with local agriculture
biotechnology industries that can prepare Hispanic students for emerging
technical jobs, including those in the field of agricultural biodiagnostics.
This training will enable Hispanic students to develop skills that are
transferable to other sectors and help to alleviate the shortage of skilled
technical workers in the state. In addition, this funding can generate revenue
needed to sustain the degree program, helping to alleviate COVID-19-related
impacts on the College itself. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.