* 2055121
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying the Role of the Ocean Circulation in Climate Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* James Hurrell, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 959,588.00

There has been significant scientific progress over the past few decades in
understanding the role of the ocean in climate and climate change. However,
fundamental questions still exist, such as where in the global oceans and on
what timescales do ocean circulations drive variations in upper-ocean heat
content and sea surface temperature, and what role do those variations play in
influencing events over land, such as episodes of drought and deluge, heat and
cold, and storminess? The overarching goal of the project is to comprehensively
quantify the role of variations in ocean circulation on global climate
variability. This goal will be achieved through two main tasks. The first will
be to diagnose the extent to which ocean circulations drive changes in sea
surface temperatures using different observational data sets and ocean state
estimates, and the second will be to conduct numerical modeling experiments to
provide insight into the influence of those ocean-driven sea surface temperature
changes on global climate variability. Together these tasks will lead to new
perspectives on the role of ocean dynamic variability in the climate system,
potentially leading to enhanced predictive skill of weather and climate events
of direct relevance to human well-being and safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this proposal will result from its support and training of
graduate students, which is required to sustain the pool of human resources
needed for excellence in global atmospheric dynamics and climate research.
Graduate students from communities underrepresented in climate science will be
prioritized for support, and undergraduate students from historically
underrepresented groups will be entrained by leveraging existing programs that
provide research opportunities to those students. Moreover, all observational
and model data generated by the project will be easily and freely accessible to
the broader research community, and all results will be disseminated through
publications in leading, peer-review scientific journals and through
presentations of research results at prominent national and international
climate workshops and conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.