* 2055442
* CDS&amp;E: A Deep Learning Framework for Evaluation of Electron Microscopy Images of Chemically-Complex Metallic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Vitaliy Yurkiv, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2023
* USD 330,659.00

This project is co-funded by the Condensed-Matter-and-Materials-Theory and
Metals-and-Metallic-Nanostructures programs in the Division of Materials
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electron microscopes take beautiful and informative
pictures of metal particles of nanometer size, but the images can sometimes be
difficult to interpret. The chemically-complex metallic-alloy nanoparticles
(CCA-NPs) that motivate this work are of great interest in a wide range of
applications including catalysis, energy conversion and storage, and
bio/plasmonic imaging. This research project develops a multi-disciplinary
modeling methodology supported by experimental measurements to keep pace with
the growing widespread application of atomically resolved microscopic
measurements. The main objective of this project is to utilize a novel modeling
framework based on machine learning to extract information about atomic column
heights and chemical elements from experimental high-resolution electron
microscopy images of CCA-NPs of different compositions and sizes. Although the
present work is motivated primarily by nanoparticles, the framework is general
and easily extendable to other nanoscience research amenable to scanning
transmission electron microscopy, such as catalysis, crystallography, and phase
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will introduce in their undergraduate
and graduate courses a number of topics related to the present project,
stressing familiarity with current research problems and direct experience with
different computational methods as well as open source and commercial software.
The investigators and their group members actively participate in outreach
activities for local high-school women and members of underrepresented groups
through the University of Illinois Chicago (UIC) Open House and the UIC Youth
Program. The computer simulation results with narratives will be used for
classroom teaching and will also be made available to the public and scientific
community via microblogging and social-network
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The latest developments in machine and deep-
learning algorithms, coupled with continuing progress of in-situ electron-
microscopy techniques, have paved the way to an effective analysis of a variety
of materials. This research uses a deep-learning model built on a fully
convolutional neural network to resolve the elemental distribution of CCA-NPs
represented in atomic-resolution transmission (TEM) and scanning (SEM) electron
microscopy images. The objective of the proposed neural network is to learn,
through semantic segmentation, the non-linear correlations between the pixel
intensities of microscopy images and the number of atoms of different
constituent elements in the atomic columns of CCA-NP structures. In spite of the
critical need in determining structures and elemental distributions, current
experimental efforts rely on trial-and-error analysis and often involve many
assumptions. This is due to the nonlinearity and complexity of TEM images,
preventing the straightforward estimation of atomic column heights and elemental
distributions. Thus, the main objective of this project is to provide such
information from experimental high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) and scanning TEM
(STEM) images of CCA-NPs of different sizes and compositions, including high-
entropy alloys (HEAs). An integrated, multi-disciplinary modeling framework
based on machine learning (ML), an evolutionary approach (EA), and density-
functional-theory (DFT) calculations supported by HRTEM and STEM measurements is
proposed. A supporting objective is to provide a range of experimental
conditions for which reliable HRTEM images may be acquired. This project
provides a paradigm shift in the analysis and interpretation of HRTEM/STEM
experimentally acquired images of CCA-NPs employing a multi-disciplinary
modeling approach through (i) advancing the current state of the art of deep-
learning techniques for evaluation of experimentally obtained images, (ii)
generation of physically meaningful and reliable training data for CCA-NPs using
the Wulff Construction, (iii) evaluation of elemental motifs in HEAs using an
evolutionary approach, and (iv) more profound understanding of the influence of
the microscope parameters (e.g., dose, focal spread, defocus, etc.) on the
quality of neural-network predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.