* 2055282
* Variational Questions, Stability, and Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Eric Carlen, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 05/31/2024
* USD 288,321.00

The search for a better understanding of many physical processes, and the
evolution equations that govern them, is in part a quest for new and more
precise mathematical inequalities. The answers to such questions as "How fast
can this process go?" and "How rapidly can information be communicated through
this channel?" often turn on the discovery of new mathematical inequalities,
which are the central theme of much of the project. The problems to be
investigated are of significant interest within pure mathematics as well. But
because they are motivated by problems arising in other fields, especially
physics and quantum information theory, their solution will have impact and
applications outside of pure mathematics. Students will be involved in the
project, contributing to training of the next generation of
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The connection between mathematical
inequalities and physical processes runs both ways. So, in trying to prove a
particular inequality, one may try to relate it to a simple and well understood
evolution equation. This area of research has been fruitful not only in
producing results that are of interest to a wider scientific community, but also
in engaging the interest of Ph.D. students. The project places particular
emphasis on proving functional inequalities in sharp form. This means to
completely solve the following variational problem: find the minimum value of
some functional and determine the full set of equality cases. Some of the
questions go further and seek stability results for such sharp inequalities,
i.e., theorems that assert that when a certain function almost yields equality
in a functional inequality, then that function is close in some metric to one of
the cases of equality. Such stability results have many important implications.
Both their proofs and applications will be worked on by the PI and his
collaborators. This research will produce not only significant new mathematics,
but results that are relevant to the physical sciences and even engineering as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.