* 2055257
* Collaborative Proposal: NSF-DFG Echem: Understanding the Mechanism of Urea Oxidation on Nickel-Based Electrocatalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Eric Stuve, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2024
* USD 391,583.00

Urea – a common high-nitrogen chemical waste product of mammalian metabolism,
and a major component of fertilizer – poses significant threat to water
resources from agricultural run-off and municipal wastewater. A promising means
for removing excess urea is to oxidize it electrochemically to produce produce
harmless compounds. Urea removal processes can also be used to generate
electricity and to produce hydrogen for fuel cells. Electrochemical urea removal
therefore exhibits strong potential as a transformative technology by converting
a harmful waste product to the beneﬁt of society, industry, and the environment.
The project brings together researchers from the United States and Germany to
apply a synergistic blend of experimental and theoretical methods to the study
of electrochemical urea removal from water. In particular, the project seeks
fundamental understanding of catalytic urea oxidation that is needed to develop
feasible urea removal technologies. Effective urea removal systems are key to a
large number of technological applications including municipal and agricultural
wastewater treatment, remediation of fertilizer run-off, ammonia synthesis,
hydrogen production, and electricity generation. Other benefits from this
project will include workforce development and educational outreach to
underrepresented grade-school students. These efforts will promote increased
diversity in STEM fields, a student exchange program between Germany and the US,
and improved scientific literacy of the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this research project is to develop comprehensive knowledge of
electrochemical urea removal over nickel-based catalysts, based on experimental
and theoretical research spanning molecular and device levels. Electrochemical
urea removal will be studied by density functional theory calculations,
vibrationally and electronically resonant sum frequency spectroscopy, and
electrochemical measurements of reaction rate and product distributions.
Particular attention will be paid to the active form of the nickel oxide
electrode as it exists in different phases and oxidation states depending on
electrode potential and history, such as aging and preparation method. This
combined electrochemical, spectroscopic, and computational approach provides
insight related to catalyst structural changes and how they affect the urea
reaction mechanism, reactivity, and effectiveness of nickel, nickel-iron, and
nickel-chromium catalysts. The outcomes of this research will greatly advance
the scientific understanding of electrochemical urea removal -- about which
little is known -- and establish a foundation in the wider field of
electrocatalysis regarding electrochemical reactions on oxide surfaces and on
surfaces that undergo a change in oxidation state as part of the overall
reaction mechanism. Successful completion of this research will benefit society
through sustainable methods for treating wastewater and agricultural run-off
that will reduce demand on water supply systems and enhance the biodiversity of
marine ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.