* 2055024
* The Geoscience Behind Critical Infrastructure Careers; Unlocking the Intrinsic Value of Diverse Communities - a GEO-STEM Learning Ecosystem in Practice
* GEO,RISE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Sherry Callaway, LIMITLESS VISTAS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 06/30/2022
* USD 49,710.00

There is a well-documented lack of diversity in the geoscience classroom,
faculty and geoscience professional ranks and environmental workforce. This
workshop introduces a diverse population of high school and undergraduate
participants to solution based geoscience and potential career pathways. The
workshop will help increase the diversity in the educational and career pipeline
of future geoscience professionals and show participants ways to become active
in addressing the impact of public facilities on their communities. Working with
practicing geoscientists and educators, participants will develop and present on
cutting edge environmental infrastructure (water, power, sewer, solid waste,
etc.) issues, technologies and careers which affect their daily lives. They will
learn the skill sets necessary to become more active participants and problem
solvers who are focused on using geoscience to aredress the impact of public
facilities on their communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop has the
potential to increase participants’ awareness of environmental infrastructure
and the connection to community impacts and STEM-related careers. The proposed
workshop squarely addresses AGU’s Diversity and Inclusion Strategic Plan
including to 1) “Promote and expand collaborative activities... with local
community–relevant scientific endeavors, particularly in support of under-served
and disadvantaged communities” and 2) “Increase the visibility of education and
career paths (in earth science) among diverse audiences and encourage
participation in the geosciences.” Program participants will develop creative
content for presentation at the 2020 AGU Virtual Fall Meeting - including
virtual tours, videos, and interactive communication pieces to demonstrate how
New Orleans', San Francisco’s and Los Angeles' unique geology and seaport
locations impact the critical infrastructure of those cities and respective
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.