* 2055015
* ERASE-PFAS: Microbial electrochemical defluorination of PFAS using bioaugmented Acidmicrobium sp. Strain A6
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Peter Jaffe, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Per and polyfluorinated alkyl substances (PFAS) are emerging contaminants of
concern because they are ubiquitous and have been linked to multiple health
problems, including cancer. PFAS are extremely stable, and those of most concern
have been considered non-biodegradable. This stability has led to these
compounds being dubbed “forever chemicals.” Recently, the bacterium
Acidimicrobium (A6) commonly found in acidic iron rich soils has been shown to
degrade PFAS. A6 uses ammonia for energy by reaction with solid-phase iron
oxides. Although iron oxides are common in soils, adding them to bioreactors for
the controlled growth of A6 is challenging. To address these challenges, a
special bioelectrochemical reactor was developed with iron serving as the anode.
The goal of this project is to gain a fundamental understanding of how A6
degrades PFAS. This will be achieved through testing A6 with various PFAS and
operational conditions using the specially formulated bioelectrochemical
reactors to understand the mechanisms of PFAS biodegradation. Successful
completion of this research will allow the rapid growth of A6 for subsequent
addition (“bioaugmentation”) of A6 into contaminated soils to treat PFAS on
site, or through direct treatment of PFAS-contaminated water in the bioreactors.
This project will train graduate students, undergraduate students, and involve
STEM high school students during summer internships in the novel field of PFAS
treatment. Results will be disseminated in scientific journals and conferences
to advance knowledge. Outreach efforts are focused on advancing acceptance of
this novel treatment technology through collaboration with a company to
implement a demonstration project for testing in real world applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acidimicrobium sp. Strain A6 (A6) is a novel autotrophic
Gram-positive bacterium that oxidizes ammonium while reducing iron. A6 is
capable of defluorinating PFAS, including perfluorinated compounds such as PFOA
and PFOS. The genome of A6 contains dehalogenase genes, including a reductive
dehalogenase homolog and a fluoroacetate dehalogenase homolog that are both
expressed when PFAS are defluorinated. The high demand of A6 for ferric iron
makes it challenging to grow this strain in traditional bioreactors for extended
periods of time. Fortunately, A6 is electrogenic and can grow in the absence of
iron in microbial electrolysis cells, where it is also able to defluorinate
PFOA. This novel research focuses first on understanding the mechanisms by which
A6 grows in bioelectrochemical systems. PFAS defluorination will be examined
using both pure and enrichment cultures while tracking gene expression and
degradation intermediates. Bioreactor results will be combined with results from
batch incubations, and a separate collaboration with enzymologists to gain new
insights into the mechanisms of PFAS defluorination by A6. The project will
train a PhD student and result in close collaboration between students from
multiple laboratories to increase cross disciplinary collaboration. Summer
engineering and high school interns will be recruited to work in the
laboratories to increase STEM training. A collaboration with an industrial
partner will implement a pilot demonstration of A6 bioaugmentation to degrade
PFAS in industrial waste to facilitate implementation of these findings in the
remediation field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.