* 2055008
* Distance Questions, Fourier Restriction, and Beyond
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Yumeng Ou, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 08/31/2024
* USD 196,606.00

Distance questions are the driving forces in incidence geometry, a field of
mathematics studying intersection patterns of basic geometric objects (such as
points, lines, or circles). One of the most famous distance questions is called
the Erd√∂s distinct distance problem, which asks for the least number of distinct
distances generated by a given set of points. Another example is the unit
distance problem, concerning the maximum number of times that a fixed distance
can occur among a given set of points. These questions have motivated
development of tools and ideas that have wide applications in disciplines beyond
mathematics, such as computer sciences, physics, and engineering. Fourier
restriction concerns the Fourier transform, which decomposes a function into
pieces with different frequencies of oscillation. Fourier restriction studies a
fundamental question about Fourier transform: the relation between the size of a
function and the geometry of its Fourier transform. This relation has important
applications in partial differential equations, number theory, and other areas.
This research project aims to further the understanding of the interplay between
distance questions and Fourier restriction, as well as to develop modern tools
with applications in various areas of mathematics, including harmonic analysis,
geometric measure theory, and partial differential
equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the main directions in the project is
driven by Falconer's conjecture, a continuous analogue of the distinct distance
problem. It is conjectured that the distance set of a compact set E must have
positive measure if the Hausdorff dimension of E exceeds a certain threshold.
Recent results towards resolving the conjecture were obtained via new ideas from
Fourier restriction theory: incidence geometry and geometric measure theory.
This project will continue investigation of these approaches and apply them to
other related distance questions such as general geometric configurations,
multiparameter distances, and projections of fractal measures. The work aims to
further the study of weighted Fourier restriction estimates and decoupling and
to apply them to distance questions. The project is expected to reveal deeper
connections between the discrete and continuous setting. An investigation of
Fourier restriction for the cone in high dimensions will be continued using
algebraic tools in connection with polynomial methods. In addition, the project
will explore further applications of Fourier restriction in dispersive partial
differential equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.