* 2055027
* Deformation Mechanisms Governing Torsional Fatigue Failure of Additively Manufactured Metals at High Temperatures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Sanna Siddiqui, Florida Polytechnic University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 148,885.00

Recent advances in the 3D metal printing/additive manufacturing technology have
allowed for the realization and rapid production of nickel-based metal
superalloy components, extending their geometric design space and mechanical
performance envelope. Nevertheless, there is a need to ensure that these
additively manufactured components can withstand in-service operational
conditions while meeting necessary functional requirements and durability.
Torsional fatigue, characterized by cyclic twisting loads, is often an
underlying cause for failure of nickel-based metal superalloys used in the
extreme environments of rocket and jet engines, high performance automobiles,
and pressure vessels. These extreme temperature environments are characterized
by a complex loading state, in which the deformation mechanisms contributing to
torsional fatigue failure remain unclear. This award supports fundamental
research to delineate the principal deformation mechanisms at the
microstructural level, which govern torsional fatigue failure of additively
manufactured nickel-based metal superalloys subject to varying service
conditions. This research will advance the current state of knowledge and
maximize durability and viability of these alloys for in-service use, thereby
maturing the current technology. Additionally, this study will broaden
participation, outreach, and professional training of under-represented minority
undergraduate and graduate students in STEM research spanning across the
disciplines of mechanics, manufacturing, and materials science and engineering.
Research outcomes will be used to establish enhanced educational
curriculum/tools, including incorporation of a research project-based teaching
and learning structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental problem that this
research addresses is capturing the micron scale to structural scale deformation
response spectrum experienced by additively manufactured nickel superalloys
under torsional fatigue loading conditions at ambient and high temperatures
representing in-service component conditions. The role of temperature, varying
cyclic torsional loadings, and additive manufacturing processing conditions and
build orientation will be explored. A variety of material characterization
techniques, such as energy dispersive spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction, and
electron microscopy, will be used in conjunction with extensive fatigue testing
to capture the driving microstructural mechanisms leading to torsional fatigue
crack initiation and growth. It is anticipated that outcomes resulting from this
study will reveal how torsional response of these alloys is impacted in terms of
microstructural evolution under ambient and in-service operational conditions,
potentially providing insights that will contribute to an understanding of their
multiaxial fatigue response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.