* 2055214
* Mechanoregulation in the Maintenance of the Bacterial Cell Wall
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Christopher Hernandez, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 04/30/2024
* USD 430,000.00

This project will study the biological response to mechanical forces in
bacteria. Bacteria are the most abundant form of life on Earth. Bacteria can
cause disease in humans as well as in animals and plants in the food supply.
However, some bacteria such as probiotics are beneficial to the health of
humans, animals, and plants (e.g. probiotics) and others are used in production
of food and pharmaceuticals. Antibiotics are used to remove disease-causing
bacteria. A common way that antibiotics work is to cause the mechanical failure
of the bacterial cell envelope â€“ i.e. causing the cells to burst open and die.
However, antibiotic resistant strains of bacteria are increasingly abundant in
the environment, presenting a challenge to health and food production. The goal
of this project is to understand how bacteria resist the mechanical forces that
would normally cause them to burst. We explore the novel idea that bacteria can
sense excessive stretching in their cell membranes and cell wall and respond to
this sensation by thickening and strengthening their cell walls to prevent
death. Additionally, the project involves a project to broaden participation in
science and engineering through inclusion of undergraduate researchers and work
with a minority serving professional society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work
uses a novel microfluidic system to generate mechanical stress within the cell
envelope of individual bacteria and observe the response using conventional and
single molecule microscopy. We focus on VxrAB (also referred to as WigKR), a
two-component signaling system in Vibrio cholerae which is involved in the
remodeling and homeostasis of the bacterial cell wall. The research objectives
of this work are to 1) Determine the role of mechanical stress and strain in
stimulating the VxrAB system and the resulting cell wall biogenesis; and 2)
Determine the changes in cell envelope mechanical properties in response to
VxrAB signaling. The educational objectives of this work include: 1) lead
efforts to broaden participation in science by members of underrepresented
groups within investigator laboratories and 2) organize a session at a national
meeting to enhance bioengineering careers of students from underrepresented
backgrounds. This project is co-funded by the Biomechanics and Mechanobiology
program in the Division of Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation, and
the Systems and Synthetic Biology program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.