* 2055773
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Narrowing The Gap Between Privacy Expectations and Reality in Mobile Health
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Mitra Bokaei Hosseini, St Mary's University San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 03/31/2023
* USD 196,533.00

Recent years have seen a dramatic rise in mobile apps for health monitoring, a
trend accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic. By collecting and utilizing massive
amounts of data, mobile health apps could revolutionize how people monitor their
health and how they interact with physicians. This revolution could be derailed
by unexpected data uses and poor privacy protections scaring away potential
users. This project systematically examines the potential disconnects between
consumers’ privacy expectations when interacting with mobile health apps,
privacy perspectives and behaviors of health apps’ developers, the privacy
protections afforded by the law and relevant privacy policies, and the actual
data handling practices of such apps. The research team is addressing identified
disconnects by demonstrating new methods of communicating privacy information to
developers and users. The team will attempt to better align the practices of
mobile health apps with the privacy expectations of consumers by producing
policy recommendations, validated user interface artifacts that improve
transparency and privacy control mechanisms, practical solutions for monitoring
data practices and enforcing privacy regulations, and advice for developers on
considering privacy while designing software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combining
expertise in social sciences, computer security and privacy, natural language
processing, and law, the investigators are comprehensively analyzing the privacy
of mobile health apps. They will learn the app’s actual data practices by
studying their sensitive resource usage and communication over the network. The
investigators are examining how current privacy laws do and don’t apply to
health apps, and comparing them with both users’ and developers’ expectations.
Studies of health app users will identify users’ privacy expectations and test
the usability of privacy interfaces. Studies of health app developers will
identify their views on privacy and test privacy-promoting development tools.
The combination of these studies will point to interventions, and develop and
test practical interface improvements and development
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.