* 2055012
* Research Initiation Award: A Computational Study of Hydroformylation of Ethylene Over Heterogeneous Bimetallic Catalysts
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Shyam Kattel, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 05/31/2024
* USD 298,542.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improve research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University has potential to
increase the understanding of hydroformylation which is an industrial process to
produce aldehydes. The project will create undergraduate and graduate courses in
materials modeling, provide research training in computational materials science
and catalysis and create internal and external collaborations with local
community colleges and high schools.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Hydroformylation is a
process to produce aldehydes by the reaction of synthesis gas with alkenes.
Currently, hydroformylation is carried out using Rh and or Co-based transition
metal complexes as a catalyst. The homogeneous nature of this reaction leads to
difficulties in catalyst separation and recovery, active metal losses, metal
species contamination, and corrosivity of catalytic solutions. The development
of heterogeneous catalytic systems without sacrificing the activity and
selectivity will avoid the drawbacks associated with homogeneous catalysts and
be highly useful. This project employs computational methods such as first-
principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations and kinetic Monte Carlo
(KMC) simulations to gain a fundamental understanding of catalytic science of
ethylene hydroformylation to C3-oxygenates on heterogeneous Rh and Rh-based
bimetallic model catalysts. The DFT calculations will provide the energetics of
the reaction network and KMC simulations will be employed to obtain the kinetics
of the reaction at experimental reaction conditions. The theoretical
calculations will provide atomistic insight into ethylene hydroformylation and
help identify simple catalytic descriptors that can be used to screen potential
bimetallic catalysts that are active and selective for ethylene conversion to
C3-oxygenates. Moreover, the knowledge gained from this study will also shed
light on the hydroformylation of other higher alkenes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.