* 2055340
* Brown’s Spectral Measure: New Computational Methods from Stochastics, Partial Differential Equations, and Operator Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Todd Kemp, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 06/30/2024
* USD 215,202.00

The modern world is built on data, which is usually represented in rectangular
arrays of numbers. Mathematicians call those tables matrices, and try to find
hidden structure within them. One such hidden signature is a list of numbers
called eigenvalues that describes some of the properties of the larger matrix of
numbers. Eigenvalues not only summarize the information in a large array; they
can reveal information that was hidden from plain view, through ubiquitous tools
like principal component analysis that statisticians have used to great effect
for decades. The main purpose of this proposal is to explore promising new
computational tools to understand the behavior of eigenvalues of very large
matrices lacking any overall symmetry. The PI and his team have discovered new
and surprising connections between several different mathematical fields of
study that can be used to compute the large-scale behavior of the eigenvalues of
such symmetry-free matrices, opening the door to solve problems that have
remained inaccessible for decades. As a new methodology, there is much to
explore including low-hanging fruit that is perfectly suited to research by
Ph.D. students and postdoctoral researchers. Funds will be used to develop these
computational tools in collaboration with colleagues and postdoctoral
researchers, and will support the research of a diverse body of Ph.D. students –
both developing their research skills to prepare them for academic or technical
careers, and furthering the research goals of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address questions relating
operator theory, stochastic differential equations, diffusion on Lie groups, and
random matrix theory. The central theme will be to deploy a promising new set of
computational tools, based on stochastic and partial differential equations, to
calculate and prove regularity of spectral measures of non-normal operators in
von Neumann algebras. These arise naturally as the high-dimension limits of
random matrix models that appear in wireless communication and information
theory, as well as throughout geometry and analysis in pure mathematics. The
project concerns eleven research directions, which yield connections between
these topics and applications to others. The intended research, upon completion,
will settle several interesting open questions and present a major contribution
to the theory, as well as provide ample opportunity for the mentoring of Ph.D.
students and postdoctoral researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.