* 2055097
* NSF-DFG Echem: CAS: Synergistic Experimental and Computational Approaches to Designing Electrocatalysts with Proton-Responsive Ligand Architectures
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Demyan Prokopchuk, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 451,046.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Demyan Prokopchuk of Rutgers University-Newark will design electrocatalysts for
generating chemical fuels. Storing and releasing electrical energy in the form
of chemical bonds is attractive because of its scalability and flexibility for
short or long term fuel deployment. Fundamental research into the sustainable
production of energy-dense chemical fuels will be essential for an
environmentally responsible energy future. To that end, this research program
will develop biologically-inspired electrocatalysts using Earth-abundant metals.
To accelerate electrocatalyst development, the program will focus on
understanding reaction mechanisms by combining the unique expertise of
experimental chemists at Rutgers in the US and theoretical chemists at the
University of Bonn in Germany. Students from US and German institutions will
participate in cross-border research exchanges. Partnering with a local
glassblowing organization for underprivileged youth will engage Professor
Prokopchuk with the community. Undergraduate participation will be integrated
into these research efforts through minority scholarship programs, summer
internship opportunities, and upper-level chemistry research projects. The
project was awarded through the "NSF-DFG Lead Agency Activity in
Electrosynthesis and Electrocatalysis (NSF-DFG EChem)" opportunity, a
collaborative solicitation that involves NSF and Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In partnership with collaborators at the University
of Bonn in Germany, Demyan Prokopchuk of Rutgers University-Newark will design
earth-abundant metal-base electrocatalysts for chemical fuel generation. Enzymes
have evolved in remarkable ways to efficiently and selectively activate small
molecules under mild biological conditions using earth-abundant metals (EAMs)
shrouded by enzymatic scaffolding. Thus, coaxing EAMs to catalyze reactions
under abiotic conditions while replicating the activity and efficiency of their
enzymatic relatives remains a challenge in the arena of fundamental science.
This program will focus on designing synthetically tractable homogeneous EAM
electrocatalysts with biologically-inspired amine functionalized ligands at
Rutgers in the US and will be tightly coupled with computational datasets to
guide laboratory efforts with collaborators at the University of Bonn in
Germany. Synergistic cooperation between experimental and theoretical chemists
will survey free energy landscapes by using state-of-the-art quantum chemical
methods. Electrocatalyst performance will be assessed by understating reaction
mechanisms and probing scaling relationships. Students from German and US
institutions will participate in international research exchanges. Dr.
Prokopchuk will engage with the community, including youth from underprivileged
youth in partnership with a local glassblowing organization. Undergraduate
participation will be integrated into these research efforts through minority
scholarship programs, summer internship opportunities, and upper-level chemistry
research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.