* 2055602
* Leadership Support of the Board on Environmental Change and Society
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Toby Warden, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 12/31/2024
* USD 611,000.00

This project aims to serve the nation by mobilizing the social and behavioral
sciences to address social, political, economic, and equity dimensions of
environmental challenges. The Board on Environmental Change and Society (BECS)
draws on nationally recognized experts from different disciplines and
practitioner communities to identify and inform solutions for the increasingly
urgent and complex challenges facing the nation and the world at the
intersection of environmental change and society. BECS provides a unique
platform for objective, independent, and rigorous deliberation among
researchers, the public, the media, Congress, professional associations, the
National Science Foundation, and other federal agencies. Activities such as
consensus studies, workshops, expert meetings, seminars, and virtual events in
response to societal needs and explicit requests from federal agencies and other
sponsors are the foundation of the Boardâ€™s work. Topical areas include climate
change, environmental shocks to social systems, energy transitions, the
rural/urban divide, land-use changes, and advancing new lines of research to
provide benefits to society through advancing partnerships and collaborations
between the natural and social sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following
themes will be addressed in the three years covered by this award: identifying
new lines of cross-cutting research; increasing greater coordination and
integration across solution areas; and advancing community engagement so that
solutions more comprehensively address community needs and equity issues. Among
the complex scientific challenges faced by the government and society at large,
better insight into the interactions between human activities and the
environment is paramount. The social and behavioral sciences are the foundation
for advancing knowledge about how people and societies behave and interact while
both responding to and contributing to global environmental change. By joining
the social sciences and natural sciences to examine such interactions, BECS
provides a unique forum for advancing scientific knowledge while informing
solutions to improve societal well-being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.