* 2055309
* A Collaborative Approach to Work-Based Learning in Biotechnology: Building Inclusive Lab Environments
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* James Lewis, City College of San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 04/30/2024
* USD 275,596.00

There is a renewed sense of urgency to develop a more diverse workforce in STEM-
related fields. This project focuses on community college students from groups
that are not yet equitably represented in STEM. These communities have also been
disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Most workforce
interventions to prepare students for technical positions have been based on the
premise that the students simply need targeted skill training and tips on
behavioral norms to be successful in these workplace cultures. This “student
deficit” model puts the burden on the newcomer to navigate a work environment
that is often inherently biased against people of color, women, and individuals
from groups that are underrepresented in the sciences. However, as leading-edge
organizations are recognizing the value of diversity, they are also realizing
that they have a role to play in establishing an inclusive workplace culture.
This project aims to foster the professional development of students, faculty,
industry managers, and academic researchers in inclusive workplace practices.
The project expects that these practices can seed true cultural change and
prepare a more diverse, inclusive, and productive United States biotechnology
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at City College of San Francisco is
a collaboration with the Office of Career and Professional Development at the
University of California, San Francisco. Its overall goal is to build more
inclusive workplace environments for community college students pursuing
biotechnology education and careers. The project plans to address issues of
diversity in the scientific workforce by 1) teaching industry managers and
academic researchers practical ways to supervise, mentor and train future
scientists inclusively and effectively, and 2) helping community college
students and their instructors navigate the scientific workplace to identify
inclusive workplaces and navigate barriers to inclusivity. It builds on prior
work that has led to the development of a published framework for inclusive
workplace practices in research laboratories, a comprehensive inclusive academic
mentor and intern training, and a guided internship program that includes
formative assessments and coaching. In collaboration with the California Life
Sciences Institute, an organization representing hundreds of biotechnology
companies, the project will invest significant resources in developing new
frameworks, tools, and curriculum tailored to the needs of the biotechnology
industry. Additionally, the project seeks to disseminate the trainings to other
community colleges and academic research institutions. This project is funded by
the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.