* 2055237
* Collaborative Research: Mapping professional support networks of women and gender and sexual minorities in physics
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Ramon Barthelemy, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 06/30/2025
* USD 391,559.00

This project is a collaboration among the University of Utah as the lead
institution and Western Michigan University and Wright State University as
partners to investigate how women and gender and sexual minorities (GSM)
construct and navigate their professional networks to support their post PhD
physics careers. The goal is to use social network analysis with qualitative
methods to characterize the professional support networks of women and GSM
physicists to test the central hypothesis: professional support networks of
these physicists will include substantial out-of-field or out-of-hierarchy
elements and that significant differences may appear by employment sector. The
specific aims are to (1) identify the types of professional support networks
experienced by GSM physicists, (2) compare professional support networks and
career trajectories between different GSM identities, (3) compare professional
support network characteristics among physics employment sectors, and (4)
synthesize results into a professional support network survey that can be
distributed to a wider scientist audience. The project will provide a nuanced
understanding of these changing roles and structures with the goal of broadening
participation in physics for underrepresented or marginalized groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will employ standpoint theory to investigate
research questions that are aligned with the project aims. The framework
motivates the importance of in-depth data collection that centers an individual
with their multitude of experiences. It also suggests that individuals from
underserved groups should not be compared to those from majority groups, but
investigators should focus knowledge production from their voices and lives.
Investigators will conduct semi-structured interviews to address three research
questions: (1) How are the professional support networks of women and GSM in
physics characterized? (2) How satisfied are women and GSM in physics with their
career trajectories and current jobs? What network patterns are associated with
higher satisfaction and sense of professional identity? (3) What similarities
and differences exist among employment sectors? Investigators will use
qualitative methods to analyze and code participant surveys and ego network
analysis to focus the exploration of the professional networks of women and GSM
physicists. The project contributes guidance for universities, professional
societies, and mentors to better understand the professional network needs of
women and GSM scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is funded by the EHR
Core Research program that supports fundamental research focused on STEM
learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM fields, and
STEM professional workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.