* 2055370
* Establishing an Environmental and Natural Resources Technology Center
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Ellen Bluth, Eastern Iowa Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2026
* USD 7,495,172.00

Environmental Technologies (ET) is a career field that applies math, science,
technology, economics, engineering, law and communication to manage, protect and
sustain natural resources and to ensure human health and safety. Environmental
technicians are a part of homeland security in the protection of our country’s
air, water and soil and an important part of the major environmental issues of
global warming and water pollution. ET will also reshape pedagogy and hands-on
delivery of learning in the post-COVID “new normal,” as well as become part of
the solution for health and safety issues in the workplace following any other
infectious disease pandemic. ET jobs cannot be outsourced and survive economic
downturn. Major industries that employ environmental technicians include
engineering services, local and state government, consulting services, public
health agencies, manufacturing and remediation services, and there are immediate
needs for Environmental technicians across all of these sectors. The
Environmental and Natural Resources Technology Center will synthesize the cross-
disciplinary efforts of ET-related sectors and collaborate with industries,
government and public agencies, professional organizations, 2- and 4-year
colleges, and high schools to define and disseminate the critical knowledge and
skills required to provide leadership in ET education and support the
environmental advanced technology industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this
mission, the Center will pursue several objectives. First is to create a
Leadership Network to support the development and sharing of best practices in
ET workforce development. Second is to establish collaborations between existing
and new ATE projects in ET fields to mentor prospective PIs and broaden the
impact of ATE. Third is to provide models and leadership for collaborations
among secondary, 2- and 4-year institutions, business and industry, economic
development agencies and government. Fourth is to promote ET careers while also
addressing the need to educate highly skilled technicians and to provide faculty
professional development. Fifth is to develop institutionalization of Center
functions to sustain activities in the post-award period. The Center will
actively reach out to all learners, including women, those from minorities who
are underrepresented in their participation in STEM, those facing economically
challenging circumstances, first generation students, and those from Tribal
and/or rural backgrounds. The Center's planned deliverables include DACUM charts
with occupational competencies; a Defining ET Report; a Best Practices Guide for
Recruiting, Retaining, and Completing Students in ET Fields targeting URM,
female, military, and indigenous students; a set of interactive career websites;
and AVR learning modules. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.