* 2055196
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Improving Internet Privacy with Global Privacy Control
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Sebastian Zimmeck, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 12/31/2023
* USD 265,614.00

As the Internet is becoming an increasingly bigger part of many peoples' lives,
privacy protection is becoming more important as well. To protect the privacy of
users, lawmakers are introducing new privacy laws. The California Consumer
Privacy Act (CCPA) gives California consumers a right to prohibit websites from
selling their personal information to advertisers. Similar rights are being
introduced in other states and countries. However, it is time-consuming and
effortful for users to exercise their rights. This project is developing
software for making the process easier for users. The research team is designing
and testing settings inside browsers and other software that can be used to
automatically send signals to websites informing them that they should not sell
the users' personal information. To help adoption of such signals by browser
makers, websites, and others, the research team is developing the Global Privacy
Control (GPC) Internet standard at the Internet standards organization
W3C.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central idea of this project is that Internet
users' privacy can be improved by standardizing and implementing Do Not Sell and
other privacy rights in the form of usable browser and other software
technologies. The research agenda covers five core research activities: (1)
analyzing the compliance and usability of current privacy rights implementations
on popular websites, (2) improving on existing implementations, (3) deploying
the improved implementations in browsers and other software, (4) standardizing
GPC at the W3C to achieve wide adoption, and (5) providing directions for future
extension of GPC beyond the web, for example, in mobile technologies. The
research is guided by software engineering and privacy by design principles.
Undergraduate students play a crucial role in the project. It aims to train
tomorrow's socially-cognizant tech leaders, increase the participation of
underrepresented students in computer science, and evolve the computer science
curriculum in the liberal arts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.