* 2055474
* Collaborative Research: Tracing the fate, age, and ecohydrologic significance of rock moisture
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Todd Dawson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 08/31/2023
* USD 78,987.00

Increased frequency and severity of drought is amplifying the importance of
understanding where forests source water. Where soil water is unavailable, woody
plants commonly access water stored in the underlying fractures and pores of
weathered bedrock (rock moisture). However, in contrast to the soil mantle,
little is known about water stored in bedrock and how accessible it may be to
plants. Better tools for fingerprinting how different species access rock
moisture are needed to understand how shifts in precipitation could impact local
water resources. This experiment tracks water flow through soil, bedrock, and
trees via isotopic tracers to document how forest water use influences of
groundwater recharge and stream flow, especially during drought. New tools for
tracing water will be evaluated and communicated to students and early career
scientists, so that these tools can be widely applied to better understand the
fate of water resources under changing climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research is conducted at an intensively characterized and monitored hillslope in
a Northern Californian old-growth forest. Experimental results will provide
direct, isotopic evidence for when and where trees source water during the dry
season and how their water uptake impacts groundwater recharge and streamflow.
The study overcomes previous challenges with tracing rock moisture by leveraging
the unique capability to trace water through unsaturated, fractured bedrock
using specialized sampling infrastructure. Labeled water will be injected into
the bedrock at the start of the dry season. That labeled water will be tracked
through the subsurface-plant-atmosphere continuum in the dry and wet seasons
that follow. The project will also estimate water age and transit time of water
pools by measuring concentrations of short-lived naturally occurring radio-
isotopes. Estimated transit times from labeled water and radio-isotopes will be
used independently to evaluate the fate of rock moisture and its ecohydrologic
significance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.