* 2055557
* RET Site: Research Experiences in Big Data and Machine/Deep Learning for Oklahoma STEM Teachers
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Johnson Thomas, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 03/31/2024
* USD 397,669.00

As artificial intelligence continues to transform society, a skilled STEM
workforce is becoming more critical for the growth and diversification of
science, innovation, and the U.S. economy. This RET site at Oklahoma State
University (OSU) will immerse high school teachers in research and curricular
development activities to better engage students with AI topics like Big Data,
Machine Learning, and Deep Learning. OSU will leverage an existing partnership
with the Tulsa Regional STEM Alliance to recruit teachers to the site while
simultaneously strengthening and creating relationships between industry, high
schools, community colleges, and universities. This RET Site will also provide
opportunities for high school and community college students to continue
engaging in research after the RET program has run its course, further promoting
opportunities to propel the next generation of technologically saavy students
into computing careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oklahoma State University (OSU) in
partnership with Tulsa Regional STEM Alliance (TRSA) propose a RET site to
conduct research and develop curriculum for Big Data and Machine Learning/Deep
Learning (ML/DL) to equip teachers and engage students to achieve a computing
aware and capable workforce. The program will recruit ten teachers from the
Tulsa and surrounding areas to conduct research and curriculum development
activities at the OSU campus in Tulsa for six weeks during the summer. The RET
site will include ML/DL projects that call on large datasets in different areas.
The teachers, faculty mentors along with the curriculum coordinators will
develop learning experiences, activities, problems and examples suitable for use
in their classrooms. The objectives of the program are: 1). Develop teachersâ€™
knowledge of ML/DL/Big Data. 2). Develop and implement innovative curriculum by
translating research experiences into classroom practices. 3). Build long-term,
sustainable relationships between OSU, TRSA, Community colleges, high schools
districts and industry to promote and provide support for advancing STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.