* 2055694
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: From Distributed Cryptography to Blockchain and Back
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2025
* Juan Garay, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2025
* USD 399,999.00

Secure distributed computation has long been a common “playground” for
cryptography and distributed computing/systems research. Despite novel ideas
flowing in both directions and central questions such as resilience to
misbehavior and efficiency being treated by both communities, the difference in
focus and the aimed properties have resulted in distinct approaches and
considerable gaps in terminology, models, definitions and overall language. This
mismatch is ever more present in emerging technologies such as blockchain and
decentralized ledgers (DLT). The project’s novelties are: (1) a common
blockchain-focused language for cryptography and distributed computing and
translations of results to this common language; and (2) the study of
feasibility, scalability, and efficiency of both classical distributed-
cryptography primitives and blockchain-inspired ones, in models that better
capture the challenges and idiosyncrasies of the latter. The project’s impacts
are to forment collaborations that will ensure a holistic approach to the modern
challenges posed by the above emerging technologies thus avoiding pitfalls that
can hinder these technologies’ potential. The study of cryptographic hardness
and decentralized trust assumptions can lead to a more flexible yet realistic
and secure cyberspace. This project will actively promote an interdisciplinary
research agenda focused on these technologies at Purdue, Texas A&amp;M, and
Northeastern, and will actively pursue inclusion to computer science research of
underrepresented groups in the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A bit more
concretely, the goal of this project is to address the above challenges by (1)
creating a framework suitable for expressing foundational and modern questions
from both cryptography and distributed computing, without ignoring privacy or
computational considerations, a paradigm that is termed distributed
cryptography, and theoretical transformations (“compilers”) for importing
classical results into this framework, and further extending them under the
cryptographic lens; (2) investigating feasibility, scalability, and efficiency
of distributed cryptography primitives, such as secure multi-party computation,
in models of execution and under assumptions inspired by DLT protocols; and (3)
investigate how the paradigm of relying on a sparse resource, which is central
in the blockchain literature (e.g., hashing power in proofs of work- and stake
in proofs of stake-based protocols) can generically reshape distributed
cryptography and allow us to circumvent long-standing impossibility
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.