* 2055042
* Grain Boundary Orientation Impacts on Internal Resistance in Solid State Lithium Ion Conductors
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Jon Ihlefeld, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2024
* USD 369,984.00

Freeing the U.S. from reliance on fossil fuels is important for national
security and economic prosperity. Efficient transition from fossil fuels to
electricity will require the ability to rapidly and safely charge batteries in
minutes rather than hours. Solid-state batteries have promise to accomplish this
task because of their inherent safety, but they are currently unable to charge
and discharge at sufficient rates. This project will study the features of
electrolytes in solid-state batteries that hinder charge and discharge rates.
The knowledge gained will allow engineering of improved electrolytes to achieve
faster rates. The project also will develop educational outreach materials
designed to illustrate the scientific process and will focus on experimental
failures. They will show how failed experiments are a key component of the
scientific process and that societyâ€™s knowledge is built over time upon the
lessons learned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this fundamental research
project is to determine the features that lead to resistance in ionic conduction
across grain boundaries in perovskite-structured lithium ion conductors and to
categorize ionic resistances by specific grain boundary orientations. Epitaxial
lithium ion conducting films will be prepared by pulsed laser deposition on
single crystal, bicrystal, and large-grained polycrystalline insulating
substrates. The grain and grain boundary orientations will be assessed via
electron backscatter diffraction and the ion conductivity measured across the
individual grain boundaries using microcontact electrochemical impedance
spectroscopy. The nature of resistance to ionic conduction will be assessed to
determine whether the origin is structural or electronic in nature. With the
ionic conductivity of different grain boundary orientations determined, cross-
sectional scanning transmission electron microscopy will be employed to measure
the local chemical compositions and structures. These parameters will then be
used to determine the mechanisms that lead to grain boundary resistances in
solid-state lithium ion conductors. Using this information, the features and
grain alignments that lead to high and low ion conductivities across grain
boundaries will be established, which may then be used to design a
microstructure that minimizes the populations of high resistivity boundaries in
the conduction path. The end result will be a step toward realizing high power
fast charge and discharge solid-state lithium ion
batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.