* 2055120
* CAREER: Unraveling the origins of genomic heterogeneity in microbial species and populations
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Cheryl Andam, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,071,881.00

Although in some species of microbes all the individuals are very similar, there
are many species in which individuals are very different in how they live, what
they look like, and the genomes that determine these things, because they have
different evolutionary histories. These differences in evolutionary history can
come from having inherited small changes in their gene sequences, or because
they don't share all the same genes across their genomes. Determining why
genomes within a species vary, and what the consequences of this variability are
is important in understanding microbial diversity on Earth. It will help us
better understand what knowing the species a microbe belongs to can tell us
about how it will evolve or respond to environmental conditions. This
fundamental biological question has practical implications for questions about
the role of microbes in agriculture and public health. This research will also
provide an important platform for training undergraduates, graduate students,
and the postdoctoral scholars. Through its integrated educational plan, it will
help provide interdisciplinary training in analyzing large-scale genomic data, a
much-needed skill set. This will be done by involving students in the research,
though hands-on undergraduate courses, and through teacher training and a
microbial art exhibit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Species delineations and the
mechanisms of speciation have been notoriously challenging to study in microbes
owing to pervasive horizontal gene flow, within-species variation, and cryptic
ecological niches that structure microbial populations. This research will test
the hypothesis that different components of the bacterial genome diversify
through distinct mechanisms, which can facilitate ecological adaptation across
different time scales. Using Streptomyces as a model system, this research will
use genomic sequences from more than 1,500 free-living and host-associated
Streptomyces isolates from disparate environments, and integrate data on three
facets of genomic heterogeneity: distribution of genetic variants, rate of gene
content changes and signals of selection and neutrality. Completion of the
project will reveal the extent to which a single genome carries genes with
distinct ecologies and modes of evolution, and how this genomic heterogeneity
contributes to success and survival in specific environments. Output from the
proposed project will advance our knowledge of the origins, extent and impacts
of genomic heterogeneity on microbial evolution, divergence and
adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.