* 2055559
* SBIR Phase I:  Smart needle for precise tumor ablation
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2021,06/30/2022
* Christopher Wagner, CURRENT SURGICAL INC.
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase 1 project is to enable doctors to treat previously
untreatable cancerous tumors through the development of a smart surgical needle.
There are many clinical situations in which a patient cannot receive curative
surgery because of the proximity of the tumor to critical anatomy; for example,
the central bile duct in liver cancer. In these cases, patients are forced to
decide between a number of non-curative treatments that have poor outcomes and
significant side effects. Innovation in early-stage tumor treatments will expand
treatment options to under-served communities and patient populations. Liver
cancer, for example, disproportionately affects Native Americans, Hispanics, and
African-American populations in the US, with as many as 30% to 66% patients
never receiving any treatment. One reason is that surgical treatments require
significant operating room infrastructure (for example, three-dimensional
medical imaging) to provide high-quality outcomes; unfortunately these
facilities are concentrated in research hospitals and access is not widespread.
The technology developed here will address these tumors, and will apply to the
more than 600,000 patients in the US yearly that suffer from cancers of the
liver, kidney, lung, and breast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate feasibility of small-size
sensors to transform ablation technology into a first-line treatment for all
cancerous tumors. By placing imaging sensors onto the tip of a needle, the
device can overcome performance limits encountered when using traditional image
guidance. This increased performance, in combination with real-time image
analysis, can sense temperature variation in a variety of tissues. The ability
to sense temperature variation will be combined with needle tip-based energy
delivery to provide an all-in-one closed loop ablation device, with the
capability to treat previously untreatable tumors. This project will demonstrate
the application of deep-learning techniques, combined with physics based
simulations, to enable precision ablation monitoring. Subsequently the ablation
monitoring will be combined with ablation control to test the feasibility of
precise closed-loop ablation in ex vivo tissue with sufficient accuracy for
future clinical implementation. This foundational work will then guide the
development of the desired needle probe embodiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.