* 2055422
* Identifying and Reducing Gender Bias in STEM: Systematically Synthesizing the Experimental Evidence
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Courtney Tanenbaum, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,067,411.00

This project will integrate high-quality experimental evidence on the existence
of, and strategies to reduce, gender bias in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) fields, including how gender bias may intersect with
other identities such as race and ethnicity. Biases favoring men could thwart
women’s training and careers in STEM fields in many ways, but research also
suggests promising interventions for changing biased cultures and structures.
This project will synthesize four decades of research to understand the
postsecondary and workforce contexts in which bias against women in STEM remains
especially pernicious and the interventions that can most effectively reduce
such biases. The results will inform scholarly debates such as whether biases
against women in STEM have reduced over time, persist in nearly all training and
career contexts, or vary in more nuanced ways across contexts and STEM fields.
The work ultimately aims to help organizations (a) disrupt the culture of peer
and mentor discrimination that could directly block women’s entry into STEM
fields and (b) mitigate the accumulated experiences of discrimination and
exclusion that could drive women out of STEM. Dissemination of project findings
will especially focus on actionable insights for higher education institutions,
such as bias reduction strategies that male and female STEM faculty can adopt in
their teaching, mentoring, and service activities. This project is funded by the
EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances fundamental
research on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in
STEM, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The synthesis will
include two sets of studies: (a) studies testing for the existence of gender
bias in STEM fields (bias identification studies) and (b) studies evaluating
interventions to reduce such biases (bias reduction studies). For both, the
synthesis will focus on randomized experimental designs, such as changing the
name on a résumé from John to Jennifer (bias identification study) or assigning
some individuals to receive diversity training or not (bias reduction study).
Focusing on experimental designs maximizes the rigor of the evidence to be
synthesized because they help rule out potential confounds when testing for bias
and evaluating intervention efficacy. All STEM fields will be eligible for
review, spanning undergraduate education to the academic and nonacademic
workforce, to provide a robust and thorough understanding of where gender biases
exist and how interventions can reduce them. Contrasting with traditional
literature reviews, the team will use rigorous systematic review and meta-
analysis methods to improve transparency of the review process, reduce reviewer
bias, and ensure the project’s findings are robust and comprehensive of existing
high-quality evidence. Statistical analyses will focus on understanding how
specific contextual features (e.g., formal accountability, disciplinary field,
intervention design) can explain mixed findings on identifying and reducing
gender bias in STEM. This knowledge can help universities, companies, and other
organizations pinpoint where targeted intervention is most needed and which
strategies will be most effective for mitigating bias.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.