* 2055554
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Risk-based Secure Checked-in Credential Reduction for Software Development
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Bradley Reaves, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 399,708.00

Similar to human users, software relies heavily on the use of credentials, like
passwords, to prove identity and rights to access resources. During software
development, software engineers may need to share these software credentials,
and operators who deploy the software will often need to distribute these
credentials securely to servers. Engineers may take the path of least resistance
which includes storing credentials -- keys, database connection strings,
certificates, usernames and passwords -- in distributed version control systems
used to manage software development. This type of storage makes accessing and
distributing these credentials more convenient but also creates the very real
hazard that they will be leaked to the public or to insider threats. This
project will develop an understanding of how software engineers choose to manage
credentials, and will develop techniques, tools, and datasets to better detect
credential leaks and to prioritize credential removal based on the risks that
disclosure of the credential would create.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will include a mixed-methods investigation of the interplay of functional and
security concerns on the software engineer's overall decision-making strategy
for protecting or revealing credentials in software artifacts. This project will
inform our approach to improve the ability of static analysis tools to detect
more credentials with a lower false positive rate. Additionally, the project
will identify the asset being protected by the credential, which will enable an
automated or semi-automated risk estimation. Finally, the project will lead to
the creation and evaluation of new techniques for securely storing and sharing
secrets among project teams and in a system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.