* 2055111
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Chronological Development of Complex Community Interactions
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Kathryn Brown, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2023
* USD 14,112.00

Scientists study the complex interconnections between the social, political, and
economics systems that shaped past lifeways. Archaeology is well suited to this
study because the material remains of the past are embedded with the
sociopolitical and economic relationships at play when the materials were
constructed. By investigating the production and distribution of ceramics used
by cultures in the past, researchers can reconstruct the complex and
interconnected relationships that existed in the region inhabited by this
cultural group. The time-period under consideration saw dramatic shifts in
social and political organization and tracing the patterns of organizational
change in the material record is relevant to current understandings of modern
sociopolitical and economic relationships that shape and are shaped by our
interactions with material goods. The investigators plan to collaborate closely
with local artisans and non-profit organizations to develop programs designed to
encourage the safeguarding of cultural heritage as well as the education of
members of local communities about cultural heritage and archaeology. This
project was designed with inclusivity in mind, introducing creative project
design and perspectives into the archaeological process, while ensuring that
results are accessible to multiple voices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral
dissertation project will model a ceramic economy by examining the production
and distribution of fine-ware ceramic vessels from two sites to highlight the
dynamic shifts in social complexity that occurred during this period. Within a
framework of ritual economy, the study will analyze and compare the mineral and
chemical compositions of ceramic assemblages from the sites to test the
hypothesis that a larger site served as a node of public activity a place for
political, social, and ritual congregation for local residents as well as those
from other surrounding communities. To test this model, the doctoral student
will conduct stylistic analysis, petrography, and Neutron Activation Analysis on
the fine-ware ceramics from two assemblages. Micro-level characteristics of the
vessels will reveal macro-level relationships between populations and their
practices because these dynamics are embedded in the material record at the time
of its production and distribution. Investigations of this nature highlight the
inextricable link between the economic, political, and social structures that
shape society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.