* 2055690
* RoL:Deciphering the robustness mechanisms of the stem promoting transcription factor gradient
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Venugopala Gonehal, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,564,295.00

Understanding how plants develop to optimize their size and shape is key to
future efforts to improve plant performance under varying environmental
conditions. Initial development takes place at a shoot apical meristem (SAM)
comprising stem cells that will ultimately give rise to the rest of the plant
body Remarkably, these stem cells divide throughout the plant's life span and
provide cells for developing all above-ground plant parts, which form a sizable
portion of the biomass that sustains life on earth. Therefore, the study of the
SAMs will impact future efforts to develop a sustainable agriculture that
contributes to environmental protection. As in all multicellular systems, SAM
development is a highly choreographed sequence of complex events and it is
important to link mechanisms of growth across subcellular, cellular, tissue, and
organismal levels. To reach across these scales of inquiry, the project employ
multidisciplinary approaches to develop experimentally supported multiscale
mathematical models. These models will allow easy observation and manipulation
of biological processes generating and testing new hypotheses on SAM
development. The research involves a diverse group of students to engage in
research and learn about the role of SAM function in plant development.
Importantly, these students will be trained in interdisciplinary thinking, which
is critical to advance science into the future. The proposed outreach will help
bring institutional resources to surrounding underserved communities through
mentoring and engaging with undergraduate and high school students to learn
about, experience, and potentially start down the road to careers in
mathematical biology and related fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WUSCHEL
transcription factor gradient regulation is critical in stem cell maintenance
and SAM growth. Self-regulation of the WUSCHEL protein gradient involves
simultaneous control of processes that occur at different spatiotemporal scales.
The WUSCHEL gradient depends on the regulated diffusion of WUSCHEL into adjacent
cells controlled through nuclear-cytoplasmic (N-C) partitioning by position-
specific extrinsic signals such as CLAVATA3 (a peptide that activates receptor
kinase signaling) and plant hormone-cytokinin signaling. WUSCHEL, in turn,
regulates CLAVATA3 through a unique concentration-dependent transcriptional
switch. How transcriptional/post-translational control and spatial signals
combine and achieve finely tuned regulation of the WUSCHEL gradient will be
studied by utilizing a combination of experimental and computational methods.
The experimental approaches will visualize the effects of transient system
perturbations and derive parameters that will be fed into the computational
model to provide a fine-grained determination of the influence of different
system components. The system will be examined on the level of a single cell and
at the tissue level to study the control of WUSCHEL synthesis, sub-cellular
partitioning, diffusion, and degradation regulated by the layer-specific signals
(aim1). WUSCHEL concentration-dependent regulation of CLAVATA3 transcription
will be explored in aim2. In aim3, a continuous signaling sub-model regulating
the WUSCHEL protein accumulation will be integrated with the stochastic model of
CLAVATA3 transcription. This hybrid model will be used to understand the
mechanisms regulating the robustness of the WUSCHEL gradient. The scalable
hybrid model could be used broadly in the quantitative analysis of systems
governed by events that occur in multiple spatiotemporal
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Rules of Life award is co-funded by the Plant,
Fungal and Microbial Developmental Mechanisms Program in the Division of
Integrative Organismal Systems and the Cellular Dynamics and Function Program
and the Genetics Mechanisms Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.