* 2055127
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Principled Foundations for the Design and Evaluation of Graph-Based Host Intrusion Detection Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Gang Wang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,201,199.00

Modern system intruders are extraordinarily sophisticated, leveraging expertise
and financial means to "live off the land" and avoid detection as they penetrate
large organizations. Unfortunately, over 25 years of host intrusion detection
research has proven insufficient to detect today’s sophisticated attackers.
Recently, advancements in machine learning and auditing have led researchers to
reconceptualize intrusion detection as a graph learning problem -- provenance
graphs that describe the history of system execution are analyzed in an attempt
to differentiate typical from suspicious activity. However, at present it is
unclear how (or even if) these graph intrusion detection systems (Graph IDS) are
effective in the face of determined, resourceful adversaries, particularly
adaptive attackers that pattern their actions to blend in with typical activity.
This project measures the resilience of Graph IDS to so-called “mimicry
attacks,” then design novel anomaly detection algorithms that are hardened
against this threat. The project also contributes to work force development
through student participation in research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
examines the central challenges pertaining to the evaluation and design of Graph
IDS. Using provenance graphs as an abstract model for system activity, the
project develops novel techniques for automated generation of mimicry attack
samples, allowing the IDS’ to be rigorously benchmarked against adaptive
adversaries. The project then develops new primitives for Graph IDS by
incorporating the intuitions that underpin human-in-the-loop threat
investigation procedures, such as root cause analysis. In the final stages of
the project, it considers methods for the practical deployment of these
techniques in large organizations and networks. The findings from this work
inform the next generation of enterprise security strategies, re-establishing
host anomaly detection as a precise and practical means of detecting system
intrusions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.