* 2055631
* Path to Information Technology (IT) Practice: Increasing Credential Completions in IT within the Southern Tier of Virginia
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Chad Patton, Southside Virginia Community College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2024
* USD 495,026.00

It is well documented that the Information Technology (IT) workforce is
chronically understaffed, and predictions show that the shortage of IT workers
will reach alarming levels in a few years. The goal of this project is to
increase the number of students from Southside Virginia Community College,
especially those from populations currently underrepresented in the IT
professions, who are ready to enter the regional IT workforce. The project will
target high school students in dual enrollment programs, as well as adult
learners, employing a culturally responsive model that will increase enrollments
and retention. Project goals will be attained by the deployment of a program
infrastructure that incorporates a comprehensive recruitment strategy, with a
specific focus on students from groups traditionally underrepresented in IT
careers, coupled with academic support strategies and identity-building and
self-efficacy activities to ensure student success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project team will study methods to increase recruitment and attainment of
success in community college IT programs, especially among students
traditionally underrepresented in IT careers. Increased educational attainment
is positively correlated with higher standards of living, increased wages, and
overall prosperity and welfare. This project has the potential to improve the
understanding and implementation of culturally responsive advising for all
students, but especially for those traditionally underrepresented in IT
professions. Results from this work will inform the Governor's G3 Initiative
("Get a Skill. Get a Job. Get Ahead") in Virginia, which is focused on getting
credentialed students back to school to upskill for emerging technical careers.
Providing opportunities for students, specifically those who are marginalized,
will help address the gap in the IT industry by increasing the number of women
and underrepresented minorities obtaining credentials. This project is funded by
the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.