* 2055324
* Supporting Instructors to Embed Design Thinking in Digital Fabrication Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Josh Labrie, Northern Virginia Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,897.00

Manufacturing and engineering industries face a looming gap in skilled workers,
with an estimated 2.4M positions projected to go unfilled by 2025. This project
aims to help fill this gap by improving the preparation of the needed technical
workforce. To do so, it will establish a Professional Learning program in design
thinking pedagogy for secondary and postsecondary educators. The curriculum will
focus on design thinking projects that involve digital fabrication techniques,
including 3D printing, laser engraving, and Computer Numerical Control milling.
The Professional Learning program is expected to improve the educator' teaching
practices and enable them to update existing curricula and lesson plans to
better align with industry relevant skills and techniques. The project also
intends to create a community of practice around design thinking in digital
fabrication that will build a beneficial network among secondary teachers,
community college faculty, makerspace educators, and regional employers. It is
expected that the project will support 36 secondary and postsecondary educators
who will teach more than 3,000 K-12 and undergraduate students in the northern
Virginia region. These students will have greater interest in and be better
prepared for technical careers in manufacturing and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the project is to use
Professional Learning to move digital fabrication instruction beyond the
reproduction of simple objects. Instead, the project will train educators to use
pedagogy and cognitive strategies to embed design thinking into their digital
fabrication lessons and courses. As a result, students will learn to use design
thinking to build complex, useful objects. The projectâ€™s specific aims include
to: (1) create a professional learning institute; (2) host digital fabrication
summer camps at NOVA and the Boys and Girls Club of Greater Washington; (3) host
a semiannual design and digital fabrication challenge; and (4) establish an
online resource library of projects and lesson plans created and refined by
educators in the community of practice. The project is expected to advance:
understanding of the pedagogies that help to develop student interest in
manufacturing and engineering; the capacity for Professional Learning to
facilitate integration of design thinking into classrooms and makerspaces; and
the extent to which a capstone design challenge may foster sustainable change in
instructional practices. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.