* 2055416
* NSF-DFG Chem: Photocatalytic Organic Synthesis By High-Efficiency Planar Semiconductors
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Victor Batista, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2024
* USD 326,083.00

This project was awarded through the “NSF-DFG Lead Agency Activity in
Electrosynthesis and Electrocatalysis (NSF-DFG EChem)" opportunity, a
collaborative solicitation that involves the National Science Foundation and
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG). This is a collaborative project between
researchers at Yale University and Ilmenau University of Technology in Germany.
Harnessing solar energy for chemical reactions offers an attractive, low-carbon
alternative to traditional thermal chemical manufacturing processes that rely on
energy from the combustion of fossil fuels. Adoption of photochemical processes
has been slow, however, due to fundamental challenges in the efficient
conversion of light into electrochemical energy and directing that energy toward
desired chemical reactions. The project addresses both limitations by employing
efficient semiconductive photoabsorbers combined with photocatalytic coatings to
facilitate the manufacture of organic chemicals. The research effort brings
together leading researchers to apply a unique blend of experimental and
theoretical methods to the study of photocatalytic chemical manufacturing.
Through an international outreach effort, the project will include workforce
development and educational outreach, including mentoring science club
activities, developing courses in sustainable technologies, and raising public
awareness of sustainable chemical production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The joint
team will explore the use of efficient semiconductive photoabsorbers to achieve
organic synthesis. Presently, the relationship of the charge-transfer energetics
and kinetics with surface reactivity is not well understood, which limits the
design of synthesis pathways based on photocatalysis. To address this gap, the
team investigates a model reaction of photocatalytic para-xylene oxidation to
produce terephthalic acid, driven by titanium oxide-coated planar aluminum
gallium indium phosphide semiconductors. This model reaction will explore the
ability to manipulate the location, free energy, and charge-transfer potentials,
as well as the design principles for controlling product distribution. In
operando, attenuated total reflection Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy
will be used to identify key surface species, which in combination with theory
and computational modeling will investigate the measured energetics and product
selectivity, while providing insight regarding the surface reaction pathways.
The collaborative research thrusts include 1) correlation between the surface
chemistry and the hole-transfer energetics, 2) coevolution to achieve product
selectivity control, and 3) vapor-phase reactor implementation. Insights from
the para-xylene model reaction should extend to technologically important
organic synthesis, such as oxidative dehydrogenation, enantioselective cross-
coupling, and carbonylation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.