* 2055607
* Dual Credit High School-Community College DNA Sequencing and Genomics Project
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Joseph Oleniczak, Austin Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 04/30/2024
* USD 393,626.00

The United States Biotechnology Industry has increasing demand for jobs based on
DNA sequencing technology. The U.S. DNA sequencing market is estimated at $2.8
billion dollars for 2020 and on-track to grow to $5 billion by 2027, a compound
annual growth rate of 16.6%. Biotechnicians with specialized training to run DNA
sequencing instrumentation are needed to fill the jobs in this growing sector.
Texas currently has 63 DNA sequencing facilities, 60 of which are located within
250 miles of this workforce education project. To fulfill industry needs for
trained technicians in this field, Austin Community College will collaborate
with the Austin Independent School District Liberal Arts and Science Academy
High School to develop a DNA sequencing and genomics facility. The project will
create an industry and research-based dual credit (high school and community
college) academic program that focuses on DNA sequencing technology for entry-
level biotechnician training. The project is designed to provide equitable
access of underrepresented minority students to real-world workforce training.
Students will learn laboratory techniques, have research experiences, develop
job skills, receive industry-level instrumentation training, and be exposed to
industry and academia as career pathways. As a result, the project team expects
the project will lay the academic and technical foundation for high school and
two-year community college students to enter the biotechnician workforce.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide research-based,
hands-on, and real-world workforce experience for two-year community college and
dual credit high school and biotechnology students by providing access to
industry-level DNA sequencing technology. The project aims to increase the
recruitment, retention, and certificate completion rates for traditionally
underrepresented minority students in biotechnician training programs by
establishing on-campus industry and academia mentored research internships.
Project goals are: 1) Instrumentation acquisition of industry-level DNA
sequencing technologies to establish a dual credit, high school campus-based DNA
sequencing and genomics facility; 2) Modifications and updates to course
curricula for the Level-I Certificate in Biotechnology from Austin Community
College to include DNA sequencing and genomics technology instrumentation
technician competencies and opportunities for authentic student-led research
mentored by industry and academic partners; 3) Program development through
establishing a DNA sequencing and genomics research-based industry and academic
internship mentor network for dual credit high school biotechnology students to
increase the recruitment, retention, and certificate completion rates for
traditionally underrepresented minority students in STEM biotechnician training
programs; and 4) Development of partnerships within the InnovATEBIO National
Center member network to support the DNA sequencing and genomics technician
training needs of this community and to broadly disseminate the findings of this
project. The project will engage biotechnology students in authentic student-
driven DNA sequencing research while working with biotechnology industry
professionals, high school teachers, community college faculty, and university
researchers. Furthermore, the project expects to establish best practices in
workforce training in this critical area. It will disseminate project outcomes
nationally as a scalable model for other high school and higher education
institutions looking to create similar academic programs in DNA sequencing
technology technician training. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.