* 2055345
* Collaborative Research: Latinx Families' Talk about Science in Stories with Young Children
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Catherine Haden, Loyola University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Lori Takeuchi
* 08/31/2024
* USD 815,531.00

This project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports
work that advances fundamental research on STEM learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.
It responds to continuing concerns about racial and social inequities in STEM
fields that begin to emerge in the early childhood years. The overarching goal
of the project is to identify cultural strengths that support early science
learning opportunities among Spanish-speaking children from immigrant Latin
American communities, a population that is traditionally underrepresented in
STEM educational and career pursuits. Building on a growing interest in the ways
stories can promote early engagement in and understanding of science, this
project will investigate the role of oral and written stories as culturally
relevant and potentially powerful tools for making scientific ideas and inquiry
practices meaningful and accessible for young Latinx children. Findings will
reveal ways that family storytelling practices can provide accessible entry
points for Latinx children's early science learning, and recommend methods that
parents and educators can use to foster learning about scientific practices that
can, in turn, increase interest and participation in science education and
fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance knowledge on the socio-
cultural and familial experience of Latinx children that can contribute to their
early science learning and skills. The project team will examine the oral story
and reading practices of 330 Latinx families with 3- to 5-year-old children
recruited from three geographic locations in the United States: New York,
Chicago, and San Jose. Combining interviews and observations, the project team
will investigate: (1) how conversations about science and nature occur in Latinx
children's daily lives, and (2) whether and to what extent narrative and
expository books, family personal narratives, and adivinanzas (riddles) engender
family conversations about scientific ideas and science practices. Across- and
within-site comparisons will allow the project team to consider the immediate
ecology and broader factors that shape Latinx familiesâ€™ science-related views
and practices. Although developmental science has long acknowledged that early
learning is culturally situated, most research on early STEM is still informed
by mainstream experiences that largely exclude the lived experiences of children
from groups underrepresented in STEM, especially those who speak languages other
than English. The proposed work will advance understanding of stories as
cultural resources to support early science engagement and learning among Latinx
children and inform the development of high quality, equitable informal and
formal science educational opportunities for young
children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.