* 2055781
* Increasing the Cloud System Administration Services Workforce through Skills-Based Education and Training
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Margaret Taylor, College of Southern Nevada
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 284,165.00

The Information Technology (IT) workforce is chronically understaffed and
predictions show that the shortage of IT workers will reach alarming levels in a
few years. The traditional role of a systems administrator was to manage
servers, computers, and applications residing inside an organization. Cloud
vendors offer new technology capabilities that enable organizations to rapidly
and cost effectively move IT services to the cloud. As the IT infrastructure in
this country grows more dependent on, cloud technologies, there is an urgent
need for systems administrators who are skilled in these technologies. The
College of Southern Nevada aims to address the shortage of skilled systems
administrators by developing a program that will train students to manage multi-
vendor cloud systems. The project team will collaborate with local IT
professionals to ensure that the new program will meet regional workforce needs.
Recruitment efforts for the program will emphasize inclusion of women and
hospitality workers in the region who are facing increased unemployment and
underemployment. This project can provide a pathway to stable and lucrative
careers for those who are unexpectedly unemployed or underemployed, including
those whose employment was highly affected by the COVID-19
pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The College with their Business and Industry
Leadership Team to develop courses, skills certificates, and certificates of
achievement to address the shortage of qualified cloud computing support
technicians. The resulting program will feature a multi-vendor cloud computing
administration program that will provide local industry with skilled technicians
who are ready to work and capable of supporting both on-premises and cloud-based
systems. The new program will focus upon providing training for both vendor
agnostic and vendor-specific solutions. As a result, students will be prepared
to support the transition of industries from traditional IT infrastructure to
multiple cloud vendors. The programâ€™s curricular approach will integrate
experiential and project-based learning to provide students with real-world
learning, supporting a seamless transition from the classroom to the workforce.
Free summer cloud training seminars will be offered to the community through
collaboration with the local school district, local workforce development, and
IT industry groups. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.