* 2055742
* CAS: Development of Core-Substituted Dihydrophenazine Photoredox Catalysts for Organocatalyzed Atom Transfer Radical Polymerization
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Garret Miyake, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 475,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Garret Miyake of Colorado State University is studying a new class of organic
catalysts for the synthesis of polymers with precisely defined molecular
weights, chemical compositions, and architectures. Polymers are among the most
important synthetic materials in modern society. Developing new and efficient
methods for their synthesis accelerates the discovery of new materials and
applications. Catalysts enable the synthesis of medicines, commodity chemicals,
and materials but are often based on precious metals and require elevated
reaction temperatures. The expected outcomes from this work are the development
of new organic catalysts as sustainable alternatives to commonly used precious
metal catalysts that allow access to otherwise unobtainable polymers.
Furthermore, these catalysts will convert light to chemical energy to drive
reactions under mild conditions. In collaboration with a local high school, the
Miyake group is developing supplemental curricula to educate high school
students in modern themes of sustainability. High school students are also
working with the Miyake research team at Colorado State University to develop
these catalyst systems and gain research experience in the diverse skill sets
necessary to address global challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support
of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry, Garret Miyake of
Colorado State University is studying core-substituted dihydrophenazine
photoredox catalysts for organocatalyzed atom transfer radical polymerization.
This work will establish synthetic routes to novel organic photoredox catalysts
possessing unique photophysical properties that will enable the synthesis of new
polymeric materials. Through mechanistic studies, an understanding into the
structure-property relationships of the catalysts on their polymerization
performance will be gained to ultimately yield more efficient catalyst systems.
These catalysts will be applied toward the polymerization of challenging
monomers for the synthesis of novel polymeric materials. Beyond polymerization,
these catalysts will also have the potential to unlock previously inaccessible
catalytic chemical transformations and will find broad applications across
chemical catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.