* 2055528
* RET Site: Socially Relevant Computing and Analytics
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Collin Lynch, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 03/31/2024
* USD 598,913.00

This award creates a new Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) site focused on
socially relevant computing and analytics at North Carolina State University.
Each summer, in-service and pre-service teachers will be recruited and put into
research teams with a computer science (CS) graduate student research mentor and
a CS research faculty mentor. In this immersive research experience, teachers
will learn software tools, human computer interaction, and rapid prototype
development as they work with CS researchers to investigate socially relevant
problems concerning health, education, and critical infrastructures.
Participants will synthesize research projects into problem-based computing
assignments for students, integrating equitable practices for computing
curricula including providing students the opportunity to represent their
culture and ideas into the projects. Through immersing educators in socially
relevant computing research, they will have a much better understanding of the
impacts of computing and will be better able to relay these concepts to their
students and through a focus on equitable curriculum design, we can investigate
how well their created projects resonate with female, African American/Black,
Hispanic/Latinx students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Experience for
Teachers (RET) site at North Carolina State University will focus on socially
relevant computing and analytics. In service teachers will be recruited from
school districts serving large populations of underrepresented students, and
will be placed in teams along with pre-service teachers and computer science
graduate students. This Affinity Research Group model will immerse participants
in a vibrant community to contribute to ongoing research in socially relevant
computing and analytics. Research projects include serious games, interface
design, critical infrastructures, novice programming environments, intelligent
tutoring systems, machine learning, and data analytics. The RET Site will also
work with participants to develop curricular modules linked to their research
experiences including workshops on equitable and culturally relevant CS
curricula and intensive workshops with peer feedback for development of modules.
The siteâ€™s objective is to create a collaborative culture, promote individual
research contributions, and create culturally responsive and inclusive
curricular modules. The intended impact on participating teachers is to increase
their CS knowledge, efficacy, research and presentation skills; and to increase
retention and engagement of their students. The intended impact on broadening
participation of underrepresented groups in CS is to create high levels of
student engagement particularly for females, African-Americans/Blacks,
Hispanics/Latinx and new knowledge about CS and careers. Plans for academic-year
follow-up and outreach activities and dissemination include RET Teams and
mentors support teachers in classroom implementation; pre-service teachers
observing classes; and two workshops to reinforce pedagogical and research
knowledge gained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.