* 2055579
* Intermetallic and Extraordinary Bonds of Beryllium and the Alkaline Earth Metals
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Michael Heaven, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 07/31/2024
* USD 513,812.00

In this project, supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-A
(CSDM-A) Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Michael C. Heaven and
his research group at Emory University are investigating the unusual chemical
bonds formed by atoms called alkaline earth metals. Metallic and intermetallic
bonding of the alkaline-earth metals is a subject of both conceptual and
practical importance. The bonds formed by alkaline earth metals show erratic
trends, with the most unpredictable behavior exhibited by molecules that contain
the element beryllium (Be). The chemistry of Be is under-explored owing to its
toxicity, but its compounds exhibit unique and valuable properties. For example,
beryllium alloys are used as lightweight structural materials due to their
exceptional strength to weight ratios. The remarkable durability of the metal is
reflected by the fact that it is used as a plasma-facing material in extremely
high-temperature fusion reactors. A common type of chemical bond is called a
covalent single bond, where two electrons are shared by two atoms, each atom of
the pair typically contributing one electron to the bond. Beryllium atoms are
unusual in that they often form what are called dative covalent bonds, where
both bonding electrons are provided by the other atom. Professor Heaven and his
research group use specialized instrumentation to characterize the structure and
properties of small molecules containing alkaline earth metals, including bonds
with another type of atom called alkali metals. This research project provides
new insights into chemical bonding in general, including data that can be used
to test new theories to describe bonding and to help in the prediction of the
properties of novel compounds for technological applications. The molecules
under examination include diatomics that have been proposed as the basic units
(called qubits) for quantum information storage and quantum computing. The
graduate students engaged in this project receive advanced training in both
experimental and theoretical chemistry. Undergraduate students from institutions
in the Atlanta University Center Consortium (AUCC) are also involved in the
project, providing research opportunities for undergraduate students from
historically Black colleges and universities (HBCUs). Undergraduate researchers
receive technical training related to the investigation of bonding mechanisms,
and also develop important career skills, such as networking, manuscript
preparation, and oral presentation of research results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At
present, the experimental data needed to evaluate high-level quantum chemical
models for compounds containing beryllium and the heavier alkaline earth metals
are lacking. This validation is necessary to establish confidence in the
computational methods that are used to identify compounds with valuable physical
and chemical properties. Experimental studies of prototypical compounds are the
primary objectives of this research. Spectroscopic techniques, including laser-
induced fluorescence (LIF) and pulsed-field ionization-zero electron kinetic
energy (PFI-ZEKE) measurements, are being applied to gas-phase molecules and
ions to obtain structural and thermodynamic properties. The species being
examined include LiBeLi, which is predicted to have a 3-center 4-electron bond,
Li4Be2, where the Be2 sub-unit is thought to have two sigma-bonds with no pi-
bonding contribution, and Li6Be2 where quantum calculations predict an
unprecedented Be-Be triple bond. In addition to the experimental spectroscopic
work, this project employs computational studies that utilize complete active
space self-consistent field (CASSCF) and multi-reference configuration
interaction (MRCI) methods. The research provides graduate, undergraduate, and
post-doctoral research students with advanced training in experimental and
theoretical methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.