* 2055072
* Collaborative Research: Nonlinear Dynamics and Spectral Analysis in Dispersive Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Justin Holmer, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 251,420.00

Internal deep-water waves, ion-acoustic waves in a plasma, laser propagation in
highly refractive materials, and collective particle behavior in very low
temperature gases are all physical systems whose behavior in time is modeled by
a nonlinear dispersive wave equation. The term "nonlinear" refers to a property
of size-dependent response and the term "dispersive" refers to how the
fluctuations of the wave influence the speed and direction of motion. At the
mathematical level, one studies the behavior of general solutions and special
types of solutions to these equations and seeks to provide quantitative
descriptions of phenomena observed in the physical setting. In this project, the
investigators explore how coherent waves travel - whether they retain their
shape despite encountering obstacles, break apart and dissolve, or collapse into
a singularity. Each of these possibilities hinges on both the nonlinear and the
dispersive character of the equations; over the past several decades,
mathematical techniques have been developed to model and measure these
properties. The project aims to improve existing methods and apply the methods
in new directions. The project contains educational efforts at various levels of
mathematical learning. These include advising undergraduate and graduate
students as well as postdoctoral scholars, with special emphasis on attracting
underrepresented minorities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main objective of the
research will be to provide analytical descriptions of the behavior of solutions
to certain classes of nonlinear dispersive equations. The two main categories of
equations considered are the Korteweg-de Vries (KdV) family and the nonlinear
Schr√∂dinger (NLS) family. Both classes of equations satisfy powerful dispersive
estimates called local virial estimates, and the KdV family in addition
satisfies a monotonicity property that controls the movement of mass. The
multiple-scale method, spectral analysis, application of dispersive estimates,
and monotonicity bounds are core methods that will be utilized and extended.
Several focus problems are identified in which some classical feature, like
scale-invariance or a property of localized influence, have been removed or
weakened, providing the stimulus to develop new techniques, while at the same
time, provide new descriptions of real physical phenomena. The phenomena of
primary interest are the dynamics of coherent structures like solitary waves and
line solitons as they interact with each other and their environment, and the
description of how singular collapsing solutions arise and their asymptotic
description.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.