* 2055063
* Harnessing the Reactivity of Sulfur: From Novel S-Atom Transfer Reagents to Sulfide-Protected Nanoclusters
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Trevor Hayton, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Trevor Hayton of the University of California-Santa Barbara will
explore the chemistry of sulfide-containing metal complexes. Sulfur plays a key
role in industry, medicine, and biology. Underpinning much of this chemistry is
the reactivity of metal sulfides. In this project, Professor Hayton will develop
several new applications of metal sulfides, including nitric oxide delivery,
catalytic sulfur-atom transfer for organic synthesis, and quantum computing.
This research will provide excellent training to undergraduate and graduate
students in the synthesis and characterization of air-sensitive metal complexes,
preparing them for careers in academia, industry, and the national laboratory
system. In addition, Professor Hayton will develop a student-led virtual seminar
series to introduce students to cutting-edge nanoscience. This series will allow
undergraduate students, in particular, to network with researchers from other
institutions and meet potential employers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the
support of the Chemical Synthesis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Trevor Hayton of the University of California Santa Barbara will
perform a wide-ranging investigation into metal sulfide reactivity related to a
diverse set of topics, including bioinorganic chemistry, organic synthesis, and
nanoscience. In particular, his laboratory will explore the reactions metal
sulfides with nitric oxide in an effort to understand the NO/H2S “crosstalk”
process, a suite of reactions between NO and sulfide/hydrosulfide in biological
systems that is thought to play an important role in cell signaling and the
immune response. Additionally, they will explore the ability of the
monothiopercarbonate fragment (i.e., the SOC(O)O-dianion) to function as a
S-atom transfer reagent. This species is predicted to be a thermodynamically
more powerful S-atom source than elemental sulfur, yet should feature good
kinetic stability. Finally, they will synthesize and isolate a series of nickel
sulfide atomically-precise nanoclusters (APNCs) of varying size. This series of
clusters is designed to uncover how paramagnetism emerges in transition metal
nanoclusters. Open shell APNCs can feature single molecule magnet (SMM) behavior
and have been proposed to function as novel spin
qubits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.