* 2055590
* Undergraduate Students' Reasoning about Equivalence in Multiple Mathematical Domains:  Exploration and Theory-Building
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* John Paul Cook, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Equivalence, the idea that two objects can be considered “the same” in some way,
is one of the most important concepts in mathematics. Learners from elementary
through graduate school encounter equivalence in many ways across many
mathematical topics. Unfortunately, students can have difficulties in
understanding ideas of equivalence in more advanced mathematics courses. One
possible challenge is that equivalence is often treated as a new concept each
time it is introduced within or across courses. In addition, students’ ways of
thinking about this fundamental idea are not yet well understood. To begin to
fill this knowledge gap, this project aims to develop a theory about how
students reason with equivalence across two mathematical disciplines:
combinatorics and abstract algebra. To gather data on which to base the theory,
the project will examine the current body of literature on equivalence, analyze
textbooks, and conduct interviews with mathematicians and students. The theory
that emerges from this research will help researchers and educators better
understand different ways to reason about equivalence across mathematical
domains. This work also may have long-term benefits: such a theory could inform
the design of curricular materials to help students at all levels see instances
of equivalence in a more consistent, linked
fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Equivalence is one of the most fundamental, far-
reaching concepts in all of mathematics and an essential component of the K-16
mathematics curriculum. Its importance is particularly evident at the
postsecondary level, where equivalence manifests and plays a key role in
virtually every domain from calculus to abstract algebra. Despite its prevalence
and importance, undergraduate students can be challenged to understand instances
of equivalence, especially if similar concepts are introduced in a disconnected
way. Moreover, characterizations of equivalence in research are often implicit
or domain-specific, speaking to the need for cognitive models that might prove
useful within and across mathematical disciplines. This project will work toward
a crosscutting theory of equivalence that could be applied in multiple contexts.
Focusing on the domains of combinatorics and abstract algebra, the project’s
primary research questions are: (1) What is entailed in undergraduate students’
ways of thinking about equivalence within the domains of abstract algebra and
combinatorics? (2) What is entailed in undergraduate students’ ways of thinking
about equivalence across these domains? To answer these questions, the project
will leverage existing literature, textbook analysis, and interviews with
mathematicians to develop an initial theory and then rigorously refine that
theory via sequences of exploratory and targeted task-based clinical interviews
with students, focusing on abstract algebra in Year 1, combinatorics in Year 2,
and both domains in Year 3. This project is funded by the EHR Core Research
(ECR) program, which supports work that advances fundamental research on STEM
learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM
workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.