* 2055507
* RET Site: Engineering for People and the Planet: Research Experiences for Teaching Integrated STEM
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Katherine Chen, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 12/31/2024
* USD 599,980.00

The Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Site at Worcester Polytechnic
Institute (WPI) focuses on the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals for
an integrated approach of learning and doing science, math, and engineering
through real-world problems that focus on people and the planet. A WPI pre-
service teacher and a local in-service teacher will be paired to do summer
research for six-weeks in a lab with a faculty mentor on topics, such as food
safety, healthy lives, clean energy, and quality education. Five teacher pairs
will participate each summer in professional development workshops to translate
their research experience into lesson plans and classroom activities, as well as
present their work to broader audiences. This project will impact a large number
of high school science, tech/engineering, and math (STEM) teachers and high
school students in underserved districts with populations that are racially and
ethnically diverse. By building the capacity for strong STEM educators in the
region, this program can provide relevant STEM learning opportunities that
engage students to develop real-world problem solving skills and help prepare
the next generation of scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of this project are to: 1) Provide authentic research experiences
centered around Engineering for People and the Planet, as inspired by the United
Nations (UN) Sustainable Development Goals to pre-service and in-service
teachers around the City of Worcester, Massachusetts; 2) Deliver high-quality
professional development on the teaching of “Integrated STEM”; 3) Assist RET
participants in both creating lessons and activities based on their research and
disseminating their work to students in their classroom and broader audiences
including TeachEngineering.org; 4) Increase RET participants’ confidence and
knowledge about Engineering for People and the Planet, the Engineering Design
Process, and teaching Integrated STEM; and 5) Form an on-going Community of
Practice for peer and near-peer mentoring among WPI pre-service teachers,
Worcester area in-service teachers, WPI faculty and graduate students, industry
advisors, and the STEM Education Center. Five pre-service teachers from WPI’s
Teacher Preparation Program (current WPI STEM undergraduates) and five local in-
service high school teachers from high need schools will be paired for annual
cohorts to conduct summer engineering research with WPI faculty for six weeks.
Research topics include: 1) sensors for food safety, 2) novel antimicrobials for
treating infections, 3) brain sensing for personalized learning environments, 4)
catalytic conversion of food wastes into renewable fuel, 5) spectroscopy for
detecting hazardous chemicals, and 6) sustainable production methods through
engineering biosynthetic processes. The UN Sustainable Development Goals unify
these research projects as “Engineering for People and the Planet,” and provide
a context and platform for teaching “Integrated STEM,” leading to effective and
engaged K-12 learning. Teachers will have weekly workshops to guide their
research project as they learn research techniques to culminate in a poster for
a public RET Symposium, and to translate their research experience into lesson
plans implemented in their classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.