* 2055190
* Synthesis, Properties and Dynamics of BODIPY-based Fluorophores
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Maria Vicente, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 470,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Maria da Gra√ßa H. Vicente of the
Department of Chemistry at Louisiana State University, in collaboration with
Professor Petia Bobadova of the Department of Chemistry and Fermentation
Sciences at Appalachian State University, will develop new fluorescent dyes for
use in biological and materials applications, including bioimaging and
chemosensing. The main goals are to design and synthesize new boron
dipyrromethene (BODIPY) dyes, followed by investigation of their photophysical,
electrochemical and cellular properties. This research is directed toward the
development of near-infrared absorbing and emitting fluorophores that can be
conjugated with proteins and other biomolecules. Computational and experimental
methods will be used to design, synthesize and evaluate new fluorescent dyes and
their conjugates, seeking enhanced stability, biocompatibility and performance
for practical applications. This project encompasses organic and inorganic
chemistry, spectroscopy, chemical kinetics, computational modeling, cell and
molecular biology, molecular recognition, and biomedical imaging, and is
therefore well suited to the education of scientists at all levels. This group
is also well-positioned to provide the highest level of education and training
for students underrepresented in science. Dr. Vicente leads programs at LSU that
will enhance student learning and professional skills, enrich their educational
experiences, and encourage them to pursue research careers. Outreach activities
involving K-12 students will also be part of the funded project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Boron dipyrromethene (BODIPY) dyes display a rich array of
photophysical and optoelectronic properties, including intense absorption and
emission profiles, high molar extinction coefficients, high fluorescence quantum
yields and long fluorescence lifetimes. Chemical modifications of the BODIPY
core can be used to tune the absorption and emission wavelengths, Stokes shifts,
stability, quantum yields, water-solubility, and to introduce functionality
suitable for conjugation. This project aims to provide new BODIPY-based systems
with enhanced stability, solubility, and photophysical properties for practical
applications in bioimaging and biosensing. The main strategies are: 1) Use of
benzo-annelation via efficient intramolecular cyclizations to produce [a]-fused
BODIPY systems with enhanced rigidity, and near-infrared absorptions/emissions.
2) Regioselective functionalizations to create push-pull BODIPY systems and
BODIPY dyads with enhanced molar extinction coefficients, fluorescence emission
and Stokes shifts, as well as with increased oxidation potentials and
solubility. 3) Use of polyfluorination for enhancement of cellular permeability,
stability, and biocompatibility. Computational methods will be used to assist
the target design by modeling BODIPY properties and mechanisms, thus
facilitating the development of new methodologies for the synthesis and
functionalization of BODIPYs. This project encompasses a broad range of science
and techniques, which will provide the highest level of education and training
for students underrepresented in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.