* 2055055
* Reactions of Arynes and Other Reactive Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Daesung Lee, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Daesung Lee of University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) is
studying new reactivity of reactive intermediates known as arynes and developing
new synthetic methods for forming these intermediates. Suitably designed organic
compounds can undergo structural reorganization by heating to form new chemical
species. These synthetic methods will allow for efficient synthesis of organic
compounds that have potential value in chemical biology and medicinal chemistry.
Exploring these new reactive aryne species and their subsequent chemical
transformations will help chemists better understand the factors and principles
that facilitate the formation of these high energy species and their reactivity
patterns. An additional potential benefit of this research is that the synthetic
approaches postulated herein, if successful, could spur related investigations
in other systems. The simple design principles and mode of performing the
reaction--under purely thermal conditions at relatively low temperatures--will
allow participation of high school and undergraduate students in this research
project, which will increase the opportunity of recruiting students from under-
represented groups at UIC (Connect with UIC Faculty program) and high school
students in Chicago area (STEM Professionals as Resource Knowledge Program of
Stevenson High School).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Daesung Lee and his students will
further develop hexadehydro Diels-Alder reaction-based aryne chemistry and
expand the scope of transformations of other thermally generated reactive
intermediates. To facilitate these thermal reactions, novel hydrogen bonding-
promoted strategies will be explored and applied to the synthesis of
biologically active natural products including selaginellin H, selagintamarin A,
and selaginpuvilin G. Also, the activating effect of an extra alkyne in
1,3-diynes will be examined in Alder-ene reactions, [2+2] cycloadditions between
alkyne and allene, Myers-Saito and Bergman cyclizations. The activating effect
of an alkyne substituent will be further exploited in the development of a new
[4+2] cycloadditions to generate alpha,3-dehydrotoluene intermediates followed
by their trapping as a zwitterionic or a diradical species. This new mode of
cycloaromatization is expected to display different reactivity compared to that
of hexadehydro Diels-Alder reaction, thereby significantly enriching the array
of thermal transformations available to multiynes. Broader impacts of this
project will involve various aspects of mechanistic study, natural product
synthesis, and development of medicinal and pharmaceutical lead compounds that
can serve as an ideal platform for student training at various levels, including
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.