* 2055036
* Developing Classroom-based Undergraduate Research Experiences in Antibody Bioengineering
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Sandra Porter, Digital World Biology
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 04/30/2024
* USD 583,053.00

Antibodies are proteins involved in vertebrate immune responses. They are also
used for medical and other purposes. For example, nearly 300 employers across
the United States develop antibody-based drugs or diagnostic tests, sell
antibodies as bioreagents, or provide antibody-related laboratory services. Not
surprisingly, antibodies are an important front-line tool for diagnosing and
treating COVID-19 infections. Bioengineering antibodies is an active area of
applied biotechnology research. Bioengineered antibodies have the potential to
reduce the costs of antibody manufacturing and storage, as well as to improve
antibody-based drug delivery. This project will enlist faculty, industry-
representatives, and two-year college students from across the United States to
participate in developing and implementing research projects in antibody
bioengineering. The research projects and laboratory protocols that derive from
this work will help two-year colleges incorporate high-impact and relevant
technologies into new or existing courses, thus providing a mechanism to engage
students while preparing them to work in fulfilling careers. In addition, the
project will provide expert information about COVID-19 vaccine development and
testing, thus benefitting students, instructors, and the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of the project include 1)
developing laboratory modules to support course-based undergraduate research
experiences related to antibody bioengineering, and 2) investigating the
feasibility of using hackathons as a novel strategy for engaging participants in
collaborative curriculum development. The project will develop learning modules
that each address computational skills (e.g., data science, structural biology,
bioinformatics), technical skills (e.g., mutagenesis, protein purification,
assays, staining), and employability skills (e.g., poster presentations,
communication, leadership). The modules will list related skill standards and
learning outcomes, making it easy for instructors to incorporate the modules in
their courses and for employers to evaluate portfolios of students participating
in the research. The project team has assembled a national advisory board
comprised of individuals with expertise in antibody technologies from
biotechnology companies, research institutions, and core laboratories. Board
members have agreed to provide guidance concerning project ideas and industry
needs, as well as to evaluate modules. An annual hackathon will be held where
the participants will organize in teams around one of the industry-suggested
projects or other new project ideas. During the hackathon, the teams will work
to refine the ideas, and to identify the modules and materials needed for each
project. Project pitches at the end of the hackathon will be used to determine
which projects will be selected for development and implementation. The project
team and faculty collaborators will continue to develop the selected modules,
implement the projects with students, and share findings. The ubiquitous
presence of antibodies in industry and research labs ensures that students who
learn antibody-related workforce-skills will be employable in nearly any locale.
The project can, thus, contribute to mitigation of COVID-19 impacts on
individuals who have been disproportionately impacted by the pandemic. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.