* 2055077
* Strengthening the Industry 4.0 Workforce through Virtual Reality Training Modules
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2021,10/31/2021
* Sheri Plain, Owensboro Community & Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 10/31/2021
* USD 593,464.00

As manufacturing contributes to higher export potential, better standards of
living, and more jobs in America, addressing the need for a skilled technical
workforce is crucial to support the future economic prosperity of the country.
Moreover, as a result of the multiplier effect, manufacturing also impacts the
broad economy, with every 100 jobs in a manufacturing facility creating 250 jobs
in other sectors. In 2018, Deloitte and the Manufacturing Institute conducted a
study on the manufacturing skills gap that revealed artificial intelligence,
advanced robotics, automation, analytics, and the Internet of Things are
emerging to transform the world of work (Industry 4.0) and are likely to create
even more jobs than they replace. Since mid-2017, job openings in manufacturing
have grown at double-digit rates, with a growing gap between open jobs and an
available skilled talent pool to fill them. To help bridge this gap, this
project of the Advanced Manufacturing Technical Education Collaborative
(https://amtecworkforce.org/) will create a virtual reality (VR) application
built on the zSpace platform that students can use to troubleshoot ten scenarios
on an industry simulator. These scenarios will be integrated into a credit-
bearing post-secondary capstone course for manufacturing students developed and
designed with input from industry and education subject matter experts.

This partnership between representatives of industry and advanced technological
education will ensure that the project strengthens the competency and global
competitiveness of the advanced manufacturing workforce. The VR application and
curricula will be field tested at targeted Advanced Manufacturing Technical
Education Collaborative partner sites across the country, as well as with
students and instructors currently using zSpace’s virtual reality platform. In
addition, an exploratory curriculum will be developed to engage K-12 students in
gaming-like simulations to recruit youth into advanced manufacturing technical
training. Several objectives will guide the execution of the project. First is
to engage secondary students in Industry 4.0 advanced manufacturing concepts
through field-testing a newly created virtual reality “game-like” application.
Second is to train post-secondary students preparing to be manufacturing
technicians to enter the workforce with a basic understanding of Industry 4.0
technologies and the ability to apply them successfully in the workplace
setting. Third is to increase the aptitude of secondary and post-secondary
faculty in Industry 4.0 concepts and the use of virtual reality technology by
providing comprehensive professional development. Three primary contributions to
the field are anticipated. One is an expanded set of partnerships between
academia, industry, and others to develop technician training that aligns with
the growing Industry 4.0 infrastructure. Two is the improvement of secondary and
post-secondary student learning in emerging Industry 4.0 technologies and
virtual reality applications. Third is the lessening of disruptions of
manufacturing technician training during a pandemic or similar event that
creates a need for remote learning. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's economy. As a result, the
project has the potential to contribute to improving the national STEM
workforce.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.