* 2055138
* RET Site: Culturally Responsive Energy Engineering Education in Rural/Reservation Elementary Schools
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Rebekah Hammack, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 06/30/2024
* USD 600,000.00

The new Montana Engineering Education Research Center (MEERC) RET Site will
provide unique professional development opportunities for at least thirty rural
and reservation elementary teachers to engage in authentic energy research and
engineering education, and then share these experiences with their colleagues
and students. Evidence shows that young students who identify with engineering
are more likely to pursue engineering careers, and that teachers with higher
self-efficacy have students with better learning outcomes. The MEERC RET Site
will focus on improving teachers’ self-efficacy for engineering education
through an immersive six-week experience combining hands-on energy research
within engineering faculty laboratories with customized field trips to energy
industry facilities and co-located cultural venues and structured curriculum
development activities. Elementary teacher participants will work directly with
engineering and education faculty, research staff and students on energy topics
ranging from building energy systems and biomass energy to sustainable
transportation infrastructure and innovative materials batteries, wind turbines
and solar cells. The MEERC RET Site will also convene a diverse industry
advisory board (IAB) comprised of regional energy industry representatives to
share their career experiences and facilitate customized tours of industry-scale
energy facilities including a conventional power plant, a petroleum refinery, a
wind turbine farm, a cement plant, a hydroelectric dam, and a community-scale
solar power plant. Additionally, the Site IAB will work directly with the
participating elementary teachers to help them develop and implement energy-
engineering curricula, including facilitating engaging in-class demonstrations
and visits (virtual or actual) to nearby industrial facilities. Through
customized, expert-guided and reflective tours of cultural venues and curriculum
development activities, the MEERC RET Site Project Team will also work with
teachers on essential understandings from Montana’s Constitutional Article,
Indian Education for All, which aims to recognize and preserve the distinct and
unique cultural heritages of American Indians. Throughout the academic year, the
Site Project Team will help the elementary teachers develop, integrate, and
assess culturally responsive energy curricula within their rural/reservation
classrooms. Hundreds of rural and reservation elementary students will be
directly impacted by the year-round development, integration and assessment of
culturally responsive engineering education modules within their elementary
science curricula via this interdisciplinary project. Structured two-way
knowledge exchanges highlighting elementary teachers’ perspectives and assets
will help create a collegial and collaborative ecosystem among academia,
industry, and elementary teachers aimed at promoting more inclusive STEM
identity formation opportunities, and ultimately a more diverse STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three overarching goals of the new Montana Engineering
Education Research Center (MEERC) RET Site are to (1) promote inclusive
engineering identity formation among diverse rural and reservation students by
(2) increasing elementary teacher self-efficacy in culturally responsive
engineering education via (3) establishing a collaborative ecosystem among
regional elementary schools, industry and academia focused on energy research
and diversifying the future engineering workforce. To achieve these goals, the
three-year MEERC RET Site Project will facilitate an engaging, holistic and
integrated six-week summer experience for at least thirty elementary teachers,
which (1) provides authentic energy-related research experiences within
engineering laboratories and with appropriate scaffolding and connections to
elementary settings, coupled with (2) customized, guided and reflective tours of
Montana energy industry facilities and nearby cultural venues, all while (3)
fostering development, integration and sharing of unique and high-impact energy-
related engineering curricula in diverse elementary classrooms. Motivated by the
efficacy of early STEM identify formation in students pursuing STEM careers and
leveraging both existing partnerships and diverse energy-related research, pre-
and in-service elementary teachers (grades 3-5) will be recruited from Montana’s
rural and reservation communities to participate in the MEERC RET Site at
Montana State University (MSU) in Bozeman. Following structured orientations,
trainings and two-way knowledge exchange opportunities, Site participants will
engage in hands-on energy-related research experiences, working with engineering
faculty and students and contributing directly to funded research projects such
as building energy systems, biomass energy conversions, fluid flow processes,
materials for energy conversion technologies, and sustainable transportation
systems. Site participants will tour regional energy-related industrial
facilities, including a conventional electric power plant, an oil refinery, a
hydroelectric dam, a wind farm, a cement plant, and solar power projects. These
site visits will be facilitated by MSU engineering alumni, who will comprise an
Industry Advisory Board (IAB) for the Site, which will also engage directly with
teachers and classrooms. A unique and integral feature of the MEERC RET Site
will be customized, expert-guided and research-informed tours of regionally co-
located venues with local Indigenous cultural significance, including a buffalo
jump, pictograph caves, various museums, and monuments. Participants will also
engage in research-informed activities to help build cultural awareness and
incorporate indigenous wisdom and engineering practices, such as tipi raising,
hide tanning and food preparation - as they relate to energy. Throughout the
six-week experience, teachers will work with education experts to develop their
own ways to integrate energy-related engineering educational experiences within
their diverse elementary class settings. The Site Project Team will also work
with teachers on essential understandings from Montana’s Constitutional Article,
Indian Education for All (IEFA), which aims to recognize and preserve the unique
cultural heritages of American Indians. During the following academic terms, the
Site Project Team will continue to support participating teachers and their
integration and assessment of engineering classroom activities developed through
their Site experiences. Project products will be shared widely through
established venues at MSU and elsewhere, including teachengineering.org, the
American Society for Engineering Education PreK-12 Facebook Group, and a newly
established Open Education Resource hub being designed and built by the MSU
Library in tandem with Montana PBS Learning Media, which reaches thousands of
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.