* 2055646
* Expanding the Engineering Technician Pipeline for Industry 4.0
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Mark Gerko, Columbus State Community College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 04/30/2024
* USD 397,014.00

Automation of manufacturing using smart technology has been called the fourth
industrial revolution or Industry 4.0. This automation is making major changes
to the workplace as manufacturers deploy a host of connected devices to support
smart manufacturing. As a result, new educational programs are needed to prepare
the skilled technicians who can implement and maintain these new technologies.
In central Ohio, employers have expressed a need for highly skilled engineering
technicians to support their Industry 4.0 efforts. One such effort is
implementation of collaborative robots or cobots, which were developed to
interact with workers and other digital devices in a shared workspace. The
increased demand for cobots in industry creates a need for raising students’
awareness of technical careers and for developing new skills training
opportunities. This project will build on an existing outreach model to help
high school students and high school teachers learn about Industry 4.0
technologies through a project-based learning approach. In addition, it will
develop collaborative robotics courses, implement a new collaborative robotics
lab facility, and create an Industry 4.0 certificate. Overall, the project
efforts are expected to increase the number of Industry 4.0-ready
technicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to increase the
number of skilled engineering technicians who can implement and maintain
Industry 4.0 technologies. This project will build on existing learning
resources for Industry 4.0 and develop new courses for collaborative robotics.
To support these changes in the engineering technology course offerings, a new
collaborative robotics lab will be established for hands-on training. With input
from industry partners, the project will expand opportunities for incumbent
workers by developing an Industry 4.0 certificate program. Recruitment efforts
will bring high school students and teachers from four schools in the region to
the College for three Manufacturing Summer Institutes each year, where students
and teachers will learn about Industry 4.0 technologies in two separate tracks.
The institutes will help prepare secondary students for technical education
programs and help teachers design curricula that include Industry 4.0
technologies. The project will be evaluated through a mixed methods approach,
using content analysis and descriptive statistics to assess project deliverables
and outcomes. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the nation’s economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.