* 2055068
* NSF-DFG Echem: Future Fuels and Chemicals from Electrocatalytic Upgrading: Advancing Kinetic Understanding using Operando Spectroscopic Approaches and Quantum Chemical Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* James Jackson, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This project was awarded through the “NSF-DFG Lead Agency Activity in
Electrosynthesis and Electrocatalysis (NSF-DFG EChem)" opportunity, a
collaborative solicitation that involves the National Science Foundation and
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG). This is a collaborative project between
researchers at Michigan State University and Technische Universität Braunschweig
(TUB) in Germany. Electrobiofuels are fuels that couple the energy from two
renewable sources: biomass and electricity from renewables such as from wind
turbines and solar photovoltaics. By cycling the renewable carbon in the 1.3
billion tons/year of plant biomass that will become available in the United
States, electrobiofuels could displace fossil carbon-based fuels and the
resulting greenhouse gas addition to the atmosphere. Key needs are carbon-,
hydrogen- and energy-efficient technologies to convert renewable plant matter
into liquid transportation fuels. Carbon efficiency is especially critical; in
the U.S., there is only enough carbon in plant biomass to displace about one-
half of the 2019 level of petroleum usage, even assuming high harvest yields,
perfect conversion, and no net growth in fuel demand. This project addresses a
path to renewable hydro¬carbons fuels and chemicals via biomass fast pyro¬lysis,
electro¬catalytic hydro¬genation (ECH) in decen¬tral¬ized facilities, and
further upgrading at petro¬leum refineries. Much is known about fast pyrolysis
and upgrading of pyrolysis bio-oils via thermal hydrogenation, but the use of
ECH to partially upgrade and stabilize bio-oil is largely unprecedent¬ed. This
project will map the mechanisms of ECH and the factors that limit its
performance and to improve accuracy and decrease the uncertainties in ECH
reaction and process models. Through MSU’s College of Engineering Detroit Area
Pre-College Engineering Summer Programs, high school students will be hosted for
engineering science interactive experiences. The PIs will also run an after-
school program with the Boys and Girls Club of Lansing, Michigan, to introduce
middle school students to electrochemistry. These programs will address the need
for biofuels to reduce climate change and discuss with the student researchers
the basic principles of electrochemical engineering. Students will also be
introduced to computational chemistry software that can be used for molecular
modeling. Lesson plans, presentations, and laboratory methods developed as part
of the collaboration will be shared amongst the US and German investigators.
These Broader Impact activities will positively engage middle and high school
students in the US and Germany by demonstrating organic chemical
electrosynthesis, a topic not typically seen in high school curriculums.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this German-US collaboration is to study
electrocatalytic hydrogenation (ECH) of fast pyrolysis bio-oils as a path to
chemical and hydrocarbon fuel precursors. Fast pyrolysis uses heat without
oxygen to convert biomass into liquid bio-oil, solid biochar, and combustible
gases. However, bio-oil’s corrosiveness and reactive instability limit its use
in conventional fuel and chemical processes. ECH saturates carbon-carbon and
carbon-oxygen double bonds, as well as the delocalized pi systems of aromatic
compounds, in aqueous media at temperatures and pressures much milder than those
used in hydroprocessing. Thus, reduction via ECH can stabilize the bio-oil,
making it compatible with conventional manufacturing infrastructure. Core
activities of the project include electrocatalytic organic transformations,
catalyst evaluation by in operando techniques, quantum chemical modeling,
reaction engineering and reactor design leading to fundamental knowledge
supporting system optimization and scale-up. As part of the research
collaboration, US graduate students will conduct in operando measurements in
Germany, while German graduate students will perform quantum chemical modeling
in the US. With further development, ECH may yield “finished” hydrocarbon fuels,
enabling rural production of electrobiofuels. Data from experiments and modeling
will be used to update technoeconomic and life cycle analyses, assessing cost
feasibility and the potential for “carbon negative” production of liquid fuels.
These analyses are needed to de-risk the eventual commercialization of fast
pyrolysis and ECH as steps in production of renewable liquid fuels. Such
operations are needed to reduce the deleterious effects of climate change while
still benefitting from the installed hydrocarbon fuel distribution
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.