* 2055074
* Increasing the Inclusion of Women in the Information Technology and Cybersecurity Skilled Technical Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Nelly Delessy, Miami Dade College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 04/30/2024
* USD 592,566.00

As the digital revolution continues to change the way people live and work, the
need for a highly skilled computing workforce also continues to grow. Diversity
contributes to increased productivity in highly skilled occupations, but women
are not yet equitably represented in many computing fields. Nationally, only 26%
of professional computing occupations in the 2019 workforce were held by women.
Black women represented only 3% and Hispanic women represented only 2% of this
workforce. More specifically, women remain underrepresented in the high-demand
information technology/ cybersecurity fields, for which job openings and wages
are rising rapidly. To ensure the vitality of the information technology and
cybersecurity enterprise, the nation must increase the number of women in these
fields. This project aims to expand opportunities for women in information
technology/ cybersecurity by using strategic outreach, supported by experts, to
recruit women, and by supporting these women through completion of their
education and training. By increasing women's access to computing jobs, this
project can help to mitigate the disproportionate impact of COVID-19 on career
entry and progression of women in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching vision for this project is to increase the educational attainment of
women in high-technology fields that are driving the nation’s economy, with
emphasis on Information Technology and Cybersecurity. To accomplish this vision,
the project team will implement best practices for supporting women students,
including a comprehensive set of activities that include development of the
Community Alliance for Women in Technology, faculty professional development,
optimized outreach strategies, a summer Tech Immersion JumpStart, a virtual
group mentoring program, proactive academic advising, promotion/support for the
attainment of industry certifications, and specialized programming to enhance
the student experience. This programming includes events focused on career
development, a Women in Technology Student Organization, and a high-tech
internship program. Expected project outcomes include: (1) broadening
understanding of the impact that professional development has on college faculty
and how the delivery of new pedagogies geared to support women in technology
affects success and progression of technology coursework; (2) developing best
practices for non-academic supports (such as pre-college summer immersion
programs and mentoring) that are effective for recruiting and retaining students
in technology fields, particularly Black and Hispanic women who are first
generation college students; (3) gaining insights into the effects of applied
learning experiences (such as internships and soft-skills preparation) on the
number of female graduates entering technology fields; and (4) advancing
understanding of long-term measures needed to cultivate meaningful and lasting
change that can scale to other fields that would benefit from greater diversity
and inclusion. This project's emphasis on career preparation with mentoring
support may be replicable and sustainable at other institutions interested in
increasing the number of women and first-generation students in the skilled
technical workforce. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation’s economy.   &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.