* 2055313
* Strengthening Community College and Workforce Partnerships in Construction Management
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Azhar Mahmood, Hudson County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 298,806.00

Employment in construction management is expected to grow 11% over the next ten
years. In response to this workforce demand, Hudson County Community College
recently developed an Associate in Applied Science degree program in
Construction Management. This degree includes transferable general education
classes as well as relevant training in construction management. Current
construction management students are trained on new construction methods,
protocols, testing procedures, engineering drawings, software, cost estimation,
and management principles. However, the rapid rate of change in construction
technology requires continuous curriculum updates and additional real-world
experiences prior to graduation. The project will work to achieve these needs by
revitalizing the Industry Education Advisory Board as a Business and Industry
Leadership Team. This change is expected to result in increased engagement of
potential employers and improved outcomes for students through academic and
industrial co-leadership of the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this
project are to (1) develop structured partnerships with local employers to
increase internship opportunities and employment for Construction Management
students and graduates, and (2) ensure rigor and relevance of the academic
program in partnership with the Industry Education Advisory Board. It is
expected that these changes will result in training of qualified employable
graduates in 12 to 36 months of project initiation. Hudson County Community
College will continually evaluate the success of these initiatives, including
the quality and number of partnerships created, as well as the number of
internships, apprenticeships, and new job opportunities for Construction
Management students. This effort is anticipated to enhance eight courses in the
degree program, and enable students to sit for national licensing exams as they
proceed. Co-leadership with the Industry Education Advisory Board will allow
Hudson County Community College to continually align their academic programs to
keep pace with changes in construction management. The project plans to recruit
and retain veterans, female students, minority, non-traditional students,
students with special needs, and incumbent workers. Hudson County Community
College will share the results of their work among the other 19 community
colleges in New Jersey and the New Jersey Community College Consortium for
Workforce and Economic Development. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.