* 2055680
* Virtual Reality to Improve Students’ Understanding of the Extremes of Scale in STEM
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Cesar Delgado, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lori Takeuchi
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,342,682.00

This project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports
work that advances fundamental research on STEM learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.
This project will investigate how students’ understanding of scale and number
sense (numeracy) can be improved in virtual reality (VR). Research shows that
students of all ages hold inaccurate ideas about the size of scientifically
relevant entities. For instance, students have difficulty distinguishing the
magnitude of difference between the sizes of molecules and cells, or between
Earth’s moon and the sun. Because many STEM fields—from virology to
astronomy—involve work conducted at extremes of scale, students must develop
accurate conceptions of scales that exist well beyond their everyday experience
of the world. An inaccurate understanding of scale can obscure the applicability
of numeric representation to the real world and become a barrier for entry to
STEM. This project will create Scale Worlds, an immersive virtual environment,
where students can see various scientific entities in relation to their own
bodies and conduct realistic size comparisons that cannot be replicated in
everyday experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inside Scale Worlds, scientific
entities—such as a blue whale and a water molecule—will be distributed among
distinct environments, each of which corresponds to a different exponent in
scientific notation. Students will be able to see their own bodies and increase
or decrease in size relative to these entities, with numeric symbols in
scientific and standard notation serving as the primary means of navigation.
Development of Scale Worlds will include the iterative design of 31 distinct
environments with multimodal experiential cues that reinforce scale, analytical
evaluation with usability experts in VR, and formative evaluation with non-
expert students. A comparative study with middle school and undergraduate
students will assign participants to a projection-based virtual environment (or
“CAVE”), head-mounted VR display, or non-VR desktop simulation condition, with
the desktop condition being the lowest level of immersion. A subsequent study
will observe students’ precise body movements along with corresponding
verbalizations in two versions of Scale Worlds: one with the full feature set of
structural elements and multimodal experiential cues, and the other with a
reduced feature set. This will offer insight into the impact of these features
on engagement. Project outcomes include: (a) two validated versions of a scaling
environment that reinforces scientific and standard notation; (b) virtual
reality usability guidelines; (c) recommendations for STEM educators on
technology use; and (d) publicly accessible lesson plans for leveraging Scale
Worlds for STEM learning and numeracy, which will be developed in partnership
with practicing teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.