* 2055455
* ANT LIA - Viral Ecogenomics of the Southern Ocean: Unifying Omics and Ecological Networks to Advance our Understanding of Antarctic Microbial Ecosystem Function
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Melissa Duhaime, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 04/30/2024
* USD 884,192.00

Part 1: Non-technical description:&lt;br/&gt;It is well known that the Southern
Ocean plays an important role in global carbon cycling and also receives a
disproportionately large influence of climate change. The role of marine viruses
on ocean productivity is largely understudied, especially in this global region.
This team proposes to use combination of genomics, flow cytometry, and network
modeling to test the hypothesis that viral biogeography, infection networks, and
viral impacts on microbial metabolism can explain variations in net community
production (NCP) and carbon cycling in the Southern Ocean. The project includes
the training of a postdoctoral scholar, graduate students and undergraduate
students. It also includes the development of a new Polar Sci ReachOut program
in partnership with the University of Michigan Museum of Natural History
especially targeted to middle-school students and teachers and the general
public. The team will also produce a Science for Tomorrow (SFT) program for use
in middle schools in metro-Detroit communities and lead a summer Research
Experience for Teachers (RET) fellows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical
description: &lt;br/&gt;The study will leverage hundreds of existing samples
collected for microbes and viruses from the Antarctic Circumpolar Expedition
(ACE). These samples provide the first contiguous survey of viral diversity and
microbial communities around Antarctica. Viral networks are being studied in the
context of biogeochemical data to model community networks and predict net
community production (NCP), which will provide a way to evaluate the role of
viruses in Southern Ocean carbon cycling. Using cutting edge molecular and flow
cytometry approaches, this project addresses the following questions: 1) How/why
are Southern Ocean viral populations distributed across environmental gradients?
2a) Do viruses interfere with "keystone" metabolic pathways and biogeochemical
processes of microbial communities in the Southern Ocean? 2b) Does nutrient
availability or other environmental variables drive changes in virus-microbe
infection networks in the Southern Ocean? Results will be used to develop and
evaluate generative models of NCP predictions that incorporate the importance of
viral traits and virus-host interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.