* 2055164
* Targeting Children's Beliefs and Misconceptions Concerning COVID-19
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Susan Gelman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,518,000.00

Developing effective means of educating children about disease transmission is a
matter of vital concern, not only for scientific literacy, but also for public
health. This project, conducted by researchers from the University of Michigan,
will map out what children at different ages and their guardians understand
about viral contagion, such as the transmission of COVID-19, and, based on the
findings, will develop and test the effectiveness of a home-based educational
intervention delivered by means of a picture book. Building on pilot research,
three studies will provide a rigorous, cross-age assessment with US children in
grades K-5 in three distinct community contexts. Research questions include: At
what ages do children understand aspects of viral transmission that are non-
obvious or invisible, such as asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic carriers, or the
potential for objects and surfaces to carry infection? At what ages can children
go beyond isolated facts they have learned and figure out what to do in new
situations? How is children's biological reasoning influenced by non-biological
factors, such whether a potential carrier is a friend or a stranger? How does
children's reasoning about a global pandemic that has already massively
disrupted their daily lives (COVID-19) compare with more ordinary and innocuous
illness (the common cold)? Can young children successfully learn about core
aspects of disease transmission by means of an illustrated storybook? Targeting
children's beliefs and misconceptions of COVID-19 provides an unprecedented
opportunity to determine effective ways of teaching core biological concepts in
the elementary-school years. Findings from the project will inform parents,
educators, and public health professionals regarding gaps and misconceptions in
children's understanding of the transmission of viral disease in general, and
COVID-19 in particular, as well as evidence-based scientific data on how most
effectively to target educational efforts with children to improve both
scientific literacy and adherence to public health guidelines. It will also be a
source of theoretically significant data of central interest to STEM education,
regarding how to teach children about vital scientific processes that they
cannot see, how non-biological concepts influence children’s biological
reasoning, and the role of community context in biological understandings. This
award is made by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that
advances the fundamental research literature on STEM learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team of researchers will individually interview 1,440
children ages 5-12 years and their parents to assess children's understanding of
the biological processes of viral transmission, comparing COVID-19 with the
common cold. Building on preliminary work by the investigators, the project will
advance foundational knowledge on children’s intuitive understanding of
biological mechanisms and on the use of picture books in educational
interventions. Study 1 will address children's understanding of how and why
viruses work and spread, with a battery of child-friendly tasks that assess:
incubation periods (lag between infection and disease onset), asymptomatic
hosts, that viruses can survive on a surface or object (such as a doorknob), and
that viruses can gain access to the body through the eyes, nose, and mouth.
Study 2 will focus on who may contract, transmit, or suffer the consequences of
viral disease, and the role of both biological and non-biological factors (such
as a person's nationality, language, or familiarity) in these judgments. Study 3
will assess a home-based educational intervention that targets key
misconceptions regarding viral transmission, with the core notion of making
invisible concepts visible. This intervention will systematically manipulate the
role of anthropomorphic language and imagery (treating the virus as if it were a
tiny creature) to determine the effects of these commonly employed choices on
children's learning. Finally, the project team will partner with a natural
history museum to design, mount, and test the effectiveness of an exhibit
regarding viral transmission, including a media component (an interactive game)
that will be portable to other users beyond the museum itself. This exhibit will
be directly informed by the proposed research, with the aim of improving the
public's knowledge of COVID transmission, and viral disease transmission more
generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.