* 2055171
* Geometric Function Theory in Euclidean and Metric Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Piotr Hajlasz, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 280,000.00

Calculus has a myriad of applications in science. In the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries the notions of calculus were studied for functions defined
on general spaces called smooth manifolds. The last thirty years have witnessed
the emergence of new directions in mathematics—calculus, now called analysis, on
more general spaces, called metric spaces—leading to new bridges between the
distant worlds of non-smooth and smooth spaces. Analysis on metric spaces,
together with quantitative topology, is nowadays an active and independent field
bringing together researchers from disparate parts of the mathematical spectrum.
It has far-reaching applications. The current project aims at investigating a
broad spectrum of questions in analysis on metric spaces and quantitative
topology while including other related topics in analysis. The work emphasizes
how similar techniques can be successfully employed to answer seemingly
unrelated questions in different areas of mathematics. The project also includes
the training of graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The common themes of the
project are the analytic, geometric, and topological aspects of the theory of
functions and mappings with low order of regularity (convex functions, Sobolev
functions, Lipschitz and Hölder continuous mappings, mappings that are one time
continuously differentiable, etc.). Such mappings appear in several areas of
contemporary mathematics, and the project attempts to create bridges between
different areas of analysis, geometry, and topology. More precisely the
investigator will study topics in the following areas: (1) Approximation of
convex functions; (2) Sign of the Jacobian of Sobolev homeomorphisms with
connections to topology and the calculus of variations; (3) Homotopy groups of
spheres and geometry of mappings whose derivatives have low rank, with
connections to quantitative topology; (4) Approximation of mappings whose
derivatives have low rank; (5) Area and coarea formulas in metric spaces; (6)
Generalization of the implicit function theorem to metric spaces; (7)
Quantitative implicit function theorem and factorization through trees; (8)
Analytic properties of Hölder continuous mappings in the Heisenberg groups; (9)
Lipschitz and Hölder homotopy groups of the Heisenberg groups; (10) Whitney
extension theorem for the Heisenberg group with applications to approximation of
contact mappings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.