* 2055420
* The neurobiological mechanisms underlying gesture’s role in mathematical learning
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Marc Berman, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,289,384.00

All speakers gesture when they talk. Gestures are a type of action––an action
done in the air that does not directly affect objects. Both gestures and
actions-on-objects can promote learning, but having gesture as part of a math
lesson makes it easier to remember and extend that lesson than having action as
part of the lesson. This program of research uses neural data to figure out why.
Two hypotheses, both of which might be correct, are possible: (1) Gesture
promotes learning by helping children abstract beyond particular exemplars used
in instruction. (2) Action impedes learning by tying children to the particulars
of the exemplars used in instruction. It is difficult to disentangle these two
mechanisms at the behavioral level because both hypotheses lead to the same
outcome––better learning following gesture than action. The research uses
neuroimaging to measure activity during a math lesson and determine whether
different areas of the brain are activated during gesture- vs. action-based
instruction. Understanding the neural processes that underlie learning through
gesture vs. action can help distinguish between these two hypotheses, and lead
to more finely tuned recommendations to teachers for using these tools in the
classroom. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program aims to distinguish
between the two hypotheses in a math lesson under two conditions: when children
observe an instructor produce gestures or actions (Study 1); when children
themselves produce gestures or actions (Study 2). Study 1 uses fMRI (functional
magnetic resonance imaging) and Study 2 uses fNIRS (functional near infrared
spectroscopy) to measure neural activity while 8- to 10-year-old children in 3rd
and 4th grade receive gesture- or action-based instruction in the pre-algebra
concept of math equivalence (the notion that two sides of an equation must be
equal). Neural activity in abstraction areas is expected to occur during gesture
instruction; neural activity in object areas is expected to occur during action
instruction). Differences in neural processes during instruction will be used to
predict children’s learning outcomes after instruction. fNIRS is a new
technology that has been underused in educational neuroscience, but has the
potential to be used in the classroom to measure neural activity during learning
from multiple students simultaneously. This work is an early step in testing
that possibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the EHR Core
Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances fundamental research
on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM,
and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.