* 2055436
* Using Game Design Mechanics as Metaphors to Enhance Learning of Introductory Programming Concepts
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Magy Seif El-Nasr, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2021
* USD 103,231.00

This project tackles the urgent needs of the nation to engage people of all ages
in computational thinking and help them learn basic computer science concepts
with a unique and innovative approach of structured in-game computer program
coding. Researchers will explore the design and development of a 3D puzzle-based
game, called May's Journey, in which players solve an environmental maze by
using the game's pseudo code to manipulate game objects. The game is designed to
teach introductory but foundational concepts of computer programming including
abstraction, modularity, reusability, and debugging by focusing players on logic
and concepts while asking them to type simple instructions in a simplified
programming language designed for novices. The game design in this project
differs from today's block-based programming learning approaches that are often
too far from actual computer code, and also differs from professional
programming languages which are too complex for novices. The game and its
embedded programming language learning are designed to be responsive to the
progress of the learner throughout the game, transitioning from pseudo code to
the embedded programming language itself. Error messages for debugging are also
designed to be adaptive to players' behavior in the game. Using extensive log
data collected from people playing the game, researchers can study how people
learn computer programming. Such knowledge can advance understanding of the
learning processes in computer programming education. Additionally, this work
emphasizes the use of games as informal learning environments as they are
accessible and fun, drawing attention and retention of many learners of
different age groups with the potential to change attitudes towards computer
programming across different populations. This project is co-funded by the STEM
+ Computing (STEM+C) program that supports research and development to
understand the integration of computing and computational thinking in STEM
learning, and the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program that funds
innovative research, approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings
with its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's formative and summative
evaluation methods, including surveys, expert reviews of learners' computer code
developed in the game, and interviews, are used to gauge learners' engagement as
well as learning. In exploring learning, researchers aim to understand how
players build implicit computer science knowledge through gameplay and how that
gameplay relates to their performance on external transfer tasks. The project
will answer the following three research questions: (1) Can observers reliably
detect and label patterns of gameplay that provide evidence of learning or
misconceptions regarding the four computer science constructs - abstraction,
modularity, debugging and semantics - that learners exhibit playing May's
Journey? (2) How does learner's implicit knowledge of these computer science
constructs change over time and do those patterns vary by gender and prior
programming experiences? (3) Is there a strong correlation between implicit
learning measures and transfer of CS concepts: modularity, debugging, semantics,
and abstraction? How do these correlations vary across elements of the game?
This work will result in several outcomes: game design metaphors tested for
their learning and engagement value that can be abstracted and embedded in
different games. This project will also contribute patterns and an understanding
of how people learn and engage in problem solving using concepts of abstraction,
modularity, debugging and semantics. These outcomes will lead to advancement in
knowledge in the learning sciences as well as the design of educational games
that enrich STEM learning, particularly in programming and computational
thinking. In addition, this project will engage female participants and
underserved populations through partnering organizations including National
Girls Collaborative project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.