* 2055250
* Fortifying Cybersecurity and Computing Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Elizabeth Hawthorne, Prince George's Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 599,839.00

The need for a highly skilled cybersecurity and IT workforce is well documented
and unequivocal. “Demand for security skills, once limited primarily to
government and the defense industry, has spread throughout the economy” (Burning
Glass, 2019). “Job growth is predicted to continue to outpace the number of
available qualified workforce” (CyberSeek.org, 2020). Community and Technical
Colleges respond to this need through their education of the skilled technical
workforce. This project aims to strengthen and grow a specific component of that
workforce, namely the nation’s cybersecurity/computing professionals. The
project’s approach is to work to increase the quality of the requests for
external support that these institutions seek to improve cybersecurity education
at their campuses. Towards this end the project investigators plan to attract a
diversity of community and technical college teams, composed of faculty, grant
writers, and selected administrators and staff and provide team-based
professional development designed to increase the competitiveness and
innovativeness of each teams’ proposed efforts in support of the education of
the cybersecurity/computing skilled technical workforce.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In each year, up to twelve community and technical college teams of
two faculty members and a grant writer will be accepted through an application
process to participate in this team-based professional development and mentoring
program. Each team will be carefully matched with and supported by a seasoned
mentor who has been trained through a series of coaching sessions by the
leadership team. Essential elements of the program, including mentor training,
pre-workshop mentee preparation, a multi-day workshop, and post-workshop
webinars coupled with team mentoring throughout the entire process, are designed
to help participants crystalize their innovative ideas and develop competitive
proposals for external support. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.