* 2055100
* RAPID: Post-Fire Geomorphic Change Detection in a Small Mountainous River Estuary
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2020,10/31/2021
* Andrew Gray, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 10/31/2021
* USD 19,360.00

This project will focus on the impacts of flooding and debris flows on the
landforms and physical functioning of the estuary of Scott Creek, California
after wildfire. The Scott Creek watershed almost completely burned in the
August, 2020 CZU Lightning Complex Fire, and in the recent past the estuary has
experienced dramatic changes from direct human management and sea-level rise.
Because fire has destabilized hillslopes and increased the production of runoff,
Scott Creek will likely flood its estuary with water and sediment during even
relatively minor storm events. Mountainous coastal regions prone to wildfire,
such as those of the US Pacific Coast, are also concentrations of human lives,
infrastructure and economic importance. Better understanding of the processes
controlling the impacts of debris flows on coastal systems after wildfire is
critical to informing effective management and restoration of these systems in
the context of previous human modification and sea-level rise. The scientific
advances from this project will also inform hazard management for the protection
of human health and prosperity in coastal regions impacted by wildfire. This
work is conducted by a research group dedicated to creating opportunities for
underrepresented groups in the geosciences, which will be advanced through this
project’s conduct, future analysis of resultant datasets with additional early
career scientists, and incorporation of results into educational materials at
the University of California, Riverside.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
provide urgently needed, perishable data supporting a novel opportunity to
investigate the impacts of wildfire on landform change in the Scott Creek
watershed. Surveying and sampling will be conducted before and after each
rainstorm or rainstorm cluster during the 2021 wet season. The ground surface of
the estuary, both above and below standing water, will be surveyed using high
resolution laser scanning and echo sounder techniques, respectively. Sediment
and water samples will also be collected from locations throughout the estuary
and investigated for physical and chemical characteristics that provide
information about sediment source and hydrodynamic transport conditions. These
data will be leveraged into a more comprehensive study of longer term (multi-
year) geomorphic and ecological changes in the estuary following the fire with a
focus on the processes contributing to the development of landforms and sediment
deposits, and their impacts on physical and ecological
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.