* 2055188
* Excellence in Research: Combustion of Bio-derived Isobutanol as an Emerging Fuel for Improved Fuel Efficiency and Economy
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Yuhao Xu, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2024
* USD 268,658.00

This project concerns a study of the combustion performance of an emerging bio-
derived liquid fuel, isobutanol, and its mixtures with gasoline in an
environment that promotes spherical flames during droplet combustion. The
relevance of this work stems from the fact that combustion engines such as
gasoline engines are powered by petroleum-based fuels, and the supplies of these
fuels are limited. Therefore, the continuous consumption of these non-renewable
liquid fuels and concerns over the harmful emissions have highlighted the need
for renewable biofuels with sustainable production and reduced emissions. In
this context, this work aims to provide a fundamental understanding of the
combustion dynamics of biobutanol and its blends with practical transportation
fuels to determine their potential performance in combustion engines. These
efforts will significantly benefit society by guiding the development of
improved fuel efficiency and providing insights into reducing harmful emissions,
and thus offering solutions to climate change. Broader impacts from an
educational perspective for this project include providing underrepresented
minority students at both undergraduate and graduate levels with opportunities
to conduct independent research, discover new knowledge, and explore practical
applications. Furthermore, this work will offer various K-12 outreach
opportunities. These programs will engage more minority students, attract them
to pursue a career in science and engineering, and thus build a more diverse
workforce in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to deepen the
fundamental understanding of the combustion processes of bio-derived liquid
fuels as promising additives or alternatives for petroleum-based fuels. The
specific objectives of this project are to (1) establish a cost-effective
Multiphase Droplet Burning Facility at Prairie View A&amp;M University to build
the institutional research capacity as a Historically Black College and
University in the areas of droplet combustion and thermo-fluids; (2) build an
experimental platform to quantitatively extract Soot Volume Fraction during the
combustion of isobutanol and its mixtures with petroleum-based fuels; and (3)
develop an experimental database for the combustion of isobutanol to evaluate
its potential for being a desirable additive for gasoline to reduce the
consumption of petroleum-based liquid fuels as well as harmful emissions during
combustion. Results obtained will advance the understanding of how bio-derived
fuels combust in the context of petroleum-based liquid fuels. Experimental
combustion data collected will also be a valuable database for the research
community for developing, validating, and optimizing numerical
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.