* 2055192
* Collaborative Research: Flow Channel Control of Substorm Expansion Phase Spatial Coverage and Duration
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Lawrence Lyons, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Liu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 379,856.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Space weather describes the
variations in the space environment between the Sun and Earth. Space weather
often manifests as substorms, where a beautiful auroral display is accompanied
by an electrical current in space which can impact systems and technologies in
orbit and on Earth, such as spacecraft and power distribution systems. The
substorm is localized in time (a few hours) and space (polar region). The space
weather effects of a substorm depend not only on its peak instantaneous
strength, but also on the highly variable spatial extent and duration. Despite
their significant importance, the spatial extent and duration has received
little attention due to the lack of ideas on what may be the important factors.
It has recently become known that flow channels of charged particles within the
auroral oval (the ring of aurora above the Earth’s geomagnetic North Pole) that
move from higher to lower latitude are a crucial feature of the oval and are
responsible for the onset of a substorm. This research project will focus on the
role of these flow channels that occur after substorm onset and evaluate whether
they play a crucial role in controlling the local time extent, the poleward
expansion, and the duration of the substorm. This project will benefit society
by advancing understanding of space weather disturbances, which significantly
affect space and susceptible ground systems. More specifically, current space
weather forecasting has some validity over long time scales, but severely lacks
the ability to predict onset, duration, and spatial coverage of short term
(e.g., substorm and streamer time scales) disturbances. This project is directly
aimed at this issue by examining what determines spatial and temporal
development of individual disturbances. The project will also set further
precedents on coordinated use of ground-based capabilities to attack major
facets of coupled magnetosphere-ionosphere physics. The team will promote
research partnerships and coordination between the relevant research activities
at UCLA, Boston University, and Penn State to publicize and develop new
approaches for maximizing return from NSF observing facilities. The research
will also continue to provide material and motivation for a UCLA freshman
seminar (“Fiat Lux”) course at UCLA “Secrets of the Northern Lights: The Earth’s
aurora” that has stimulated a talented, diverse, and enthusiastic group of
students, leading undergraduate research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since
flow channel related flows and field-aligned currents map along magnetic field
lines that connect the magnetosphere and ionosphere, the team will study
observations from primarily NSF-funded (and some other) radars and all-sky
imagers over North America of ionospheric flows and aurora (which represent
upward field-aligned currents). This allows the team to make two-dimensional
measurement versus time, which cannot be done with sparse spacecraft. The
investigators will also make use of a major new development in 2-D flow
determination from radar data. The goals of this project are to establish: 1.
Are plasma flows relative to the azimuthal expansion of the brightening of the
onset arc consistent with that brightening expansion being the result of
azimuthal expansion of the low entropy plasma from the onset flow channel as
predicted by the Rice Convection Model? 2. What is the role of post-onset flow
channels outside the auroral bulge in controlling the longitudinal development
of substorm expansion? 3. Are polar cap flow channels directed toward the
poleward boundary of the active substorm auroral bulge important in controlling
further poleward expansion and the duration of substorm expansion-phase auroral
activity? 4. Is the longitudinal extent and duration of the expansion-phase-like
disturbances that initiate from the auroral polar boundary controlled by polar
cap flow channels?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.