* 2055604
* Geometry of Graphs and Banach Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Florent Baudier, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 249,460.00

The world one lives in is geometric in nature where numerous everyday-life
issues, as well as &lt;br/&gt;fundamental scientific mysteries, can be expressed
in geometric terms. For instance, the study of &lt;br/&gt;physical laws has led
to the development of a refined mathematical framework where elaborate
&lt;br/&gt;geometric structures are able to depict and model the interactions of
elementary particles and the &lt;br/&gt;symmetries underlying quantum physics.
Another example comes from networks, which are ubiquitous in modern society.
From the &lt;br/&gt;World Wide Web and its powerful search engines to social
networks, from telecommunication networks &lt;br/&gt;to economic systems,
networks represent a wide range of real world systems. A network can naturally
&lt;br/&gt;be seen as a geometric object by considering the number of edges of
the shortest path connecting two &lt;br/&gt;nodes in the network as a quantity
measuring their proximity. The shortest path distance on a graph is a
&lt;br/&gt;fundamental example of an abstract mathematical object called
"metric". The notion of a metric space is &lt;br/&gt;an overarching concept that
is pivotal in mathematical models of optimization problems in networks,
&lt;br/&gt;and in a vast range of application areas, including computer vision,
computational biology, machine &lt;br/&gt;learning, statistics, and mathematical
psychology, to name a few. This extremely useful abstract concept
&lt;br/&gt;generalizes the classical notion of a Euclidean space, where the
distance from point A to point B is &lt;br/&gt;computed as the length of a
straight line connecting them. In numerous practical problems, &lt;br/&gt;the
heart of the matter boils down to understanding whether we can find
a&lt;br/&gt;representation of a given metric space, in particular a graph
equipped with its shortest path distance, &lt;br/&gt;inside some other geometric
object that we understand much better and that carries &lt;br/&gt;additional
structure. Our ability to perform such a task in a &lt;br/&gt;quantitatively
efficient way has tremendous applications. The project will provide
opportunities for &lt;br/&gt;undergraduate students to develop a global mindset
and superior communication skills, and graduate &lt;br/&gt;students to acquire
the algorithmic and programming skills that are crucially needed in the modern
&lt;br/&gt;workplace. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI proposes to
implement in several instances the geometric approach, which is a
&lt;br/&gt;strategy that consists in understanding and solving problems of
seemingly non-geometric nature via the &lt;br/&gt;uncovering of a hidden metric
structure that allows the application of a wealth of powerful metric
&lt;br/&gt;techniques. Due to its versatility, the geometric approach has
permeated virtually all fields of &lt;br/&gt;mathematics. Creating datasets with
billions of entries has become a routine and ubiquitous task.
&lt;br/&gt;Optimization, search, and data mining problems on these huge datasets
are computationally extremely &lt;br/&gt;hard to solve. Graphs are natural
mathematical models for many datasets, and a central computer &lt;br/&gt;science
task is the design of efficient and fast approximation algorithms for
optimization and search &lt;br/&gt;problems on various graphs. A graph is a
combinatorial object of seemingly non-geometric nature. &lt;br/&gt;However, once
equipped with a shortest path metric a graph becomes a metric space and the
collection &lt;br/&gt;of all metrics supported on the graph carries geometric
information that can be used to understand and &lt;br/&gt;study the
combinatorial structure of the graph. After its rise in the mid-90's, there are
by now numerous &lt;br/&gt;situations where availing to geometric embeddings of
graphs, most notably embeddings into tree-&lt;br/&gt;metrics or into the
classical Lebesgue sequence spaces, provides elegant, very often optimal, and on
&lt;br/&gt;some occasions the only approximation algorithms for computationally
intractable problems. The first &lt;br/&gt;goal of this proposal is to advance
significantly our understanding of the general problem of
&lt;br/&gt;embeddability of finite metrics. In particular, we will investigate
the connection between &lt;br/&gt;lamplighter metrics and Wasserstein metrics
from an algorithmic perspective, and the geometry of thin &lt;br/&gt;Laakso
structures in relation to the Metric Kadec-Pelczynski Problem. The second goal,
which is &lt;br/&gt;motivated by the geometric approach to the Novikov
conjecture in topology and to Gromov's positive &lt;br/&gt;scalar curvature
conjecture in Riemannian geometry, is to advance significantly our understanding
of the &lt;br/&gt;coarse geometry of Banach spaces and the asymptotic behavior
of Banach spaces, most notably the &lt;br/&gt;relationship between concentration
inequalities on non-locally finite graphs and the Szlenk
index.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.