* 2055749
* I-Corps: Multiplexed paper-based test for rapid diagnosis of early-stage Lyme Disease
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,03/31/2022
* Aydogan Ozcan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercialization potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a low-cost rapid diagnostic tool with the ability to measure
multiple health markers in a single test. Development of this platform may
benefit the healthcare system by improving the accessibility of diagnostic and
prognostic testing that requires a panel of measurements. Specifically, there is
potential for an early-stage Lyme disease (LD) diagnostic. Approximately 300,000
people contract LD each year, incurring a $1.3 billion cost to the medical
system. Unfortunately, much of the societal and economic costs of LD stem from
misdiagnosis due to the low sensitivity of the current Centers for Disease
Control (CDC)-recommended testing protocol, which is typically &lt;50% for the
early-stage of disease, a time when many patients seek care. Therefore, the
commercialization of an accurate and rapid test may provide a low-cost yet
effective tool for identifying early-stage infection at the point-of-care,
leading to faster and more effective treatment. The results from this potential
I-Corps project also may benefit the diagnostics and medical community by
demonstrating the value of a data-driven approach to multiplexed rapid
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a point-of-care diagnostic assay for early-stage Lyme disease (LD).
Previously, the design and validation of a low-cost, paper-based vertical flow
assay (VFA) was completed. Unlike standard rapid testing formats, the proposed
VFA technology enables the point-of-care measurement (from patient blood) of a
large panel of antibodies specific to the early-stage LD infection. A data-
driven diagnostic algorithm is then used to infer a LD diagnosis from the panel
of measurements, enabling sensitive and specific testing of suspected early-
stage Lyme patients across a diverse population with varying immune responses.
An initial peer-reviewed clinical study of the prototype assay and diagnostic
algorithm reported sensitivity and specificity of 87.5% and 96.7%, respectively,
when compared to a rigorous clinical gold standard using all early-stage LD
samples. These initial technical results show potential for effective early-
stage LD diagnosis at the point-of-care, enabling faster and more effective
treatment that could mitigate debilitating late-stage symptoms and associated
costs to the healthcare system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.