* 2055480
* Building a Career Pathway from High School into the Workforce for Skilled Technicians in Electrical, Industrial, and Process Engineering Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Fred Lacy, Southern University at Shreveport
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 04/30/2024
* USD 299,799.00

Engineering and manufacturing industries have a growing demand for workforce-
ready technicians. To help fill this need, Southern University at Shreveport
intends to provide critical technical education that enables students to develop
industry-needed skills. To do so, this project will build an educational pathway
that spans from high school to the workforce, and that provides multiple entry
points into engineering and manufacturing technician careers. The project will
strengthen collaboration among academic and industry stakeholders to decrease
time to degree for workforce-ready technicians in Electrical, Industrial, and
Process Engineering Technology. The new academic pathway will include dual
enrollment options for high school students that can result in a technical
certificate and can be applied to two- and four-year degrees in Engineering
Technology. This project intends to accelerate students’ academic and technical
skills to fill middle-skill jobs, thus preparing skilled STEM graduates to
contribute to the nation’s productivity and innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, Southern University at Shreveport intends to address the local and
national workforce shortage for engineering technicians, the absence of
underrepresented populations, and the need to strengthen their collaborative
network to support student success. The project will leverage four dual
enrollment courses through which high school students will be able to earn a
Certificate in Engineering Technology. Certificate completers will be able to
transfer their credits as they enter any of three Southern University System
colleges in Louisiana. Professional development for high school and community
college faculty will allow for course revisions that will further align learning
outcomes with employer expectations. Southern University at Shreveport expects
to maintain a strong enrollment of students in their Engineering Technology
programs by offering a summer bridge activity, internships, and mentorship
opportunities. Project outcomes will be shared through regional and national
conferences as well as through the Advanced Technical Education Central
repository. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.