* 2055418
* RET site: Multidisciplinary Teacher Research Experience in Engineering (M-TREE)
* ENG,EEC
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2024
* Liat Rosenfeld, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 12/31/2024
* USD 600,000.00

The SJSU-RET site will team San Jose State University (SJSU) with high schools
in the San Jose area. The partner high school districts will be the ones with
the largest Black and Latino student and teacher populations. The program will
provide substantive, hands-on research experience for teachers in the
multidisciplinary area of Renewable Energy and Sustainable Engineering, with a
focus on applications in the local, Silicon Valley, industries such as
semiconductor and biotech. The connection to local industries will bridge the
gap currently existing in the high school curriculum allowing the students to be
exposed, through their teachers' experience, to real applications of science and
engineering. Within the scope of the summer research activities, teachers will
have the opportunity to work in SJSU engineering labs along with SJSU
engineering faculty and their graduate students on research projects designed
specifically for them. The research projects touch upon concepts in biology,
chemistry, physics, and computer electronics ensuring wide applicability to K-12
curricula and compatibility with the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS).
The teachers will also develop curricular units, hands-on experimental modules
and curriculum development activities that will be incorporated in their
classrooms during the following school year. Teachers will receive support for
the development of the curricular modules during one-on-one and group weekly
sessions, over the summer, with a SJSU Teacher/Science Education faculty. The
program will be supported by weekly seminars from industry and academic
professionals and group activities such as field trips to local, Silicon Valley,
companies. During the subsequent school year, the teachers will pilot the
curricular units in their classrooms, with the help of SJSU faculty, and will
submit an impact report that describes how the lessons worked, proposed
modifications or enhancements, number and demographics of students impacted,
assessment results, and teaching practice change
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a three-year period, the SJSU-RET Site will
offer an intensive summer research program for a total of 30 high-school STEM
teachers from schools in underserved San Jose neighborhoods with socially,
economically, racially, and ethnically diverse student bodies. Planned research
projects include: biofuel production, production of antioxidants from
biocatalysts, production of sustainable and safe lithium-ion batteries, carbon
capture to combat climate change and circuit analysis and optimization in hand-
held devices. Project plans include: &lt;br/&gt;conduct novel, hands-on,
research at SJSU laboratories under the guidance of engineering faculty and
graduate students; develop curricular units to enhance understanding of basic
concepts in STEM education for high school students aligned with NGSS, under the
guidance of SJSU Science-Education faculty; expose the teachers to the various
engineering industries in the area via tours to local Silicon Valley companies
and presentations from industry leaders; create opportunities for SJSU faculty
and graduate students to visit teachersâ€™ classrooms and interact with students
in order to develop tools to bridge the gap between the high school curriculum
and college level courses, making the transition easier for the students; form a
long-term collaboration through which teachers and their students interact with
SJSU faculty to promote STEM engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.