* 9000048
* Ship Operations
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1990,03/31/1994
* Robert Knox, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Emma R. Dieter
* 03/31/1994
* USD 14,546,493.00

The Scripps Institute of Oceanography will operate four research vessels: R/V
MELVILLE, a 245' general oceanographic vessel constructed by the Navy in 1969;
R/V THOMAS WASHINGTON, a 208' research vessel constructed by the Navy in 1965;
R/V NEW HORIZON, a 170' research vessel constructed by the University of
California in 1978; and R/V ROBERT GORDON SPROUL, a 125' vessel built in 1981
and subsequently converted for research purposes. These vessels are part of a
fleet used by the National Science Foundation to support oceanographic research
projects. Most oceanographic research projects require highly specialized
equipment and extensive support from a ship's crew members. An increasing number
of research projects require equipment that must be permanently installed on a
ship and for which the ship must be specifically designed. Such equipment also
requires highly trained crew members for maintenance and operation. These
vessels do not operate in the same manner as general cargo or fishing vessels,
and therefore, NSF supports the operation of a variety of vessels specifically
dedicated to oceanographic research. These vessels are operated by universities
and research institutions around the country. The R/V's T.WASHINGTON and
MELVILLE operate worldwide, while the R/V NEW HORIZON operates primarily in the
northeastern Pacific. The R/V SPROUL operates primarily in the coastal waters of
California.