* 9000598
* U.S.-U.S.S.R. Workshop on the Legacy of Ya. B. Zeldovich forAstrophysics and Cosmology (Lawrence, Kansas; 2 -6 May 1990)
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1991
* Adrian Melott, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gerson Sher
* 09/30/1991
* USD 24,154.00

The United States and the Soviet Union are probably the two leading countries in
both astrophysics and cosmology. Cooperative research in these areas, however,
have not been common in the past. This workshop will provide an important
opportunity to strongly stimulate long-term joint cooperation in an area of
research which is of great interest to the world-wide scientific community. The
thematic focus of the workshop, which is being organized by Dr. Adrian L. Melott
of the University of Kansas and Dr. Sergey F. Shandarin of the Institute of
Physical Problems of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, is the legacy of Yakov B.
Zel'dovich in Astrophysics and Cosmology. One of the most important figures in
twentieth-century cosmology, Zel'dovich (who died in 1987) was responsible for
fundamental advances in these areas that are being actively investigated today.
The workshop will involve some 10 to 15 scientists from each country, including
5-10 young investigators from each side. The workshop will include an opening
session on the future of cosmology, which will be open to the public and
oriented to their understanding, as well as a three-day scientific program will
consist of a series of brief presentations followed by extended discussion
periods. Selected observers will be permitted to attend. Participants will be
invited to use the final day for the development of collaborative relationships
and preparation of specific proposals for long-term cooperative research for
subsequent submission and competitive review. This project fulfills the program
objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading researchers in
the United States and the U.S.S.R. to combine complemen- tary efforts and
capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and competence in the field of
basic scientific research on the basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality
of benefit.