* 9000772
* Engineering REU Site Proposal: Undergraduate Research in    Mechanical Engineering
* ENG,EFMA
* 05/01/1990,10/31/1991
* David Kittelson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 10/31/1991
* USD 61,987.00

A program of summer research in mechanical engineering for science and
engineering undergraduates enrolled in an REU site. Applicants for the program
will be asked to submit transcripts, letters of recommendation and an essay.
Participants will be selected by a panel of faculty members. The program will
start with an orientation program in which research projects and facilities are
described. Participants will be asked to select a project on which to work from
a group of twenty ongoing research programs in mechanical engineering. A faculty
supervisor will monitor the progress of each student. Students will be given
increasing responsibilities as their skills develop. Students will be asked to
attend biweekly seminars which will explore current research areas, in
Mechanical Engineering. The students will live on campus in dormitories close to
one another so that they may share their research experiences. An informal
social program will also be organized. At the end of the summer, students will
be asked to prepare oral and written reports on their research activities. We
will attempt to find on-campus research jobs for students who do well in the
program. Areas of faculty research and expertise include heat transfer and
thermodynamics, power and propulsion, industrial engineering, design,
environmental engineering, and Microcontamination.