* 9000665
* Summer Undergraduate Research Program in Developmental      Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1990,10/31/1991
* Carl Rhodes, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 10/31/1991
* USD 41,447.00

This award provides funds to establish a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
Site in the Department of Biology and Biomedical Sciences at Washington
University. Twelve undergraduates, from a diversity of collegiate and ethnic
backgrounds, will be recruited to spend 8-12 summer weeks engaged in
developmental biology research with faculty mentors who will be selected, on the
basis of mutual interests, from the about 30 developmental biologists on the
faculty. These staff members have active, well-equipped and funded research
groups working on a wide range of developmental problems, ranging from mating
and zygote formation in chlamydomonas, through organ-specific gene expression in
transgenic plants, and control of germ cell differentiation in nematodes, to
formation of patterned connections in the mammalian CNS. The emphasis of the
program will be on getting each student actively engaged in increasingly
independent research in one of these productive laboratories. However, to help
the students view their own research in a broader scientific and professional
context, four supplementary activities will be provided: (1) One week will be
devoted full-time to introducing the REU students to some of the major research
models and methods of contemporary developmental biology, through a coordinated
series of lectures, discussions, demonstrations and hands-on laboratory
experiences. (2) In each odd-numbered week, a member of the participating
faculty will present an informal research seminar and discussion, designed
specifically for these students. (3) In even-numbered weeks, the students will
participate with Washington University graduate students, postdocs and faculty
in an ongoing Developmental Biology Journal Club. (4) At the end of the summer,
a weekend retreat will be held at which students in this program, together with
other summer undergraduate research students, will present the results of their
summer research either orally or as poster papers.