* 9000780
* Training Program in Biosocial Adaption: Assessment of Paleonutrition Techiques
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1990,10/31/1991
* Marc Kelley, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 10/31/1991
* USD 41,400.00

This award provides support to continue a Research Experiences for
Undergraduates Site through the Department of Pathology at the University of
Minnesota, Duluth. Students will be trained in anthropometry, osteopathology,
tissue sample collection, trace metal and stable isotope analyses, and
biological differentiation of skeletal samples as tools for studying adaption to
physical and cultural environments through time. Such experiences have proven
useful to students majoring in anthropology, biology or ecology and interested
in pursuing an interdisciplinary approach towards a common objective--namely,
paleodietary reconstruction. Undergraduate students from these fields will work
together as a team to realize this common goal. They will acquire invaluable
experience in the filed and subsequently in the laboratory as the data are
collected and analyzed. The U.S. institutions involved will be collaborating
with the University of Tarapaca in northern Chile. The faculty team has
established a well-defined research project for undergraduate training in
paleonutrition reconstruction based on well-preserved mummies and skeletal
remains spanning the last 8,000 years from northern Chile. The students will
learn how to formulate and test hypotheses, they will learn new techniques and
be in a position to assess the value of these techniques for future studies.