* 9000643
* Mathematical Sciences: A Research Initiation for            Undergraduates Via Differential Equations, Difference       Equations and Chaos
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1991
* Willie Taylor, Texas Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 11/30/1991
* USD 19,910.00

Support for five undergraduate students engaged in mathematical research will
be supported by this Research Experiences for Undergraduates award. The students
will perform numerical analysis, investigate difference equations and engage in
studies of chaos as modeled by the process of iteration of continuous maps. The
main focus of the research will be on the oscillatory behavior of difference
equations and the role of symmetry in chaotic planar dynamics. The program will
run for eight weeks. Faculty from the University of Houston (UH) will also
participate in the program. This will be done in several ways. First, the
University of Houston will provide a faculty member to work with the students on
problems of differential equations and chaos. A second faculty member from
Furman University will teach the necessary introductory material on chaos. Her
salary will be paid by UH. Students will spend each Friday morning at UH
visiting laboratories such as the Dynamics Laboratory and laboratories in the
Departments of Physics, Mechanical Engineering and Chemical Engineering where
chaotic dynamics is observed experimentally. A portion of the program's research
component will involve transferring of software, which has been developed at UH
to study iterates of mappings and dynamics with symmetry, to the PC environment
which is being developed at TSU. A study of these mappings can be made at many
levels, from proving theorems in group representations to parameter exploration
in quadratic maps. In addition, UH will provide funds for three REU students to
work with the five from TSU. An active program of colloquium lectures,
counselling and social events is also planned. Students will be encouraged to
present the results of their work at the annual meeting of the Association of
Minority Professors.