* 9000787
* REU Site Award:  Basic Research in Life Science
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1993
* Marshall Sundberg, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 11/30/1993
* USD 123,733.00

This award provides support to Louisiana State University to continue a Research
Experiences for Undergraduates SITE. The primary activity will involve eight-
week summer sessions of independent research in biological science. Program
focus will be on comparative animal physiology during year one, plant
physiology/biochemistry during year two, and molecular biology during year
three. Each year a select group of ten students, of junior or senior standing,
will be invited to participate in the program. Each student will be under the
direct supervision of an LSU faculty member who will serve as the research
mentor and be directly responsible for the student's progress. Faculty
participants have been chosen on the basis of their experience working with
undergraduates in the laboratory, suitability of research projects and general
research productivity. Additional components of the program will be an intense
pre-summer session library orientation and communication skills workshop. The
program will also involve a weekly seminar series for all participants,
including the faculty advisors and members of their research laboratories. The
latter activities will be coordinated by the P.I.. Upon completion of the summer
research program, each REU investigator will present his/her research results as
an oral paper at an undergraduate research symposium, and a written paper in a
form suitable for publication. Additional follow-up activities are planned to
encourage REU investigators to present the results of their completed work to a
scientific audience.