* 9000365
* US - USSR Seminar on Precambrian Geology, the Southern Canadian Shield, and the Eastern Baltic Shield (Duluth, MN:August 1990)
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1991
* Richard Ojakangas, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Gerson Sher
* 12/31/1991
* USD 21,250.00

The geology of the southern Canadian Shield is remarkably similar to that of the
eastern Baltic Shield in many aspects, including rock types, rock ages, and
tectonic histories. It is possible that the two shields were at one time in
proximity to each other and may even have been located on the same
supercontinent. Whereas papers from Swedish and Finnish geologists on the
western Baltic Shield have been available, until now the findings of Soviet
geologists on the eastern Baltic Shield have not been accessible. This workshop,
co- organized by Dr. Richard Ojakangas of the University of Minnesota-Duluth and
Dr. Sergey Rybakov of the Institute of Geology of the Karelian Branch of the
Academy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R. in Petrozavodsk, will provide an opportunity
for American and Soviet experts to exchange ideas and to evaluate and develop
plans for long-term cooperation in this area. The workshop will also involve
geological field trips in Minnesota, Michigan, Wisconsin, and adjacent Canada.
This project fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by
enabling leading researchers in the United States and the U.S.S.R. to combine
complementary efforts and capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and
competence in the field of basic scientific research on the basis of equality,
reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.