* 9000582
* Mathematical Sciences: "Cohomological Topics in Finite      Transformation Groups and Applications"
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1993
* Amir Assadi, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 05/31/1993
* USD 56,100.00

Symmetry plays an important role in mathematics, physics, and other sciences.
In mathematics, symmetry has many different but related manifestations. A finite
group G of symmetries of a space X induces symmetries on algebraic invariants of
X. In this way, transformation groups and representation theory become
intimately related. In this project, the investigator will look systematically
at the interaction between the geometry of the symmetry (e.g., fixed points,
stability subgroups, etc.) and the algebraic invariants of such representations.
In particular, symmetries of Moore spaces (the Steenrod Problem posed in early
1960's) and algebraic curves and surfaces arising in algebraic geometry and
number theory (besides topology) provide concrete problems to which the
following general theory will apply. A significant feature of this project is
its interdisciplinary nature, which requires tools and ideas from several
branches of mathematics. This provides a natural setting for interaction of
these areas, including new applications of algebraic geometry to transformation
groups and modular representation theory. Other applications include
(algorithmic and inductive) construction of important classes of modular
representations, number theoretic properties of algebraic function fields, and a
deeper understanding of symmetries of algebraic surfaces versus 4- dimensional
manifolds. A long term objective is solution of the long-standing Steenrod
Problem and its application to the problem of existence of symmetry for
manifolds.