* 9000102
* CRB:  Effects of Landscape Management and Deer Abundance on Plant Community and Species Diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1990,01/21/1993
* William Alverson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 01/21/1993
* USD 140,070.00

Traditional forestry practices in the Northeast have led to the dispersion of
forest openings and scattered clear cuts throughout large regions. The result is
a fine-scaled mosaic of young and older forests. Such fragmentation has also
created large amounts of "edge" habitat, purposefully constructed to boost
populations of White-tailed Deer and other game species. These efforts have
succeeded in boosting deer populations far beyond presettlement densities to the
point where browsing by deer now appears to threaten plant species diversity by
preventing the recruitment and regeneration of certain gymnosperms and
associated herbaceous species. We propose to use existing long-term deer and
plant survey data and the presence of areas of reduced deer density to test
hypotheses concerning the impacts of deer browsing on species diversity and
community composition and dynamics. We will also compare the size and age
structure and community composition of forest stands dominated by Eastern
Hemlock and White Cedar among areas that vary in deer density. Finally, we will
use experiments to test the direct and indirect effects of deer browsing.
Results from this study are needed to document this new type of edge effect and
to design practical patterns of forest use compatible with maintaining the
original species and community diversity of northern forests. Such analyses will
allow implementation of appropriate conservation strategies.