* 9000306
* Dynamic Aspects of Foraging Decisions:  Short-Term Caching  Strategies
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1990,07/31/1992
* Jeffrey Lucas, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 07/31/1992
* USD 23,910.00

Decisions made by animals are affected by numerous factors. For example, a
bird's choice among different food items can be shown to be affected by how
hungry the bird is, the relative abundance of food types, the sequence of
previous encounters with different food items, and the amount of fat reserves
the bird has stored. Until now, it has proved difficult, both theoretically and
experimentally, to study the combined effects of these factors in a meaningful
way. As a result, only a small fraction of the rich diversity of responses that
animals exhibit have been studied. The current pilot project is designed to test
techniques that will allow a more synoptic view of animal decision-making.
Specifically, Dr. Lucas plans to test several predictions of caching behavior by
Carolina chickadees under laboratory conditions. Chickadees store food items
singly in hundreds of different sites and retrieve this food within a period of
days. The predictions, derived from a dynamic-programming model, will be tested
by continuously monitoring body mass, cache size and caching decisions
throughout the day. Monitoring will be accomplished using computer-driven
electronic balances and remote sensors in potential cache sites. This work is
important because it provides a methodology for understanding behavior in a
broad context. Decisions should reflect a balance of costs and benefits
associated with alternative behaviors available to the animal. The costs and
benefits, in turn, are affected by current conditions and expected changes in
these conditions. This is as relevant to human behavior as it is to the behavior
of non-human animals. Caching behavior is particularly revealing because, by
caching food, the animal is providing for future nutritional requirements (when
the food is retrieved) to the detriment of current requirements (which could be
satisfied by eating discovered food immediately). Thus, caching decisions should
reflect current conditions and expected changes in those conditions when the
food is finally retrieved.