* 9000753
* Laboratory Research in Civil & Enviromental Engineering:  A Undergraduate Research Experience (REU)
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1990,04/30/1991
* Arnim Meyburg, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 04/30/1991
* USD 32,000.00

The proposed program of undergraduate laboratory research experiences is based
on a strong experimental research program using modern lab facilities in all
principal subareas of civil and environmental engineering. The program is
designed to generate excitement, motivations and research commitment by
undergraduate students through hands-on lab research experiments performed with
the guidance of experienced senior researchers. Students will be matched with
the following laboratories, based on their interest, backgrounds, and talents:
Concrete and Construction Materials, Environmental Engineering, Hydraulics,
Remote Sensing, and Structural Engineering. The students could work in pairs.
The program is building on a very successful REU program in civil and
environmental engineering in the summer of 1989. Each laboratory program has a
faculty member as co-principal investigator in charge. A carefully thought-out
evaluation, feedback and interaction mechanism has been designed to assure that
the undergraduate lab research experience will be enticement for talented
students to think seriously about advanced studies in engineering. The proposal
identifies a great number of research activities with which the students will be
matched, based on interest and talent. A strong minority recruitment, and
advising and counseling program will assure that the interested minority
students can be identified and recruited.