* 9000312
* Ship Operations
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1990,06/30/1993
* Thomas Smith, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 06/30/1993
* USD 2,980,558.00

The University of Alaska will operate the R/V ALPHA HELIX during 1990 as a
general oceanographic vessel in support of NSF-funded research projects. The R/V
ALPHA HELIX is a 133'general research vessel constructed 1966. The vessel is
owned by the National Science Foundation, and operated by the University of
Alaska under a 5-year renewable charter. The ship will operate mainly in the
coastal waters of Alaska, Gulf of Alaska and Bering Sea. This vessel is part of
a fleet used by the National Science Foundation to support oceanographic
research projects. Most oceanographic research projects require highly
specialized equipment and extensive support from a ship's crew members. An
increasing number of research projects require equipment that must be
permanently installed on a ship and for which the ship must be specifically
designed. Such equipment also requires highly trained crew members for
maintenance and operation. These vessels do not operate in the same manner as
general cargo or fishing vessels, and therefore, NSF supports the operation of a
variety of vessels specifically dedicated to oceanographic research. These
vessels are operated by universities and research institutions around the
country. The program recognizes the importance of the R/V ALPHA HELIX to the
research fleet because it is the only vessel located in an Arctic region. Great
interest has been generated in the Arctic region during the past few years as
Global Change became an important issue. Continued operations of a research
vessel in the Arctic region is critical, and improvement of our Arctic research
capabilities is recommended. Although the R/V ALPHA HELIX has a slight amount of
ice strengthening that allows it to operate near ice, the vessel is not capable
of true ice operations.