* 9000605
* Photosynthetic Performance of Laminaria Solidungula and L.  Saccharina in the High Arctic:  Adaptation to Very Low      Light Levels Under Winter Ice
* O/D,OPP
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1993
* Kenneth Dunton, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 12/31/1993
* USD 186,177.00

The large size and rapid growth of kelp is due, at least in part, to their
ability to optimize growth under a variety of light conditions through changes
in photosynthetic performance. This feature may be most pronounce in one arctic
species, Laminaria solidungula, which increases its annual production by more
than half over 8-months of continuous ice cover when irradiance levels are
lowest. Reported open-water saturation irradiance in this occurs during the
summer, a period of minimal growth, when dissolved inorganic nitrogen (DIN)
concentrations are lowest. The project will test the hypothesis that
photosynthetic sensitivity in L. solidungula increases considerably during the
ice-covered period, and that ambient increases in DIN, not low levels of
irradiance, are primarily responsible for seasonal changes in the plant's
photosynthetic performance. Several photosynthetic parameters will be calculated
from photosynthetic irradiance (P-I) curves derived from radioactive carbon
uptake and oxygen flux measurements, and the light harvesting characteristics of
entire plants incubated in situ in Beaufort Sea. In the lab, photosynthetic
parameters of individuals grown under different conditions of light and DIN over
a four-month period will be compared to specifically address the role of these
factors in regulating winter photosynthesis at low light levels. In addition,
the photosynthetic response of L. saccharina, which is common in temperate
regions but is relatively rare in the central Alaskan Beaufort Sea, will be
compared to that of L. solidungula. Studies of photosynthesis in both species
under natural conditions of light and nutrient limitation will enhance our
understanding of photoadaptation and will greatly improve our ability to
accurately model kelp production from measurements of in situ irradiance.