* 9000099
* Landscape Archaeology at Olduvai Gorge
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/1994,05/31/1996
* Robert Blumenschine, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/1996
* USD 199,979.00

9000099 Blumenschine With National science Foundation support, Dr. Robert
Blumenschine and his colleagues will conduct two seasons of archaeological
research at Olduvai Gorge in northern Tanzania. They will focus on two
stratigraphic horizons which date to just under 2 million years ago and which
preserve traces of human activity. Dr. Blumenschine and colleagues will sample
these horizons through carefully controlled excavation and will collect both
stone artifacts and faunal remains. Because each horizon extends over a
considerable horizontal distance, through comparison of samples, the team will
be able to reconstruct a broad range of hominid (and likely non-hominid)
activities, gain insight into geographically varied behavior, and place this in
an environmental framework. This research is significant for two primary
reasons. First it will shed new light on the emergence of human cultural
capabilities. Olduvai Gorge has yielded not only important hominid fossil
remains, but also numerous assemblages of stone tools and apparently associated
fauna. These materials have provided a focus for examination of the cultural
capacities of early hominids. Using data from the Olduvai sites
paleoanthropologists have speculated on issues such as the role of meat in early
hominid diet and questioned whether such peoples had the ability to hunt. Most
of the available data comes from "sites" or dense, spacially clustered groups of
stone and bone remains. Archaeologists however have come to realize that such
clusters represent only one aspect of hominid behavior and that smaller less
dense scatters and areas which have no material at all can also provide
important relevant information. Dr. Blumenschine and colleagues will focus their
attention in a systematic fashion on both the "clusters" and the scatter between
the sites. Secondly, this work will help to pioneer the field of "landscape
archaeology." The team will develop techniques for the collection and analysis
of non-s ite data and these methods will be applicable in a wide variety of
archaeological situations. This work will provide insight into early hominid
behavior. It will yield data of interest to many archaeologists and assist in
the training of Tanzanian researchers. It will serve to strengthen the
scientific ties between African and United States scientists. ***