* 9000486
* CRB:  Population Viability of Tropical Forest Vertebrates
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1994
* David Woodruff, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 05/31/1994
* USD 240,375.00

Habitat destruction and fragmentation in tropical forests are the single
largest threat to the planet's biodiversity. The roles of genetic and
demographic factors in the extinction of small populations in fragmented habitat
patches are understood in theory but poorly documented empirically. To test
existing theory and to improve techniques of biodiversity conservation, the
investigators will develop a new method of monitoring population viability in
recently fragmented populations. Specifically, they will conduct population
viability analyses of rat, tree shrew, and other small mammal populations in
small rainforest patches of different sizes during the first six years following
isolation. These habitat patches were all isolated in 1987 when the creation of
the Chiew Larn reservoir flooded a forested valley in the Khlong Saeng Wildlife
Sanctuary, Thailand, and created 165 islands. Demographic changes in selected
populations will be monitored by seasonal live-trapping as will levels of
genetic variation, inbreeding and gene flow. The study is novel in that the
genetic changes will be monitored at the DNA sequence level with DNA obtained
non-invasively from plucked hair. This study will contribute to our basic
understanding of evolutionary biology and ecology in a number of ways. It will
provide among the first sequence-level data on variation in a number of nuclear
and mitochondrial genes in several free- ranging mammal species. It will also
provide one of the first cases where both genetic and ecological aspects of
population viability are monitored in the critical first 20 generations
following insularization. In addition, the study promises to contribute to
conservation biology in three significant ways. First, the development of the
genetic monitoring technique based on non-invasive sampling of DNA from hair
will have wide applicability. Second, the demonstration that population
viability can be monitored in common small mammals should lead to improved
management practices for rarer and more endangered species. Finally, the lessons
learned from this study in Thai forest fragments should be applicable to
biodiversity conservation elsewhere in the tropics.