* 9000688
* Mathematical Sciences: Discrete and Applied Mathematics     Research Experience for Undergraduates
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1992
* Mayer Humi, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 09/30/1992
* USD 64,000.00

Support for eight undergraduate students is provided by this Research
Experiences for Undergraduates award. The award continues an earlier program of
research in applied and discrete mathematics, matroid theory and mathematical
modeling. Students will work in small teams under faculty advisors. Written
reports at the end of the program are required. Where possible, students will be
encouraged to rewrite the reports for publication and presentation at
professional meetings. Research projects include studies on birigid graphs in
the plane and their excess (the number of edges which can be discarded without
destroying rigidity). The problem to be taken up concerns the existence of
minimal birigid graphs with arbitrary excess. Combinatorial characterizations of
birigid graphs in higher dimensions will also considered. Work will be done on
bifurcation problems in autocatalytic chemical reactions. These reactions are
prime examples of nonlinear systems whose modeling (reaction diffusion
equations) are not well understood. The objective of this project will be to
determine the symmetry properties of the system, the bifurcation diagram and the
properties of its solutions. Symbolic and numerical computations are expected to
play an important role in much of the research to be done.