* 9000144
* Behavior of Individual Planktonic Copepods: Ecological Significance of Perception and Response of Predators and Prey Organisms
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1993
* Peter Verity, Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/30/1993
* USD 375,000.00

The long.term goal of the project is to identify and describe key processes
which govern the abundance, composition and distribution of zooplankton in the
ocean. Recent results on the relationship of copepod perception to clearance
rate pointed to the significance of perception, and led to the main hypothesis,
underlying the research proposed for the next three years. Both, signal
perception performance, and the ability to respond to it, determines whether
prey organisms avoid, escape from, or are captured by predators. This project
will examine the behavior of various abundant prey (ciliates, copepod nauplii)
and predators (nauplii, copepodites and adult copepods) found off the
southeastern continental shelf of the U.S.A. The results will be used to
taxonomically classify behaviors, and to calculate mortality rates for early
juveniles of abundant species of copepods. Estimates of in situ mortality rates
for early juveniles even of the most abundant copepod species are scarce and
very difficult to obtain. The approach of quantifying species.specific, and
stage.specific behaviors of motion, feeding, etc., in relation to sensor
performance and morphology, will ultimately lead to an understanding of copepod
existence and co.existence in the ocean. In combination with ecologically
oriented efforts and parallel studies on the physiology of mechanosensors and
chemosensors the proposed studies will aid in an understanding of what governs
zooplankton behavior in the ocean.