* 9000907
* BCSPIN KATHMANDU SUMMER SCHOOL "Non-Perturbative Phenomena  and Selected Current Topics in Condensed Matter and ParticlePhysics", May 20-June 8, 1990, Kathmandu, Nepal
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1990,10/31/1991
* Jogesh Pati, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 10/31/1991
* USD 10,000.00

Description: This project provides support for U.S. scientists to participate in
the Kathmamdu Summer School on "Non-Perturbative Phenomena and Selected Current
Topics in Condensed Matter and Particle Physics" which is planned for May
20-June 8, 1990. The school emphasizes the interdisciplinary nature of the three
fields of condensed matter, particle physics, and cosmology. The areas to be
covered include introduction to functional methods, topological structures and
their applications to condensed matter and particle physics, anomalies,
dynamical symmetry breaking, superconductivity and two-dimensional conformal
field theories. Lecturers are expected from the U.S., Western Europe and the
USSR. Students come from six cuntries in Asia including China, India, Pakistan,
Bangledesh, Sri Lanka and Nepal. Scope: The exposure of students and young
researchers from Asian countries to the lectures by eminent scientists from
around the world greatly strengthens the scientific potential in these
countries, and fosters scientific cooperation between them and with the U.S.
This meeting is the second in a seies, following a 1989 meeting that proved
successful by the excellent participation from the U.S. and Europe, and with
partial support from the International Centre for Theorectical Physics, Trieste,
Italy.