* 9000054
* Mathematical Sciences: Inverse Scattering Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1990,09/01/1990
* Xin Zhou, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 09/01/1990
* USD 12,192.00

Work to be done during the period of this award will focus on higher
dimensional inverse scattering problems and on related one dimensional problems.
The underlying idea for work of this nature is that of constructing obstacles
from data measured as particles pass the obstacle. The transition from the
future of a solution of, say, the wave equation, to the past is called the
scattering transform. Knowledge of either the transform or its spectrum is
considered to be central to understanding any wave or generalized wave which
experiences scattering. This work will consider extending results on time
dependent Schrodinger equations with slowly decaying potentials in which the
inverse equation admits simple poles. In higher dimensional settings the advent
of multiple poles cannot be ruled out. However, their structure is not
understood. The question of whether or not they may accumulate will also be
studied. One method to be used will consider solutions for time dependent
Schrodinger equations which are not necessarily bounded in time. This method has
been used to achieve the complete solution (for all potentials) for the one
dimensional nxn inverse scattering problem as well as for the one dimensional
n-th order scalar equation. Several classical equations and systems are expected
to be analyzed using results developed through this investigation. They include
the Zakharov-Shabat system and the KPI equation.