* 9000888
* Research Expereinces for Undergraduate in Particulate       Systems Engineering
* ENG,EFMA
* 05/01/1990,10/31/1991
* Brad Keck, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 10/31/1991
* USD 40,023.00

Research in Particulate systems Engineering in crucial to advances in
combustion, atmospheric and environmental sciences, nuclear winter studies,
nuclear reactor safety, and materials manufacturing. The purpose of this project
is to provide research experiences for undergraduate students in this area. At
least half of the students will be selected from institutions other the UMC,
with several recruited from Stephens College (a women's college), Lincoln
University (HCBU), and other undergraduate schools in the State. Each student
will undertake a specific research project, and a faculty advisor (participating
in the REU program) will work with the student to develop his/her research
skills. An essential element of the program will be its emphasis on professional
development of the students (e.g., paper writing and technical presentations).
The purpose is to infuse bright undergraduate students with an enthusiasm
towards research careers, including graduate level education. The University of
Missouri-Columbia has made substantial institutional commitments to the program.
These include support of faculty time, waiver of tuition and fees for the
student Participants, waiver of all overhead costs, and stipends for two
minority students (in addition to those supported by the NSF funds).