* 9000006
* CRB:  Genetic Diversity of Endangered Populations of        Mysticete Whales:  Mitochondrial DNA and Historical         Demography
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1992
* Stephen Palumbi, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 11/30/1992
* USD 179,720.00

Commercial exploitation over the past two hundred years drove the great
Mysticete whales to near extinction. Variation in the sizes of populations prior
to exploitation, minimal population size during exploitation and current
population sizes permit analyses of the effects of differing levels of
exploitation on species with different biogeographical distributions and life-
history characteristics. Dr. Stephen Palumbi at the University of Hawaii will
study the genetic population structure of three whale species in this context,
the Humpback Whale, the Gray Whale and the Bowhead Whale. The effect of
demographic history will be determined by comparing the genetic structure of the
three species. Additional studies will be carried out on the Humpback Whale. The
humpback has a world-wide distribution, but the Atlantic and Pacific populations
of the northern hemisphere appear to be discrete populations, as is the
population of the southern hemispheric oceans. Each of these oceanic populations
may be further subdivided into smaller isolates, each with its own migratory
pattern and somewhat distinct gene pool. This study will provide information on
the level of genetic isolation among populations and the levels of gene flow and
genealogical relationships among populations. This detailed genetic information
will facilitate international policy decisions regarding the conservation and
management of these magnificent mammals.