* 9000845
* REU Site in Biopsychology and Animal Learning
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/1990,04/30/1991
* Heywood Petry, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 04/30/1991
* USD 41,760.00

This award provides funds to the State University of New York, Stony Brook to
establish a summer program designed to immerse a small group of undergraduate
students in an active research environment spanning the areas of behavioral
neuroscience, psychophysiology and the experimental study of decision, choice
and self-control. The goal underlying this initiative is to introduce students
who are not currently involved in a laboratory research program to state-of-the-
art psychological research in some of the most interesting and important areas
of experimental psychology. This program is intended to foster interest in, and
an appreciation of, scientific research, especially for those students who might
not otherwise have an opportunity to participate in this type of activity.
Students will participate in an intense eight-week "hands-on" research
experience where, in addition to learning specific laboratory skills, they will
be exposed to all phases of the research process. They will also receive
academic counseling and have access to a variety of support services.
Undergraduates will conduct independent research projects in one of nine active
research laboratories in the Department of Psychology. They will be closely
supervised by faculty but will be encouraged to take as much responsibility as
possible for these projects. To supplement the laboratory experience, a variety
of group activities are planned (e.g., lab visits, lab meetings, "brown bag"
lunches, seminars and a mini-symposium). These activities are designed to
facilitate student interactions with the faculty mentors, as well as provide
opportunities to share experiences with one another. Since a positive research
experience may significantly affect a student's decision to pursue a career in
scientific research, it is important that an exciting and stimulating
environment be created.