* 9000603
* Seismic Characterization of Oceanic Crustal Structure in theRegion of ODP Site 504-B
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1993
* John Mutter, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 09/30/1993
* USD 189,621.00

The oceanic crust has frequently been modeled as relatively uniform in thickness
with a characteristic velocity structure composed of linear gradients that do
not generate reflectors in vertical incidence seismic profiling. Recently,
however, improved profiling techniques and data processing capabilities have
revealed that the lower oceanic crust in some regions has a distinct suite of
low-angle dipping reflectors. A few of these events cross the entire crustal
section and may terminate at depth in the uppermost mantle. The distribution and
origin of these events is critical to understanding the processes that form the
oceanic crust and the subsequent development of the stress field in the oceanic
plate. The present award will analyze previously collected data in the vicinity
of ODP site 504B in the eastern equatorial Pacific. Future drilling is planned
at this site to extend the hole into the lower crust. Analysis of the seismic
reflection data will allow the drilling results to be placed in a proper
regional context and should provide constraints on the nature of the crust
producing the reflectors. The project represents the first research support to
Dr. Zehnder who has recently completed her doctoral research on the deep crustal
structure in the North Atlantic.