* 9000526
* Numerical Solution of Least Squares Eigenvalue Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1993
* Jesse Barlow, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 01/31/1993
* USD 54,975.00

This project addresses a number of open questions concerning the accurate
solution of least squares and eigenvalue problems. These two problem areas are
interrelated, but there are separate issues for each one of them. For the work
on least squares problems, there remain important issues in both the analysis
and implementation of the algorithms. Both direct and iterative methods for the
solution of equality constrained least squares problems will be considered. The
work on direct methods concerns error analysis and implementation issues for
sparse problems and for message passing architectures. The effort on iterative
methods concerns the development of a class of preconditioners that would work
well on constrained least squares problems. The investigation of the eigenvalue
problems is based upon theoretical questions. Recently perturbation bounds on
the relative errors in the eigenvalues of a certain class of symmetric
diagonally dominant matrices have been developed. It has been shown that some
algorithms achieve these bounds. For one important class of algorithms, divide-
and-conquer algorithms, it is not known whether the relative error bounds can be
achieved. Since this class of algorithms has shown good performance on several
distributed memory architectures, the resolution of this open question will have
a significant impact on how eigenvalue problems are solved.