* 9000201
* The Role of Sarcodine-Algal Symbiotic Associations in Upper Ocean Carbon and Nitrogen Cycles
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1994
* David Caron, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 06/30/1994
* USD 250,000.00

The three classes of symbiont-bearing sarcodines (acantharia, polycystine
radiolaria and foraminifera) are a conspicuous component of upper ocean
communities. Most of the previous research on the ecology of these taxa has been
concentrated on a single species or limited group of species. Dr. Caron and
colleagues will simultaneously examine the ecological role of the entire
assemblage of these three protozoa. Their research examines two hypotheses: 1.
In nutrient-poor oceanic environments, the symbiont primary production in the
entire population of acantharia, polycystine radiolaria and foraminifera will
represent a significant fraction of the total primary production and will
dominate the production by large cells (operationally defined as cells larger
than 74um). 2. Sarcodines will be a disproportionately important component of
sinking material from the euphotic zone compared with their suspended biomass.
Symbiont production rates of the entire population of symbiont-bearing
sarcodines are determined through a combination of large volume and diver-
collected production measurements to evaluate the importance of this production
relative to total primary production. The significance of these planktonic
protists for the vertical flux of material is estimated by the concurrent
measurement of both the stocks of sarcodines and the rate of sinking export.
These measurements are coordinated with the GOFS Time-Series Study at Bermuda
(participation in two cruises per year), which enables the investigators to view
their results from a large, seasonal perspective.