* 9000874
* Mathematical Sciences: Cooperative Game Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/1990,08/31/1991
* David Housman, Drew University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 08/31/1991
* USD 24,000.00

Six undergraduates engaged in mathematical research on problems in cooperative
game theory will be supported by this Research Experiences for Undergraduates
award. Cooperative game theory is a good field for facilitating undergraduate
discovery. It is not normally included in the traditional undergraduate
curriculum, it provides a source of excellent applications to real world
problems and its relatively small body of literature is approachable and not
highly technical. Topics to be considered include value axiomatics, an area
whose goals are to characterize values by sets of properties and to determine
the classes of games on which well-known values satisfy certain properties -
properties usually prompted by intuitive notions of fairness or bargaining
power. Applications of values is another theme which involves applications such
as airport landings, traveling salesman and other assignment strategies. Other
topics for students include studies of multi-alternative voting power. Indices,
matroidal simple games and the complexity of simplex calculations of the
nucleolus of a game. Ample computer and library facilities are available for the
students. Each student will write a final report based upon the research
completed. It will then be prepared for journal submission, presentation at a
professional meeting or used as a basis for an honors thesis. A newsletter will
be circulated to maintain contact between participants and advisors.