* 9000574
* Experimental Verification of The Regenerative Engine
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1993
* Francisco Ruiz, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 06/30/1993
* USD 153,211.00

The regenerative engine is a new concept of internal combustion engine in which
part of the energy of the exhaust gases is recovered in a porous regenerator to
be used in the next cycle. As a result, the thermodynamic cycle in the engine is
radically changed. A computational model, including fluid friction as well as
thermodynamic variables, has shown indicated efficiencies in excess of 40
percent for wide ranges of fuel/air mixture ratios, speeds, loads, and design
parameters. This engine also promises a reduction of pollutant emissions and a
higher power density through the elimination of knock. It is proposed to test
experimentally this cycle in order to check the appropriateness of the model and
the practical potential of the new cycle. Conventional engine tests (load,
speed, fuel consumption, and emissions) will be performed over a prototype
engine composed of two single-cylinder engines. In this engine, one cylinder
acts as a compressor and the other as an expander with a variable phase
difference between them. Flow is controlled by a series of poppet valves.
Experimental indicated cycles will be obtained for comparison with the
predictions of the model and its further improvement. Heat transfer and
combustion sub-models will be added as experimental data become available.