* 9000925
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Grinding
* ENG,EEC
* 01/15/1990,06/30/1995
* Trevor Howes, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Jay Lee
* 06/30/1995
* USD 410,000.00

In todays extremely competitive manufacturing markets the optimization and
upgrading of manufacturing process and procedures is a continual process.
Grinding has traditionally been a final machining operation, performed on
components to impart required dimensional accuracy and surface finish. Current
trends in research, however, have led grinding to the high stock removal regime
where in areas such as creepfeed grinding and high speed centerless grinding,
process developments have allowed grinding to compete with other primary
machining operations such as milling and turning. Fundamental studies,
particularly in Europe, have resulted in predictable grinding operations which
yielded both higher quality and increased productivity. Thus it is essential
that this new technology be brought to American industry. This award establishes
an Industry/University Cooperative Center for Grinding Research at the
University of Connecticut. The Center's research theme is to conduct fundamental
and advanced level studies of the grinding process, and to develop and maintain
a grinding data base accessible to industry. Six industry members have already
joined the center providing $300,000 in support. The University of Connecticut
has agreed to forego its overhead charges (approximately $175,000 per year). In
addition, industrial members have also contributed equipment to the center and
adequate computers, laboratory space and instruments for the proposed research
are in place. The Program Manager recommends that the University of Connecticut
be awarded $75,000 each year for five (5) for the initiation of the Center for
Grinding Research and Development. $50,000 is to come from the I/UCRC program
and $25,000 is to come from the Manufacturing Systems Program (Marvin F.
Devries, Program Director). Near the end of each 12-month period, the Program
Manager and/or Director of the Engineering Centers Division will review the
progress of the Center on a number of renewal criteria, including the following:
(1) extent to which university/industry interaction and collaboration is
developing: (2) extent to which the support base for the center is expanding;
(3) extent to which a rebust research program is developing. If review is
satisfactory, the Program Manager will recommend support of the next period of
this continuing grant.