* 9000397
* High Energy Gamma Ray Astronomy, International Conference,  October 2-5, 1990, Ann Arbor, MI, Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1991
* James Matthews, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/1991
* USD 10,000.00

Description: This project supports the travel of four Indian scientists to the
U.S. to participate in an international conference on "High Energy Gamma Ray
Astronomy", planned for October 2 to 5, 1990 in Ann Arbor, MI. The conference
will review the data which are now becoming available from a number of upgraded
detectors which will provide a new look at a number of astrophysical objects
such as Hercules x1, Cygnus x3, SN 1987. Topics of the conference will include:
Observational data from accreting binary systems and isolated pulsars;
Theoretical models of gamma-ray production; Diffuse cosmic-ray sources of high
energy gamma-rays; Dark matter sources of gamma-rays; Implications of results
for elementary particle physics; and Proposed new gamma-ray and neutrino
detectors. The proposed Indian participants are senior and well-known physicists
who should contribute to the discussions in the conference and benefit from the
participation. Scope: The topic of the conference is in a field where the Indian
scientific community is active. The selected scientists are likely to increase
collaborative research between the U.S. and India and to help advance the field.
The support of their travel fits well with the objectives of the U.S.-India
Cooperative Science Program. Funding: Grant PHY89-21708 provides U.S.$4,000 for
support of the conference organization. This action provides $10,000 in Indian
currency for the travel of the Indian scientists.