* 9000264
* Geographical Variation in the Effects of Brown Algal        Secondary Metabolites on Temperate Marine Herbivores
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1993
* Peter Steinberg, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/1993
* USD 147,000.00

This research builds on previous findings that qualitative and quantitative
differences exist in the secondary metabolites produced by kelp-like plants
between the temperate northeast and southwest Pacific regions. The purpose of
the research is to: 1) further document variation in the levels and kinds of
secondary chemicals among large brown algae from California and New Zealand, and
2) determine behavioral and long term responses of selected marine plant-eating
invertebrates to these compounds. Extensive collections will be made from both
areas to document variation in concentrations of polyphenolic and lipophilic
compounds among the common brown algal species; among individuals and tissues
within species; and through time in detached plants. Feeding preferences of
common sea urchins and snails from both regions will be tested for the effects
of these secondary compounds by measuring variation in consumption rate.
Physiological influences of secondary metabolites on various plant-eating
invertebrates will be evaluated by measuring absorption efficiencies, growth
rates, and gonadal development among experimental treatments in which the kinds
and levels of secondary metabolites are varied. Hypothetically interactions
between algae and the animals which consume them will differ among these regions
in two important ways: 1) the amount and diversity of chemical defenses in New
Zealand algae will be greater than in California species; and 2) the algae
eaters in New Zealand will be more tolerant of polyphenolics than will similar
algal consuming invertebrates from California. Overall, the mechanisms which
mediate transfer of energy from the algae which are the dominant primary
producers on temperate rocky shores to the invertebrates which consume them are
predicted to vary greatly on a biogeographical scale.