* 9000091
* CRB:  Genetic Variation and Estimates of Population         Viability for a Rare Perennial Plant
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1993
* Eric Menges, Butler University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 11/30/1993
* USD 169,000.00

Optimizing the chances of survival of rare or endangered plants is a
fundamental concern of plant conservation biologists. Part of this effort
involves assessing the current "health" of populations and predicting chances of
their long-term survival. This work will compare two methods of assessing
population "health" and the likelihood of long-term survival for the royal
catch-fly (Silene regia), a prairie relict. The investigators will determine
levels of genetic variation in populations of various size, isolation, and
management using biochemical techniques. It is generally held that populations
high in genetic variation are better buffered against environmental
perturbations in the short-term and that genetic variation provides a pool of
resources that can be drawn from for long-term adaption and evolutionary change.
However, the importance of genetic variation to the persistence of plant
populations has rarely been demonstrated with field studies. The investigators
will compare data from genetic studies with demographic data of actual survival,
seed production, and seedling establishment of plants in the same sites.
Computer modeling will be used to project, based on actual values recorded over
the relatively short term of the study, into the future to estimate which
populations are most likely to persist.