* 9000186
* Support for U.S. Participation in International GeographicalUnion Activities - including the 27th IGU Congress to be    held in Washington, DC: August 1992
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1990,04/30/1994
* Melvin Marcus, Association of American Geographers
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/1994
* USD 59,950.00

Geographic research has been extremely dynamic in recent decades, making the
quadrennial congresses sponsored by the International Geographical Union (IGU)
especially important settings at which scholars from throughout the world meet
to exchange the most current results of their research and to plan future
collaborative activities. The 27th Congress of the ISPRS will be held in
Washington, D.C., in early August 1992, providing an excellent opportunity for
American scientists to meet directly with experts from throughout the rest of
the world. This award provides support for the 1992 IGU Congress in two ways.
First it provides financial assistance to offset costs of the planning and
operation of the congress. Second, it provides a means by which other federal
government agencies may provide financial support through interagency agreements
that will fund supplements to the initial award. This award will provide
valuable financial assistance for the planning and operation of the largest and
most significant gathering of geographers from throughout the world since the
1984 IGU Congress in Paris. As has been true of past IGU activities, enhanced
scholarship and increased involvement in international collaborative activities
by American geographers will result. Further positive consequences of this grant
will be realized if NSF can assist in channelling contributions from other
federal agencies to this important activity.