* 9000915
* U.S.-Senegal Cooperative Research: Early Cambrian Small     Shelly Fossils Stratigraphy &amp; Paleoenvironments in the      Southwest Taoudeni Basin, West Africa
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1990,02/28/1993
* Stephen Culver, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 02/28/1993
* USD 13,970.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Stephen J. Culver, Department of
Geological Sciences, Old Dominion University, and Dr. Ramzy Khatib, Department
of Geology, University of Dakar, Senegal, to enhance, for a period of 24 months,
their cooperation, presently supported in part under NSF Grant No. EAR-8816137,
on early Cambrian small shelly fossils, stratigraphy, and paleoenvironments in
the southwest Taoudeni Basin, West Africa. The paleontologic goal of extensive
sample collecting was realized but the other goal of that project, the
determination of paleoenvironments, was only partially achieved. The present
project will provide support for additional field work by the collaborators and
travel by Dr. Khatib to Old Dominion University (1) to undertake x-ray
diffraction and radiographic analyses of samples and (2) to collaborate on
results and interpretations. The project will add to our knowledge of the
stratigraphy of the Paleozoic basins and fold belts in West Africa. It will
refine our understanding of the distribution of earliest Cambrian schemes. The
project also will result in interpretations of the environments in which these
organisms lived, died, and accumulated as fossils. This project is relevant to
the objectives of the Science in Developing Countries Program which seeks to
increase the level of cooperation between U.S. scientists and engineers and
their counterparts in developing countries through the exchange of scientific
information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems
of mutual benefit.