* 9000647
* Undergraduate Research in Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1990,10/31/1991
* Stephen Davis, Pepperdine University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 10/31/1991
* USD 40,060.00

The award provides funds to the Natural Science Division at Pepperdine
University to enhance an already active program of undergraduate research in
biology by teaching students the common elements of the research process and
increasing their appreciation for the diversity of biological subdisciplines. In
addition, the program provides a mechanism whereby students from traditionally
underrepresented groups in science will have the opportunity to experience
biological research. The program will begin in the summer with a 6-day research
orientation workshop at the Murchison Science Center during which students will
be introduced to the uses and limitations of specific research tools and
techniques and immersed in the research process (literature review, hypothesis
formulation, and hypothesis testing). After the orientation workshop, students
will pursue individual research projects under the direction of faculty in
either ecology, cellular biochemistry, or neurobiology. All research projects
will be designed to provide students with insight into how scientists formulate
research questions, design experiments, collect and analyze data, and
communicate their results to the scientific community. Over the course of the
summer, visiting scientists will hold special research seminars in each research
area, giving students an opportunity to discuss their own data with other
scientists. Each research group will hold weekly literature seminars to discuss
current journal articles pertaining to their research interests. The program
will conclude with a student research symposium in early August.