* 9000100
* CRB:  Practical Assessment of Reproductive Biology of an    Endangered or Threatened Species
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1992
* John Phillips, Zoological Society of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 11/30/1992
* USD 49,219.00

All 37 species of monitor lizards are considered as threatened or endangered.
Habitat destruction and human intervention have caused serious disturbances in
numerous populations of these lizards (genus Varanus). Complicating this
decrease in diversity is that monitor lizards do not reproduce well in
captivity. Indeed successful captive propagation of selected species has only
occurred after sufficient behavioral and physiological information has been
collected from natural populations. With permission from the Department of
Nature Conservation in Namibia, Africa, Dr. Phillips will study savanna monitor
lizards in their natural habitat. Integrating a series of field and laboratory
studies, he and his colleague, Dr. Pratt, will determine the hormonal correlates
of behavior in males and females, examine the environmental and social
conditions required for successful hatching of eggs, and determine what causes
reproductive dysfunction in captive female monitor lizards. Not only will these
findings provide baseline data from which the other varanid species can be
compared, but the establishment of ecophysiological data base that emphasizes
the behavioral and endocrinological aspects of natural reproduction could proved
a proximate solution for maintaining viable populations. Indeed information
originating from this work is essential to establish successful captive breeding
programs which will allow for the preservation of the species and the eventual
reintroduction of these monitor lizards into the wild.