* 9000517
* Further Calibration of Long-Chain Alkenones for             Paleoceanographic Study
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/1990,10/31/1992
* Fredrick Prahl, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 10/31/1992
* USD 216,050.00

Long-chain alkenones are now widely recognized as promising for the assessment
of paleotemperature and to some extent paleoproductivity in surface waters of
the ocean. Ourability to interpret accurately the complete paleoceanographic
implications of stratigraphic records for the alkenones inmarine sediment cores
is currently limited by an ignorance of the ecology of the phytoplankton species
that produce these biomarkers and of the ecology of the phytoplankton species
that produce these biomarkers and of the processes responsible for their
preservation in the sedimentary record. This research will advance our ability
to extract realistice paleoceanographic information from the sedimentary record
for the alkenonoes. The project willintegrate results from analyses of
laboratory phytoplankton cultures and particulate samples from the field. The
field samples include select sets of suspended particulate materials collected
from ocean surface waters, vertically transported particulate materials
collected in time series by sediment traps and underlying sediments collected by
coring at three locations along an east-west transect off northern California.
The two major goals of the proposed work are to clarify 1) where alkenone-
producing phytoplankton reside withing the euphotic zone as a function of
season, when these organisms are productive during the year and what surface
water temperature is recorded by alkenone unsaturation patterns measured in
underlying sediments as a consequence of these factors and 2) how the downcore
record for alkenone concentration relates torelative changes in prymnesiophyte
productivity and perhaps total primary productivity in overlying waters with
time.