* 9001832
* PRF/J:  Molecular Phylogenetic Characterization of a Natural Microbial Community Under Changing Environmental Conditions
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1992
* Matthew Kane, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Scott L. Collins
* 07/31/1992
* USD 58,800.00

The objective of the proposed study is to use molecular criteria to identify
obligate or synergistic associations among members of a natural anaerobic
microbial biofilm community under changing environmental conditions. To achieve
this objective, comparative sequencing of environmentally derived 16s ribosomal
RNAs and application of phylogenetically-based hybridization probes will be used
to identify and monitor the dominant members of groundwater biofilm communities
that are established within laboratory bioreactor systems. In conjunction with
in situ hybridization techniques, this molecular framework will be used to
define interdependent relationships among community members such as those
involving H2-producing bacteria (fermentative and fatty acid-and alcohol-
oxidizing bacteria) and H2-consuming bacteria (methanogenic bacteria and
sulfate-reducing bacteria). Bioreactor operating conditions (eg. Substrate
concentration and sulfate concentration) will be altered to detect these
interdependent associations by following coordinate fluctuations among selected
microbial populations (using the molecular approach described above) during
biofilm colonization, development and establishment of the climax community. The
proposed research should provide fundamental information regarding the
diversity, stability and function of natural microbial communities. Such basic
information about microbial communities has thusfar been inaccessible, but
constitutes the foundation for studies of microbial ecosystem perturbation and
assessment of the risk associated with the release of genetically engineered
microorganisms into the environment.