* 9001985
* Renal Function in Vertebrates
* BIO,IOS
* 10/15/1990,03/31/1997
* William Dantzler, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Stacia A. Sower
* 03/31/1997
* USD 570,000.00

The proposed studies concern the mechanisms and the regulation of those
mechanisms whereby the kidneys excrete water, inorganic substances, and organic
substances. They involve the regulation of the rate of production of a filtrate
of the blood and the mechanisms by which organic and inorganic substances are
moved across renal tubule cells, either from the initial filtrate back into the
blood perfusing these cells or from the blood perfusing these cells into the
initial filtrate. The organic substances being studied are those that exist as
positively charged molecules (primarily the exogenous nerve blocking agent,
tetraethylammonium, and the endogenous product of nicotinic acid metabolism,
N1-methylnicotinamide) and those that exist as negatively charged molecules
(primarily the exogenous compound, p- aminohippurate, and the endogenous end
product of nitrogen metabolism, urate). These studies take advantage of the
relatively simple kidneys of reptiles in which the movement (or some
characteristic of the movement) of some substances across the tubule cells is
more pronounced than in mammals, and the complex kidneys of birds, which in part
resemble the kidneys of reptiles and in part resemble the kidneys of mammals.
The experimental approach is an integrative one that explores function at the
membrane cell, and whole organ levels. These studies are important for
understanding the way in which the kidneys permit animals to survive in specific
environments and to adapt to changing environments. This understanding is
particularly important in terms of adopting strategies to insure the survival of
animal populations in the face of major changes in the earth's environment. Such
strategies may also be important to human populations. These studies will also
provide substantial insight into the way in which the kidneys in wild or
domestic animals populations handle organic environmental pollutants, including
many toxic compounds. This understanding applies also to human kidneys, not only
in terms of normally toxic substances but also in terms of therapeutic agents
that can be toxic when present in excess. Finally, these studies will provide
information on the way in which the kidneys eliminate urate, an important
substance in renal stone formation in humans and other animals. //