* 9001755
* csgA Gene and Cell Interactions in Myxococcus xanthus
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/1990,05/31/1994
* Lawrence Shimkets, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 05/31/1994
* USD 255,000.00

Myxococcus xanthus development is regulated by the Csg intercellular
communication system. The C signal appears to be the polypeptide product of the
csgA gene. The preliminary results suggest four directions for future work.
First, random mutagenesis of csgA followed by DNA sequencing of developmental
mutants is expected to determine the important functional domains of the
protein. Second, examination of the regulation of csgA in response to moderated
levels of nutrients is expected to reveal how nutrient levels are assessed in
this organism and used to regulate gene expression. This project will involve a)
random mutagenesis and DNA sequencing of the regulatory region to identify
nucleotides that play a critical role in regulation, b) cloning of genes
encoding regulatory proteins using recognition site probes, c) characterization
of the protein-DNA interactions with gel mobility shift assays and DNA foot
printing, and d) quantitation of the expression levels in vivo using a reporter
locus. Third, continued analysis of the csgA suppressor mutations is expected to
reveal other steps in the signaling process. Several suppressor alleles have
been cloned and these will be sequenced and studied by other functional assays.
%%% The life cycle of the myxobacterium, Myxococcus xanthus, contains the basic
elements found in the development of higher organisms including directed cell
movement, multicellular morphogenesis, regulated gene expression and cellular
differentiation. It can therefore serve as an experimentally accessible model
for the study of these processes.