* 9001334
* Research Experience for Undergraduates
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1990,10/31/1991
* Leonard Shaw, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* name not available
* 10/31/1991
* USD 48,527.00

Continued funding for an ongoing undergraduate research program that for five
years has been training electrical engineering and computer science students
during the summers before their senior years is sought. Students will be
recruited from a variety of other schools, including primarily undergraduate
institutions. The research environment will be enriched by additional
undergraduate students funded from other sources. Each participant will have
regular meetings with an individual faculty mentor to plan work and review
progress throughout the eleven week program. Project topics in electrophysics
will include artificial plasmas, microwave propagation. microstrip antennas,
frequency doubling in lasers, picosecond opto- electronics, and thin film
devices. Information systems topics will include image communication, multi-
variable feedback control, continuous phase modulation digital signalling, LAN
simulation tools, and robotics. All will benefit from extensive interactions
with participating faculty and graduate students. Participants will have
informative tours of our research laboratories. There will be two or three
seminar presentations to the group by leaders from industry, universities or
government agencies. A tour will be arranged at a nearby industrial lab or
national laboratory. The program will terminate with a two-day research review
during which each student will make a presentation and answer abstract of his
report. A prize will be awarded to the best project.