* 9001270
* Structure and Chemical Interactions at Model Polymer        Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1993
* David Allara, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 11/30/1993
* USD 266,200.00

Chemical Interactions and structural features of organic groups in polymer
interfaces will be studied in detail by a combination of synthesis of thin-film
model interface structures and application of several spectroscopic techniques.
The most significant interactions of interest are weak, chemically specific
bonds, particularly Bronsted acid-base interactions involving functional groups
such as carboxylic acid, amide, amine, hydroxyl, ester, and ketone. Model
organic/organic interfaces will be constructed that place polymer overlayers of
monolayer thicknesses in contact with a planar substrate functionalized with
organized arrays of polar organic groups of well-defined orientations. Polymer
overlayers will be formed by equilibrium-like solution deposition.
Characterization of the molecular structures and chemical interactions will be
monitored primarily (but not exclusively) by infrared vibrational spectroscopy,
optical spectroscopic ellipsometry, and quartz crystal microgravimmetry. The
data will be quantitatively analyzed for the number of interactions between
groups at the interface, the orientations and conformations of the groups and
the polymer backbone units, the overall morphology of the film (density
variations and topography) and the thermodynamics of the adsorption process.
Conclusions will be drawn accordingly as to correlations between the initial
substrate surface, polymer chain structure, and the final interfacial
structures. In the long term, such work should contribute to accurate prediction
of interfacial behavior and properties of adsorbed polymer films, and should
provide well-defined systems for tests theory.