* 9001224
* FASEB Research Conference: Cellular and Molecular Genetics  to be held at Copper Mountain, Colorado, from August 12-17, 1990.
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1992
* Inder Verma, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 01/31/1992
* USD 5,000.00

This grant will partially, support a FASEB Summer Research Conference on
Cellular and Molecular Genetics to be held at Copper Mountain, Colorado from
August 12-17, 1990. The major goal of this conference is to bring together an
eminent group of cellular biologists, molecular biologists, neurobiologists,
biochemists and geneticists to discuss multidisciplinary approaches to topics
which are at the forefront of contemporary biology. The Conference is
deliberately meant to encompass broader areas so that participants in diverse
fields, but with common scientific goals, have an opportunity to interact. There
are nine sessions spread over five days. There will be a session in the morning
and evening and the afternoons would be used either to discuss new technologies
or for poster presentations. The topics deal with: DNA replication,
developmental biology of lower and higher eukaryotes, systems which allow
understanding of cellular differentiation, regulation of transcription,
oncogenesis, RNA processing, the cell cycle regulation, molecular neurobiology
and human genetics. Additionally, there will be sessions dealing with techniques
to generate transgenic mice, homologous recombination and physical manipulation
of large genomes. In each scheduled session, the chairperson has carefully
selected three or four principal speakers to introduce the general subject. The
applicants are to include an abstract along with the application. The number of
participants is not to exceed 150. There is extensive opportunity for discussion
which will facilitate communication to promote scientific cooperation and
collaboration among the participants.*** //