* 9001172
* Dissertation Research:  Neighborhood Effects on Seed        Dispersal of a Neotropical Mistletoe
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1990,03/31/1992
* Sarah Sargent, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 03/31/1992
* USD 9,000.00

Fruiting plants that rely on frugivorous birds for seed dispersal may
experience important fitness consequences resulting from neighborhood influences
on bird foraging movements. Birds respond to spatial patterns of fruit resource
availability; thus these patterns will influence seed deposition patterns.
Neighborhood effects on seed dispersal have not been studied. This research
examines these effects on a tropical mistletoe species in pasture trees at
Monteverde, Costa Rica. Neighborhood effects from the individual plant
perspective, on three stages of dispersal; bird visitation, behavior during
visits, and post- visitation movements, using an array of high and low density
host and mistletoe neighborhoods (ca. 1 ha) will be determined. Mistletoes
provide good systems for examining seed dispersal because bird deposition of
seeds can be observed directly, and, as parasites, they have unique dispersal
requirements. The study system provides a unique opportunity to examine these
effects because of the arrangement of hosts and mistletoes at the site. The
study will also enhance general knowledge of these little-studied tropical
species. Disturbed habitats, such as the proposed site, are of increasing
importance in the neotropics with the continuing loss of forests, and an
understanding of ecological interactions in these habitats is likewise of
increasing importance. Mistletoes can be serious pests in deforested areas where
mostly susceptible trees are left standing; thus, this study is of both basic
and applied interest.