* 9001260
* Dissertation Research:  Systematics and Phylogeny           in Carex sect. Griseae (Cyperaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1990,08/31/1992
* Anton Reznicek, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 08/31/1992
* USD 10,080.00

Sedges are perennial herbs that resemble grasses, with long, narrow leaves and
small, unisexual flowers that are mostly wind pollinated. Sedges have a
worldwide distribution but are most diverse in North America and eastern Asia.
They grow in a wide range of habitats, and many species are restricted to
particular local environments. Sedges play important roles in wetland
succession, peat development, and stabilization of slopes, and they provide food
and shelter to wildlife. Despite their ecological importance, their taxonomy is
in poor condition, with large numbers of species described on the basis of only
a few, often unreliable morphological features. Graduate student Robert Naczi
under the guidance of faculty sponsor Anton Reznicek at the University of
Michigan is studying the taxonomy and evolution of sedges of the genus Carex
section Griseae, a group of about 17 species native to eastern North America.
Data from the study of morphology, anatomy, and chromosomes will be used to
delimit coherent species, and these will be mapped against soil substrate and
geographical range. Comparisons with other sedge groups will be made to
hypothesize a likely phylogeny for the group, for future testing with molecular
data. The results of the project should be a model investigation useful to
systematists and ecologists worldwide who are interested in the biology and
evolution of sedges.