* 9001012
* Mathematical Sciences: Differential and Integral Equations  for Physical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1990,04/30/1994
* Richard MacCamy, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 04/30/1994
* USD 67,554.00

This project continues mathematical work on modeling, analysis and design of
numerical algorithms for physical systems, the behavior of which is heavily
influenced by non-local effects in time, space and both. Three classes of such
systems are investigated. The first comprises viscoelastic and thermoelastic
time-memory models, the second concerns interface problems arising in elastic
and electromagnetic scattering by inhomogeneous obstacles, some of which involve
non-local operators in space and time, while the third focuses on reaction-
diffusion problems in population genetics with state-dependent diffusion
velocity. A central theme of this research is a careful study of the strength of
damping mechanisms induced by non-local effects and the influence of damping on
well-posedness, including variational formulation techniques, asymptotic
behavior, and approximation of non-local effects to facilitate easier
implementation of numerical methods. The problems require the development of
delicate analytical and numerical techniques coupled with a thorough
understanding of the underlying physics. Some of this work builds on a recent
paper in which the concept of steady-state power loss is introduced as a measure
of the strength of damping for models with singular kernels. It is expected that
this point of view will prove valuable in the study of global well-posedness and
limiting behavior.