* 9001341
* Dissertation Research:  Generic Revision and Phylogeny of   the Dolichoderinae (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1990,05/31/1991
* Philip Ward, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 05/31/1991
* USD 6,054.00

The goals of this dissertation research project to be performed by Steven O.
Shattuck and Professor Philip S. Ward of the University of California at Davis
are to define genera within the ant sub-family Dolichoderinae (about 1000
species worldwide, in 31 genera) and attempt to demonstrate their monophyly
(having one ancestral origin) based on morphological traits of workers, queens,
males, and larvae. Other goals are to analyze cladistic relationships among
these groups using rigorous methods of phylogenetic inference, develop a key to
all known genera based on the above-mentioned character analysis, and compile a
species- level catalog of all taxa (including information on current generic
status, type locality, and if available, location and number of type specimens).
Preserved material at existing museum collections in the United States, Canada,
and the United Kingdom will be examined for characters suitable for cladistic
analysis. Hypotheses about relationships among genera will be evaluated by
examining congruence between worker, queen, and male ant data sets and by
statistical estimation of cladogram confidence limits. Results will identify
natural units for alpha-taxonomic studies, provide a foundation for species-
level phylogenetic investigations by elucidating sister-group relationships
among genera, and assist in access to the taxonomic literature on the
Dolichoderinae.