* 9001963
* U.S. - Argentina Cooperative Research: Studies on the       Robust Control of Chemical Processes
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1991,06/30/1993
* Ahmet Palazoglu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 06/30/1993
* USD 13,716.00

This award supports cooperative research in chemical process control to be
conducted by Ahmet Palazoglu of the University of California at Davis and Jose
Ramagnoli of the Chemical Engineering Pilot Plant of CONICET in Bahia Blanca,
Argentina. The primary object of this collaborative effort is to develop design
and analysis methods for robust process control systems. With increasing demands
on product quality, contraints on process economics and stringent environmental
regulations, automatic control has undeniably become and integral pat of
chemical process operations. However, reliable under various operating regimes
and demand that the controllers respond to such variations without loss of
performance or stability characteristics. The methods developed through this
collaboration will be tested on various applications. The U. S. investigators
have already investigated a high purity distillation column model to demonstrate
the uncertainty characterization by various methods. The dynamic model of double
effect high purity column has also been developed and its behavior has been
tested under multi-loop PI control. The research team in Argentina has studied
the singular value and the structured singular value concepts in characterizing
model uncertainty for chemical processes. These two groups have complementary
expertise in the area of robust control of linear and nonlinear process.
Demonstrated by a number of publications, the two linear process. Demonstrated
by a number of publications, the two groups have investigated the use of various
representations of the model/plant mismatch and arrived at design and analysis
methods. The UC Davis group emphasizes the use of mag- nitude/phase information
as well as its extensions to highly structured cases. In terms of applications,
the UC Davis group developed rigorous dynamic models of high purity distillation
systems while the Argentines work with triple effect evaporators and fixed-bed
reactors, including pilot plant studies. Development of robust control
strategies ultimately benefits processing industries in both countries by
assisting them to operate process units with more confidence under tight control
situations.