* 9001036
* Dissertation Research:  Interactions of Controlled Nutrient Enrichment, Plant Growth, and Insect Herbivory in Red       Mangrove (Rhizophora mangle)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1992
* Edward Barrows, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Jethro Moorefield
* 11/30/1992
* USD 8,589.00

Primary productivity of mangroves is an important source of nutrients for
adjacent marine systems. The level of productivity is affected not only by
environmental factors but also by other components of the mangrove community.
Nutrient enrichment might have direct impact on aquatic food webs by increasing
primary productivity of mangroves, but enrichment to coastal waters might be
mitigated because as much as 20% of mangrove leaf material is removed by
herbivores. The objective of this study is to determine the effects of nutrient
enrichment on primary productivity of the key mangrove species, Rhizophora
mangle, and on rates of insect herbivory in a controlled experiment in which
nutrient availability in sediment is manipulated. The following hypotheses will
be tested: 1. Nutrient enrichment causes increased leaf production and terminal
branch production, internodal elongation, and flowering. 2. Nutritional quality
(e.g., CNP ratio, water content) of mangrove tissues increases following
nutrient enrichment of the sediment. 3. Nutritional quality of mangrove tissues
correlates with rates of insect herbivory by both leaf feeders (folivores) and
twig borers (xylovores). 4. Secondary use of R. mangle twigs by insects and
their kin, e.g., predators, parasites, twig-nesting ants, etc., increases with
rate of primary herbivory. 5. Proportions of species in the twig-feeding guild
of R. mangle change following nutrient enrichment. This research will contribute
to the knowledge base on mangrove ecology and may provide important information
useful in conservation of mangroves.//