* 9001668
* Dissertation Research:  Archaeological Investigation of LateStone Age Sites in the Mema Region of Mali
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/1990,01/31/1993
* Susan McIntosh, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1993
* USD 11,995.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Susan McIntosh, Ms. Helen Haskell will conduct
archaeological survey and excavation in the Mema or "Dead Delta" region of Mali.
The results of this work will form the basis for her doctoral dissertation. The
Mema, as geomorphological data indicates, was once a well watered region which
coincided with the inland delta of the Niger River. A change in the river's
course has turned the region to desert. The small amount of archaeological
research which has been done in the region indicates that it contains
archaeological sites which probably span several millennia. They include at
least two which document the transition from a pure hunting and gathering
existence to one which incorporated livestock and domesticated plants. The goal
of Ms. Haskell's research is to shed light on this transition period. Guiding
herself with aerial photographs, Ms. Haskell will conduct a vehicle survey of
the region, noting both ancient landforms and scatters of archaeological
materials. In conjunction, these data will provide information on prehistoric
landscape use. She will also conduct test excavations at two sites and collect
pottery, stone tools, and other cultural remains as well as floral and faunal
materials. This project is important for several reasons. First, it will fill in
what is almost a complete archaeological blank. It will provide information on
how cultures at a very simple level of technology adapted to a rigorous Saharan
environment and, hopefully, shed light on the introduction of agriculture and
pastoralism to sub-Saharan Africa. Finally, it will aid in the training of an
extremely promising young scientist.