* 9001157
* Dissertation Research: Dispersed Introgression Between Yucca baccata and Y. schidigera (Agavaceae)
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1992
* Michael Hanson, Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 11/30/1992
* USD 9,274.00

Hybridization has long been important to plant breeding and the production of
crop plants. Less well understood, however, is the importance of hybridization
in the evolution of wild plants. In part this is because it can be difficult to
detect and document the occurrence of hybridization events and to distinguish
genetic novelties introduced from another species from natural genetic variation
arising within a species by mutation processes. Recently, new and powerful
molecular methods for analyzing directly the DNA of plants have made possible a
broad analysis of this problem. Graduate student Hanson under the guidance of
Dr. Loren Rieseberg of the Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden is studying a
presumptive case of repeated hybridization events (termed introgression) between
two species of yuccas of the American Southwest. Protein markers are being
assayed by electrophoresis, and variation in nuclear ribosomal and plastid DNA
is being analyzed by enzymatic restriction-sites. Several related yucca species
are also being studied to infer the phylogenetic relationships among species in
this group, in order to determine whether the two hybridizing species have
shared a recent common ancestor. Recent ancestry can also lead to a pattern of
shared genetic markers that could be confused with hybridization. The range of
protein and DNA markers to be studied, from both nuclear and chloroplast
genomes, will help distinguish between recent common ancestry and current
introgression. The study will thus advance understanding of hybridization in
natural plant populations, and will help in the training of a young plant
scientist.