* 9001535
* PRF/J:  The Consequences of Resource Availability and Plant Apparency on Patterns of Herbivory and Herbivore Defense in an Annual Tarweed, Hemizonia luzulaefolia
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1992
* Gregory English-Loeb, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 07/31/1992
* USD 58,800.00

Ecotypes of Hemizonia Luzulaefolia (Asteraceae) will be used to examine
predictions of two theories concerned with the evolution of plant defenses
against herbivores: the resource availability and the apparency hypotheses. The
resource availability hypothesis predicts that plants adapted to low- resource
environments should allocate proportionally more resources to defense than
plants adapted to high-resource environments. Two ecotypes of H.luzulaefolia
(one adapted to resource-poor serpentine soil and one adapted to resource-rich
sandstone soil) in 1) a reciprocal transplant garden experiment to assess this
prediction in terms of plant fitness and 2) a container experiment to examine
underlying eco-physiological mechanisms) will be used. H.luzulaefolia produces
non-resinous rosette leaves prior to flowering and resinous leaves (presumably a
defense against herbivores) when flowering is initiated. In addition, two
ecotypes differ in flowering time (spring vs.fall) and in quantity of resins
produced. The apparency hypothesis predicts that this variation in the timing
and quantity of resin production is attributable to variation in vulnerability
to herbivores. This idea will be tested by placing different growth stages of
the two ecotypes into the grassland at several times during the season and
measure herbivore damage. It is anticipated that results generated from these
experiments will provide an empirical base for modifying current theory on the
evolution of herbivore defense. //