* 9001376
* Discovery and Photometry of Low Metallicity and Horizontal  Branch Stars in the Galactic Halo
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1993
* Timothy Beers, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 11/30/1993
* USD 187,156.00

Dr. Beers will complete an objective prism survey of the northern and southern
hemispheres of our Galaxy and then follow up on selected stars which have
extremely low metal abundances and stars on the horizontal branch of their
evolutionary track. The final database of candidates should include about 16,000
stars with relatively low abundances of iron, and about 25,000 horizontal branch
stars will be identified. The halo of our Galaxy contains less than 1 percent of
the luminous stars in the entire Galaxy. Yet the halo is fundamental for
revealing crucial issues of stellar evolution, the processes of galaxy formation
and evolution, and for constraining the distribution of matter throughout the
Galaxy. To understand the halo, one must first find it and characterize it.
Ideally, complete spectroscopic and photometric information for the
approximately one billion luminous stars which populate the halo would allow the
observer to draw a picture of the halo which is untainted by sampling bias.
Short of this, one can only attempt to minimize the effects of any selection
criteria which must be imposed to make the problem tractable. In its broadest
sense, the purpose of Dr. Beers' survey is to discover the objects which will,
eventually, allow for a much more complete understanding of the halo of our
Galaxy.