* 9001654
* Differential Heat Flux Probe for Measurement of Groundwater Velocity
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1991
* Joseph Feldkamp, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 09/30/1991
* USD 46,525.00

This is an award to provide support for research on the development of an
instrument that can be used to measure the velocity of water flowing in
subsurface aquifers. The basis of instrument operation is the generation and
observation of a migrating thermal plume in the vicinity of the heated probe.
The proposed instrument will be equipped to sense the motion of groundwater by
monitoring the discharge of heat from the isothermally heated cylinder to the
surrounding soil as a function of location on the probe surface. Unlike
presently available devices, groundwater flow is directed around rather than
through the probe. This provides the instrument with the advantage of component
isolation from the groundwater environment. Hence, the probe is expected to
maintain excellent long term stability (years). An accurate knowledge of
groundwater movement is needed as greater pressures are exerted on our available
groundwater resources. The depletion and recharge of groundwater supplies as
well as the migration of contaminant "plumes" through groundwater can only be
predicted given a knowledge of groundwater flow characteristics. This primarily
entails a complete knowledge of groundwater flow speed and direction for the
zone of interest. This award was made in accord with criteria outlined in NSF
89-85, Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER).