* 9001530
* Mossbauer Studies of Nitrite Reductase and                  Vanadium-containing Nitrogenase
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1994
* Boi Hanh Huynh, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Arthur Kowalsky
* 05/31/1994
* USD 285,000.00

Living matters are sustained by large-scale cycles of energy and chemical
elements, and one of the most essential elements in biological materials is
nitrogen. To study the many different biological processes which govern the
nitrogen status in the biosphere is, therefore, of vital importance. Nitrogenase
and nitrite reductase are two enzymes which catalyze key steps in the nitrogen
cycle. Nitrogenase catalyzes the conversion of atmospheric dinitrogen into
ammonia (nitrogen fixation) and many microorganisms use it to assimilate
nitrogen into the living system. Nitrate reductase reduces nitrite to ammonia
and a variety of nitrate-reducing bacteria, as well as some sulfate reducing
bacteria, use it for terminal respiration and dissimilates nitrogen back to the
physical world. Structural and functional studies of these enzymes are therefore
of fundamental importance and should provide information pertinent to the
understanding of our living environment. In this application, Dr. Huynh proposes
to perform Mossbauaer studies of the following enzymes: 1. the vanadium-iron
protein of the nitrogenase enzyme system from Azotobacter vinelandii. 2. the
nitrite reductase from Desulfovibrio desulfuricans. Both the vanadium-iron
protein and nitrite reductase are complex enzymes containing multiple iron
centers which can be most effectively studied by Mossbauer spectroscopy. The
proposed experiments include (i)characterizations of the native enzymes,
(ii)redoxtitration studies, (iii) pH- dependence investigations and
(iv)examinations of substrate- and ligand-binding effects. The Mossbauer results
will be correlated with data obtained form other physico-biochemical methods,
including optical and electron paramagnetic resonance techniques. Dr. Huynh
hopes to fully characterize the iron centers in these enzymes, to obtain
physical and biochemical properties, to reveal the roles these iron centers play
in their enzymatic functions and to enhance our understanding of the mechanisms
of biological nitrogen fixation and nitrite reduction.