* 9001063
* New Synthetic Approaches in Boron Chemistry
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1995
* Larry Sneddon, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Paul H. Smith
* 09/30/1995
* USD 619,000.00

This project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
is in the general area of main-group chemistry and in the specific area of boron
hydride chemistry. Boron-hydrogen compounds are of considerable practical
interest as starting materials for the synthesis of new materials or for
improved syntheses of known materials, such as metal borides. The goal of this
project is to develop new synthetic strategies to facilitate high yield
selective transformations in boron hydride chemistry. Of especial interest is
the use of transition metals to catalyze transformations of polyhedral boranes
and carboranes. The use of ruthenium carbonyl compounds to catalyze the
insertion of alkynes into polyhedral carboranes will be investigated. Metal-
catalyzed alkyne and olefin addition and coupling reactions will be used for the
synthesis of alkenyl- and alkyl-boranes. Late transition elements will be
investigated as catalysts for isomerizations of carborane cages. Transition
metals, particularly Pt(II), will be investigated also as catalysts for dehydro-
coupling, -condensation, -cyclization and -cage growth reactions of boranes. In
a second major sub-project the syntheses and chemical and structural properties
of hybrid polyhedral boranes, such as hypho-dithiaborane clusters, will be
investigated.