* 9001619
* Problems in Discrete Pattern Matching
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/1991,12/31/1993
* Udi Manber, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Dana S. Richards
* 12/31/1993
* USD 154,531.00

Discrete pattern matching includes a large class of problems of pattern matching
over discrete domains. These problems are driven by several applications, mostly
in the areas of molecular biology and information retrieval. There are several
features that are common to most of these problems. The input is usually a
sequence, a set of sequences, a set of integer-weighted sequences, or even a
graph of sequences, over a finite alphabet. The goal of the problem is to
identify common patterns (i.e., a subsequence or a set of subsequences) that
satisfy several constraints and/or optimize several objectives. The problems
differ not only by the constraints and objectives, but also by the type of
input. This project mainly concerns algorithmic questions in discrete pattern
matching. The investigators will identify important problems, develop new
algorithms for a variety of problems, find common algorithmic techniques, and
study relationships among different problems. The emphasis will be on four kinds
of problems which are identified by their domains: sequence comparisons, which
involve problems of finding large common subsequences of two (or more)
sequences; pattern-sequence comparisons, which involve finding more complicated
patterns, such as regular expressions of sequences, in given sequences; pattern
matching in hypertext systems, which generalizes the previous problems to
"hyper- sequences" or, in other words, pieces of sequences connected by links;
and hierarchical pattern matching, which involves finding patterns over domains
that are by themselves patterns obtained from other matches.