* 9001307
* Dissertation Research:  Fitness Consequences of Floral      Nectar Production Rate for the Hummingbird-Pollinated Plant Ipomopsis aggregata
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1991
* Nickolas Waser, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 05/31/1991
* USD 3,080.00

Nectar is the most common floral reward produced by angiosperms, but little is
known about the effect of nectar production rate on pollination success. This
investigation will focus on this relationship for the hummingbird-pollinated
monacarpic plant Ipomopsis aggregata. The primary question of the study involves
the overall effect of nectar production rate on fitness: 1) Do plants with
higher nectar production rates have greater pollination success? Preliminary
field evidence indicates that this does occur (at least for male function
pollination success), so study of the causal mechanisms of this effect will be
profitable. This question will answered by: 2) How does NPR affect standing
crop? 3) How does standing crop affect visitation behavior? 4) How does
visitation behavior affect pollination success? The study will investigate these
questions with a variety of mutually reinforcing approaches, including computer
simulation, observation of the effects of natural variation in NPR, and
manipulative experiments in the field and aviary. Estimates of the effect of
each mechanism in isolation can be combined to produce an estimate of
pollination success that can be compared with benchmark values from Question 1,
testing the adequacy of the mechanisms proposed. The research will increase
understanding, not only of the fitness consequences of variation in NPR, but the
mechanisms through which such effects may be expressed.