* 9001106
* Binary Liquids Near Boundaries: Structures, Transitions, andDynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1994
* Carl Franck, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 06/30/1994
* USD 210,000.00

This research program is to learn about the behavior of liquid mixtures near
solid boundaries. The work is primarily experimental. The fundamental issues are
the nature of the boundary states, including their microscopic structure; the
role and origins of short and long range substrate-liquid interactions; the
importance of thermal fluctuations; and the response to thermodynamic forces
both in and out of equilibrium. There are three main projects: First, a
capillary rise exploration of the transitions between states of wetting at bulk
coexistence. The variables here are temperature and the chemistry of the bulk
liquids and the substrates. Second, optical studies of the polarization and
intensity of reflected light from liquid-solid interfaces as a means of
uncovering microscopic features of equilibrium wetting layer structure. Third,
the exploration of the nonequilibrium response of wetting structures to
temperature changes with time and fluid motion. The aim here is to learn about
otherwise inaccessible regimes of equilibrium response as well as time-dependent
phenomena. As a supplementary project, they will join with the research group of
Benjamin Widom to study the interfacial structure and energy of phase-separated
polymer solutions through reflectivity and capillary rise experiments.