* 9001046
* An International Research Conference on Women, Law, and     Social Control; July 1991, Montreal, Canada
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/1990,09/01/1992
* Kathleen Daly, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberley C. Johnson
* 09/01/1992
* USD 57,000.00

Until relatively recently, there has been little research on gender differences
in the social organization and social contexts of crime and on issues of gender
and gender bias in social control, penal practice, and the administration of
justice. Scholarship in this area is growing rapidly and is recognized by many
as making some of the most significant advances in contemporary criminological
research. The theoretical and policy contributions of the research are of global
importance. However, researchers working in this area remain isolated and there
has been little international communication or coordination. This award is for
an international scientific conference of scholars from different countries to
discuss gender issues in crime, law, and social control. The conference
participants will critically examine theory, methods, and empirical data in an
effort to disentangle gender assumptions and biases, gender differences, and
what is known about the role of women in different systems of law and social
control. Further, and equally as important, the conference seeks to examine the
implications for future research and theory in criminology of bringing gender
perspectives to bear and doing so in an international, non-ethnocentric way.
Approximately thirty participants from 18 countries will attend the conference
to be held in Montreal, Canada in July 1991. An edited volume of papers,
together with relevant summaries of conference discussions, will be produced.
This conference will provide a unique opportunity to pool findings and
interpretations, from an international perspective, on concepts of gender in the
field of criminology. The products of this conference should have a major effect
on the development of scientific research by broadening the conceptual base of
what and how the field studies social control, deviance, and crime.