* 9001712
* Mathematical Sciences: Boundary Behavior of Holomorphic and Harmonic Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1992
* Patrick Ahern, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 06/30/1992
* USD 25,000.00

The aim of this project is the analysis of classes of holomorphic functions of
several complex variables. The regularity of holomorphic functions defined in a
domain becomes less definite as the independent variable approaches the boundary
of the domain. This boundary behavior is the main thrust of this activity.
Boundary properties of functions defined in a disc in one complex dimension are
well understood. A natural analogue in several dimensions is the ball. Even in
this case, information is far from complete. In the study of holomorphic Sobolev
and Besov spaces, it can be shown that functions have unique limits on approach
to the boundary provided certain exceptional sets are avoided. Some progress has
been made in characterizing exceptional sets in terms of their capacity. Further
effort will be devoted to refining these results. A related line of study will
consider the complex tangential derivative of functions in Lipschitz classes. It
appeared that when the Lipschitz constant is equal to one-half, the tangential
derivatives in the class are p-th power integrable for all values of the
parameter. This turned out to be false, leading to a reconsideration of how
functions in this class behave near the boundary. Work will be done on the
question. A second line of investigation concerns the restriction of holomorphic
Sobolev spaces to complex tangential manifolds. There is ample evidence to
suggest that the restricted classes are exactly the real Besov spaces. Work will
continue on the problem of determining when a function in such a Besov space can
be extended to a holomorphic function of the same type.