* 9001262
* Dissertation Research:  Parental Control of Sex Ratio in    Haplodiploid Herbivores
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1990,04/30/1992
* Peter Price, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 04/30/1992
* USD 7,000.00

Many organisms possessing a haplodiploid genetic system are known to
preferentially allocate maleness and femaleness to individual offspring in
response to environmental conditions that differentially confer advantages to
either sex. (A haplodiploid species is one in which individuals of one sex--
usually males--are produced from unfertilized eggs, while fertilized eggs
produce individuals of the opposite sex). For instance, parasitic wasps will
most likely oviposit a female (fertilized) egg in a relatively large high
quality prey individual since the ovipositing female stands to gain more
grandoffspring through the function of large, robust daughters than through the
function of large sons. In contrast, the female will probably gain more
grandoffspring through the function of small sons than through small daughters
and will thus most likely allocate male (unfertilized) eggs to small, low
quality, hosts. Differential sex allocation of the form just described is well-
studied in the parasitic wasps. However, the factors affecting sex allocation in
haplodiploid herbivores are much less understood, though these herbivores are
very common and quite often cause major economic damage (e.g., spider mites and
sawflies). In addition, herbivory is probably a primitive state in many
haplodiploid groups and an understanding of gender control will allow a better
understanding of the evolution of herbivory. The proposed research will examine
the relationship between sex allocation in haplodiploid herbivores and the
variable quality of host-plants encountered. By examining diverse groups of
haplodiploid herbivores, i.e., sawflies and spider mites, in which haplodiploidy
arose independently, the investigators hope to define the evolutionary
generalities that led to the success of this genetic system. A further aspect of
this research is the relationship of population sex ratios to rates of
population increase. By determining host-plant factors that result in the
production of relatively greater proportions of females, the investigators will
also begin to determine the host-plant factors responsible for periodic
outbreaks of haplodiploid herbivores. In addition to survivorship, growth rate
and egg production, the relative proportion of females in a population is a
parameter with potentially large consequences for population growth rates. The
ability to alter the sex ratio of hapodiploid herbivores through manipulation of
their host plants could lead to an additional method of controlling many pests
in agriculture and forestry. *** //