* 9001381
* Synthesis and Metabolism of Chlorophylls
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1993
* Kevin Smith, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 06/30/1993
* USD 416,056.00

The Synthetic Organic Program is supporting the research of Dr. Kevin M. Smith
of the Department of Chemistry at the University of California-Davis. Professor
Smith is engaged in a broad-based and wide-ranging study of the synthesis,
biosynthesis, chemistry, and spectroscopy of chlorophylls and
bacteriochlorophylls. Chlorophylls are the catalysts in the vital process of
photosynthesis and are involved in light gathering (antenna systems) as well as
in the process of charge separation (in the reaction center). Current work
focuses on the investigation of the chemical and biochemical basis for the
methylation of bacteriochlorophyll-c and -d pigments which causes shifts in the
cell absorption maxima, enabling the bacterium to adapt to conditions of low
light. Esterifying alcohols on bacteriochlorophylls-c and -d molecules will be
correlated with age of culture and extent of alkylation. Biosynthetic studies
will also be undertaken; these involve biosynthesis of bacteriochlorophylls-c
and -d, using isotopically enriched (carbon-13 and carbon-14) precursors to
determine the branchpoint from chlorophyll-a biosynthesis and the latter stages
in bacteriochlorophyll-a biosynthesis. A chemical synthesis of chlorophyll-a and
its 4-vinyl analog, conversion of the former into the latter, and a biomimetic
ring-cleavage of chlorophyll derivatives for chemical synthesis of certain
photochemically active active bilins (e.g. phytochrome, which regulates plant
growth and development) will be studied. Finally, chiral chlorophyll derivatives
will facilitate synthesis of chiral N-alkylporphyrin ferrochelatase inhibitors,
and chemical and electrochemical cyclizations of tetrapyrroles to give
porphyrins will be investigated.