* 9001936
* Learning Search Control Strategy
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1993
* Susan Epstein, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Larry H. Reeker
* 08/31/1993
* USD 131,370.00

The best current programs for two-person perfect information games play only a
single game; they search exhaustively and they do not learn. The goals of this
project are to demonstrate further the viability of a weak theory as a search
paradigm and to facilitate the construction of computers that learn entire
categories of tasks, rather than requiring individualized instruction. This
research develops a program, HOYLE, that can play any such game correctly and,
with experience, can learn to play it extremely well. Instead of extensive
search, HOYLE learns a search control strategy for each new game under the
guidance of its weak domain theory: a combination of procedural knowledge about
game playing, declarative knowledge about specific games, a language and
framework for strategic elements, and a set of narrow but expert perspectives
called Advisors. As it plays a new game, HOYLE selectively constructs,
organizes, and reformulates a knowledge base for each game from its playing
experience. Under a novel architecture that employs a variety of control
strategies for move selection, HOYLE combines that knowledge base with its
Advisors to produce a coherentr, incisive, steadily improving strategy for the
game. A prototype of this multifaceted learning has proved itself remarkably
effective in a varied but limited domain. HOYLE addresses, both in its design
and in its implementation, important questions in theory formation, collaboratin
of experts, conflict resolution, experimental design, and operationalization.