* 9001807
* SGER:  Multi-scale Investigations of Disturbance and Impacts of Hurricane Hugo on an LTER Coastal Landscape
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/1989,05/31/1991
* Leonard Gardner, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Crystal Blackshear
* 05/31/1991
* USD 49,996.00

Hurricane Hugo struck the coast of South Carolina just after midnight on
Friday, September 22, 1989. The eye of the hurricane came ashore just north of
Charleston, SC and moved northward through the state to Charlotte, NC. Hugo's
landfall was near the Baruch Institute's coastal field facility and the North
Inlet Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) site. The site received extensive
storm damage and a tidal surge that was 4 meters above mean high tide. Salt
marsh ecosystems and their adjacent coastal forests have evolved under a regime
of gradually rising sea level. A major hurricane such as Hugo may occur only 1-3
times per century. And this kind of disturbance may trigger sudden expansion of
marsh into forested areas. To assess the short and long term effects of
Hurricane Hugo, researchers at the University of South Carolina will: 1. Map the
spatial distribution and elevation of the storm surge in the forested portion of
the North Inlet ecosystem. And they will gather information on the storm surge
height and the deposition of Spartina detritus (wrack) and marsh mud in the
forest floor. 2. Map ground water salinity in forest soils, changes in soil and
ground water chemistry, and relate this information to tree mortality and other
changes in vegetation. 3. Establish study sites where decomposition of wrack and
its effect on underlying soil can be studied. 4. Acquire low altitude, false-
color infrared aerial photographs and multispectral Thematic Mapper (satellite)
images to document geomorphic and botanical changes caused by Hugo. Follow-up
photographs and satellite imagery should be made several times during the next
several years to detect changes and recovery of the ecosystem. Work on effects
of large disturbances such as Hurricane Hugo address important issues about the
response, resilience, and recovery of complex coastal ecosystems. Information
gathered by this research should provide data on mechanisms of salt marsh
expansion and forest recession in response to salinity and wind stresses. And
the work should provide valuable landscape level information on the response of
the North Inlet LTER ecosystem to a major disturbance. Dr. Gardner is a very
experienced and productive scientist who is well qualified to conduct and direct
this research on the impacts of Hurricane Hugo on the North Inlet ecosystem. He
will be assisted by Co-Principal Investigators, Kjerfve, Blood, Michener, and
Williams. Although the Baruch Institute's field facilities were destroyed by
Hugo, field research has continued. In particular, sampling transects and
established piezometer networks facilitate the objectives of this research. The
University of South Carolina has excellent facilities to support this research
effort.