* 9001169
* Ship Operations
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/1990,12/31/1992
* Dennis Hayes, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Emma R. Dieter
* 12/31/1992
* USD 10,177,800.00

Columbia University, Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory will operate the R/V
BERNIER during 1990 as a general oceanographic vessel in support of NSF-funded
research projects. The R/V BERIER is a 72.5 meter (254') general research vessel
with special capabilities for geophysical research. The ship was constructed in
1983 and is currently owned by the Trustees for Columbia University in the City
of New York. The recently purchased R/V BERNIER will replace the R/V CONRAD
which was retired in 1989. The R/V CONRAD was successfully operated and
maintained by LDGO for over ten years. The R/V BERNIER will conduct operations
worldwide. This vessel is part of a fleet used by the National Science
Foundation to support oceanographic research projects. Most oceanographic
research projects require highly specialized equipment and extensive support
from a ship's crew members. An increasing number of research projects require
equipment that must be permanently installed on a ship and for which the ship
must be specifically designed. Such equipment also requires highly trained crew
members for maintenance and operation. These vessels do not operate in the same
manner as general cargo or fishing vessels, and therefore, NSF supports the
operation of a variety of vessels specifically dedicated to oceanographic
research. These vessels are operated by universities and research institutions
around the country.