* 9001695
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research on Development of Axon     Pathways in the Mammalian Visual System
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1990,02/28/1993
* David Sretavan, Rockefeller University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 02/28/1993
* USD 17,500.00

This U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research award supports cooperative research in
developmental neurobiology to be conducted by Dr. Torsten Wiesel and Dr. David
Sretavan of Rockefeller University and Dr. Ary Ramoa of the Federal University
of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The goal of this research is to understand how
precise patterns of axonal projections, present in the mature mammalian visual
system, are established during development. The experiments will focus on three
areas. First, is the nature of the cellular interactions between developing
retinal axons and neuro- epithelial cells at the optic chiasm. Second, is the
identity and spatial-temporal distribution of cell surface molecules present on
both retinal axons and neuroepithelial cells. Third, is the further development
and refinement of an in vitro culture system to study retinal ganglion cell axon
pathfinding. Results from this set of studies will not only lead to a better
understanding of how a major axon pathway in the visual system is formed during
embryonic development, but will also provide insight into how specific axonal
projections may arise in other parts of the central nervous system. Dr. Ramoa
will bring to this project his expertise on the embryonic development of
mammalian retinal ganglion cells and will also benefit by learning a powerful
research technique which will be of direct use in his own research in Brazil.
Dr. Ramoa's past research has focused on the development of mammalian retinal
ganglion cells in terms of the maturation of their morphological features and
their electrophysio- logical properties. While in the U.S., Dr. Ramoa will work
with Dr. David Sretavan using hybridoma techniques to generate monoclonal
antibodies directed against molecules present on developing retinal ganglion
cells and the neuroepithelial cells of the optic chiasm.