* 9001434
* An Investigation of Interhemispheric Differences in         Aerosol Physicochemistry in the Equatorial Pacific
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1990,08/31/1992
* Antony Clarke, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 08/31/1992
* USD 78,400.00

During the past few decades observed increases in atmospheric concentrations of
certain trace species (eg. CO2, O3, CH4, etc.) have resulted in a growing
awareness of man's potential to perturb his environment on a global scale.
Consequently, this decade has seen increased efforts to identify and understand
the properties of the remote atmosphere and the processes relating the sources,
transformations and removal of the constituents that are present. This kind of
investigation involves measurement of the particle and gas phase species of
interest in conjunction with the environmental and meteorological parameters
known to influence their behavior. Understanding these processes is essential to
assessing the importance of various issues of current environmental concern.
These include 1) the role of clouds on climate, 2) the role of aerosol and gases
in atmospheric radiative transfer and 3) the geochemical cycling of atmospheric
constituents. Any investigation of these issues requires a knowledge of the
relative influence of anthropogenic, "natural" continental and marine
contributions. This research project will support the analysis of data collected
from: 1) the recent Central Pacific Atmospheric Comparison Experiment (CPACE)
aboard the NCAR-Electra aircraft was intended to intercompare and evaluate
recently developed techniques for measuring gas and aerosol species at low
concentrations. Size-resolved aerosol information will be combined with the
measurements of other CPACE investigators for the characterization of our
atmospheric observations and to complete the proposed evaluation of aerosol
inlet losses; and 2) measurements of aerosol physicochemistry and optical
properties during five equatorial transects currently obtained as part of the
Soviet-American Gas and Aerosol Experiment Three (SAGA III) the equatorial
Pacific between Hawaii and Samoa in spring of 1990.