* 9001353
* U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research:  The Formation of         Supported Bimetallic Clusters with Emphasis on the Effect   of Support
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1990,07/15/1990
* Richard Gonzalez, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 07/15/1990
* USD 0.00

This award will support Professor Richard D. Gonzalez of the University of
Illinois at Chicago Circle in collaboration with Professor Ricardo Gomez of the
Metropolitan University of Mexico at Iztapalapa. Studies recently completed
suggest that metal-precursor-support interactions are important in determining
the resulting surface composition of supported multimetallic catalysts. In
particular, the presence of a mobile surface metal-precursor results in the
surface enrichment of that metal in the resulting bimetallic catalyst. The
investigators aim to identify the structure of these precursor-surface complexes
using diffuse U.V. reflectance spectroscopy. The strength of the metal-support
interactions will be measured through the use of quantitative differential
scanning calorimetry and the elemental composition of the resulting bimetallic
particles will be obtained through the use of dispersive x-ray spectroscopy
(EDXS). EDXS will also be used to study interparticle metal phase relationships.
The proposed research will be carried out simultaneously at the University of
Illinois at Chicago and the Metropolitan University of Mexico at Iztapalapa. The
in-situ diffuse U.V. reflectance studies, the microcalorimetric DSC studies and
the catalyst charac- terization studies, including the surface composition
measurements, will be carried out at the University of Illinois. The catalytic
probe reactions and major portion of the EDXS studies will be performed in
Mexico.