* 9001792
* Mathematical Sciences: Variable Coefficient Fourier Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1993
* Christopher Sogge, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 05/31/1993
* USD 44,680.00

This award provides additional support for research by a Presidential Young
Investigator working on problems of Fourier analysis related to the microlocal
analysis of partial differential operators and the theory of Fourier integral
operators. Work will be done in developing a microlocal version of the maximal
theorem of Bourgain. The result concerns the maximal operator associated with
the Radon transform (over spheres) which was shown to preserve the Lebesgue
spaces for powers greater than two. The averaging may be viewed as a Fourier
integral operator of negative order one-half. Efforts will be made to determine
if the same result holds for any family of nondegererate operators of the same
order, depending smoothly on a linear parameter. Some additional conditions have
to be established since a total generalization is known to be impossible. A
related type of operator studied by Carleson and Sjolin is known to preserve the
fourth-power Lebesgue spaces. In this project, work will be done in expanding
the operators to integral transforms involving exponential of the Laplace-
Beltrami operator. If this is possible then the Carleson-Sjolin theorem for
Bochner-Riesz summation in the plane can be extended to compact manifolds. Other
work involves the question of embedded eigenvalues for Schrodinger operators. If
the potential is bounded by the reciprocal of the variable, then Hormander
showed that eigenfunctions which are small at infinity actually vanish
everywhere. The next step in analyzing this phenomenon is to determine exact
conditions on the potential to guarantee the same result. An immediate goal will
be to find the correct function space (one of the local Lebesgue spaces) for
embedding the potential.