* 9001120
* Dissertation Research:  A Multidimensional Analysis of      Geographic Variation in the Plain Titmouse (Parus inornatus)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1992
* Ned Johnson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 07/31/1992
* USD 8,500.00

The Plain Titmouse (Parus inornatus) varies in overall size, bill size, and
color throughout its range in western North America. Ten geographic forms are
currently recognized (American Ornithologists' Union, 1957, Check-list of North
American Birds) on the basis of morphology and color. West of the Cascade-Sierra
Nevada Mountains, the species occurs commonly in foothill oak woodland. Density
is lower in the Southwest and Intermountain Regions, where populations are found
patchily in pinyon-juniper or juniper habitat. The goal of this project is to
integrate morphologic, molecular, and behavioral data on Parus inornatus in
order to elucidate patterns and processes of divergence among populations.
Differences in population structure will enable testing of alternative models of
gene flow. Hypotheses concerning the role of adaptation and Pleistocene
isolation also will be evaluated. A variety of modern systematic techniques will
be used to examine patterns of morphologic and genetic variation within and
among populations of Parus inornatus. Results to date indicate strong genetic
differentiation between Pacific slope and Intermountain populations, on the
order of that found between closely related species of birds. Patterns of
variation in morphology (especially bill size and shape) and color support the
genetic data. A quantitative estimate of gene flow will shed light on the
process of genetic and morphologic divergence among populations. Because
numerous bird species show similar patterns of divergence between the Pacific
slope and Intermountain Regions, this study will contribute to an emerging
picture of avian speciation in western North America. The results of this study
will likely lead to formal taxonomic changes by the American Ornithologists'
Union Committee on Classification and Nomenclature. The identification of
genetically and/or morphologically distinct populations will provide critical
information for managers concerned with the protection and management of pinyon-
juniper or oak woodlands in the western United States. The future of oak
woodlands in California is of growing concern because of increasing pressures
for development in the foothills of the Cascade-Sierra, Nevada and Coast Ranges.