* 9001664
* Dissertation Research:  Archaeological Investigation of IronAge Sites in the Mema (Mali)
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1990,01/31/1992
* Susan McIntosh, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 01/31/1992
* USD 11,733.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Susan McIntosh, Mr. Tereba Togola will conduct
archaeological survey and excavation in the Mema or "Dead Delta" region of Mali.
The results of this work will form the basis for his doctoral dissertation. The
Mema, as geomorphological data indicates, was once a well watered region which
coincided with the inland delta of the Niger River. A change in the river's
course has turned the region to desert. The small amount of archaeological
research which has been done in the region indicates that it contains
archaeological sites which probably span several millennia. Areal photographs,
however, indicate that the region is dotted with possibly hundreds of "tells" or
habitation mounds. Past uncontrolled excavations recovered such artifacts as
statuettes of horseman, iron spear and arrowheads, and multi-legged vases.
However, faunal and floral remains were not collected and the subsistence base
for this culture remains unknown. Likewise neither an absolute nor a relative
chronology exists. Through a combination of survey, correlation of sites with
ancient landforms, and excavation at several sites, Mr. Togola will collect both
chronological and subsistence information. This project is important for several
reasons. First, it will fill in what is almost a complete archaeological blank.
It will provide information on how cultures at a very simple level of technology
adapted to a rigorous Saharan environment and, hopefully, shed light on the
development of agriculture pastoralism and early iron working in sub-Saharan
Africa. It should also provide information on the rise of African kingdoms.
Finally, it will aid in the training of an extremely promising young scientist.