* 9001220
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional    Science
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1991
* Victoria Lawson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/1991
* USD 7,800.00

Much of the economic activity in cities located in developing nations is
conducted by persons who operate informally. These people work independently or
in small organizations in ways that circumvent formal government control or
supervision. The share of urban populations engaged in these types of activities
has grown rapidly in recent decades, leading scholars to debate whether the
informal economic sector functions as a separate unit or whether it performs
within a broader framework within which formal economic establishments still
maintain primary power. This doctoral dissertation project will examine the form
and function of informal economic activities in Quito, Ecuador, in order to
describe the structure and diversity of activities and to analyze how persons
engaged in informal activities interact with each other and with other
individuals and institutions. Labor-force data in Ecuador's three largest cities
will be analyzed to compare formal-informal economic patterns, and interviews
with persons engaged in informal activities will be conducted to examine links
among persons in the informal sector, the formal sector, and the government.
Attention also will be given to identifying how working relations affect the
economic mobility of persons engaged in informal activities. This project will
provide valuable data and analyses of the operations of persons engaged in
informal economic activities. Although focusing on an Ecuadorian case study, the
insights from this project will be of great use to persons conducting related
work elsewhere. This project also will provide an excellent opportunity for a
promising young scholar to continue to develop independent research skills.