* 9001854
* International Conference on Quantum Optics, Hyderabad,      India, January 5-9, 1991, Group Travel Award in U.S. and    Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 10/15/1990,03/31/1992
* Ramarao Inguva, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 03/31/1992
* USD 33,240.00

Description: This project provides support for twelve U.S. scientists to
participate in the International Conference on Quantum Optics, to be held in
Hyderabad, India January 5-9, 1991. The conference's aims include interaction
between scientists from India, neighboring countries, Europe and the U.S., and
encouragement of cooperative research. The program covers recent development in:
squeezed states and nonclassical light; quantum theory of measurement and
interferometers; cavity QED; photon statistics and optical phenomena; optical
phenomena in superintense fields; topological places in nonlinear and quantum
phenomena; coherence theory; laser cooling and trapping of ions and neutral
atoms; new mechanism of laser action; resonance fluorescence; quantum jumps,
optical bistability; and light induced drift. The Indian convener is Dr. G.S.
Agarwal of the School of Physics, University of Hyderabad who is an active
scientist in the field with a long record of successful collaborative research
with U.S. scientists. The invited U.S. participants are eminently qualified and
active scientists who can benefit from and contribute to the conference. Scope:
This activity is beneficial to the Indian and U.S. scientists by enabling them
to interact with colleagues from Europe and India, as well as develop
cooperative activities between scientists of the two countries. It is likely the
maximum benefits will be for scientists from smaller Indian universities who
have few chances for such interaction.