* 9001583
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research on Dynamic Characteristics of Coastal Lagoons: Lagoa de Araruara, Rio de Janeiro
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1990,02/28/1993
* Bjorn Kjerfve, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* name not available
* 02/28/1993
* USD 16,799.00

This award supports cooperative research in physical oceanography to be
conducted by Bjorn Kjerfve of the University of South Carolina in collaboration
with Bastiaan Knoppers of the Universidade Federal Fluminense in Niteroi,
Brazil. The work will consist of the measurement of the dynamic characteristics
of the largest coastal lagoon along the Fluminense coastline. It is vital to
establish a base line for lagoon dynamics before planned intense development
begins. This lagoon is hypersaline, being choked off from the ocean (unlike
estuaries where there is a mixing zone). Characteristics to be measured include
salinity structure, sedimentation rates (runoff), wind effects, nutrient
concentration, temperatures and evaporation rates and tidal dynamics. These data
will be compared to those taken in other fresh and brackish water lagoons in
which previous oceanographic and ecological studies have been carried out. There
are coastal lagoons around the world, notably in New England and the Gulf coast
of the U.S. Not all of them are in arid climates but climatic variability
affects hydrological and ecological processes and the study of this hypersaline
example will extend the range of such effects. It will also add to the extensive
biological, chemical, geological and geographical work in progress as well as
investigations in health, sociology and economics studies underway on these
lagoons. Modelling and the use of this data will help develop predictive
capability for linear and nonlinear processes in lagoon systems. Kjerfve's
experience in hydrology and ecology will complement those of the Brazilian
multidisciplinary team and in particular the biogeochemical work of Knoppers.
Students will participate in the work in Brazil and some will follow this field
work with Ph.D. studies in the U.S.