* 9001045
* Conference on: Chromosome Replication and Segregation       in Yeast, August 5-10,1990, Saxton's River, VT
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1991
* Douglas Koshland, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 12/31/1991
* USD 5,000.00

This application is for partial funding of a conference on Chromosome
Replication and Segregation in Yeast to be held under the auspices of the
Federation of American Societies of Experimental Biology (FASEB) from August
5-10, 1990 at the Vermont Academy, Saxton's River, Vermont. Participation in the
meeting will be limited to 155 scientists who will be chosen from applicants on
the basis of their expertise and interests as being the most likely to help
create a stimulating and informative meeting. The topic of the meeting
emphasizes research on the chromosome replication and segregation in yeast.
While most participants will use baker's yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, as an
experimental system, scientists using other filamentous fungi will be encouraged
to participate. The conference will consist of nine scientific sessions, each
with approximately 9 speakers; in addition, one or two afternoons will be
devoted to poster sessions and/ or informal group discussions. Approximately
half of the speakers from each session will be invited in advanced; the
remaining half will be chosen from the pool of applicants. Three sessions will
be devoted to DNA replication (cis elements and their associated factors,
enzymology, and in vivo analysis of origin usage). Four sessions will be devoted
to chromosome segregation (centromeres and their associated factors, the mitotic
apparatus, nuclear architecture and new mutational approaches to chromosome
transmission). The last two sessions will be devoted to the analysis of the
coordination of chromosome replication and segregation during the cell cycle.
This meeting will fill an important niche for scientists interested in yeast
chromosome replication and segregation by allowing extensive communication
between laboratories at the important time this rapidly developing field.