* 9001372
* Mathematical Sciences: Diophantine Approximations of        Algebraic Points
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1990,04/30/1994
* Paul Vojta, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Gary Cornell
* 04/30/1994
* USD 67,700.00

This award supports the research in Diophantine approximations of Professor
Paul Vojta of the University of California at Berkeley. Dr. Vojta's project is
to extend his already-productive analogy between Nevanlinna Theory and
Diophantine approximation theory, so as to get information on algebraic points
of bounded degree on varieties. In addition, he hopes to generalize to varieties
of higher dimension his independent proof of the Mordell-Faltings Theorem that
arose from applying his viewpoint to Dyson's sharpening of the Thue-Siegel
Theorem. This is research in the field of arithmetic algebraic geometry, a
subject that combines the techniques of algebraic geometry and number theory. In
its original formulation, algebraic geometry treated figures that could be
defined in the plane by the simplest equations, namely polynomials. Number
theory started with the whole numbers and such questions as divisibility of one
whole number by another. These two subjects, seemingly so far apart, have in
fact influenced each other from the earliest times, but in the past quarter
century the mutual influence has increased greatly. The field of arithmetic
algebraic geometry now uses techniques from all of modern mathematics, and is
having corresponding influence beyond its own borders.