* 9001895
* Mathematical Sciences: Limit Sets of Kleinian Groups and    Hyperbolic Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1992
* Francis Bonahon, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 05/31/1992
* USD 57,250.00

Bonahon will study limit sets of Kleinian groups and of hyperbolic groups. A
Kleinian group is a discrete group of isometries of hyperbolic 3-space. Bonahon
intends to study the topological type of the limit set of a Kleinian group and
show that it is determined by the algebraic structure of the group together with
certain geometric invariants of the associated quotient space. He also wants to
study the asymptotic behavior of the leaves of foliations of hyperbolic 3-space
which are invariant under a Kleinian group (namely lifts of foliations of
hyperbolic 3-manifolds) and to analyze how fast these leaves approach the limit
set of the group. Following Gromov's terminology, a hyperbolic group is a
finitely generated group which has certain growth properties similar to those of
a cocompact Kleinian group. Such a hyperbolic group has a well defined limit
set, also called its boundary. Bonahon wants to analyze how certain topological
properties of the limit set of a hyperbolic group are related to algebraic
properties of the group, involving in particular its outer automorphism group
and decompositions into amalgamated products. Advances in the study of
3-dimensional manifolds in recent years, following work of Thurston, has rather
surprisingly shown the extreme relevance of hyperbolic geometry to the
understanding of the structure of 3-manifolds.