* 9001458
* Basic and Applied Statistical Inference and Measurement
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1993
* Joseph Gastwirth, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* jerry blackmon
* 01/31/1993
* USD 57,510.00

Over the last decade statistical data and inference have played an important
role in establishing the basic facts used for public policy, e.g.estimating the
prevalence of AIDS or HIV infection, determining the risk of cancer from
occupational or environmental exposures, assessing changes in the income
distribution and in the legal setting, e.g. tax assessment inequality. The
purpose of this project is to study statistical problems arising in these
contexts and to develop appropriate probability models and statistical
methodology for their solution. Research on procedures for estimating the
prevalence of a rare disease which preserve anonymity by combining individual
samples into batches prior to testing is a major goal. These methods should
enable health specialists to obtain the cooperation of the public as infected
individuals and non- infected persons who are misclassified (false positive)
will not be identified. Robust methods which lead to statistically valid
inferences when several scientifically plausible models may underlie the data or
when a few observations may be erroneous will continue to be emphasized. Recent
legal decisions in the equal employment area have raised new questions
concerning the measurement of discrimination. It is planned to investigate the
statistical approaches used in Watson v. Fort Worth Bank and to examine the
implications of the Ward's Cove case for more refined data and methods of
analysis. Related problems arising in legal and economic applications, e.g. the
analysis of group data, also will be investigated.