* 9001179
* Dissertation Research:  Population Dynamics and Evolution inHeterogeneous Environments
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1993
* Janis Antonovics, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 01/31/1993
* USD 8,000.00

The abundances of many plant species fluctuate widely in natural populations.
Close examination of some of the most simple mathematical models of population
growth has shown that in addition to the effects of random environmental noise,
fluctuations in population size (from periodic oscillations to chaos) may be
part of the natural dynamics of many systems. These theoretical results are
seldom tested because multi- generation experiments in controlled environments
are often difficult and expensive to conduct. The investigators will use
experimental populations to examine 15 generations of the population dynamics of
Cardamine pennsylvanica, a small, rapidly- growing greenhouse weed. Using a
greenhouse weed allows them to do experiments in ecologically "natural"
conditions with the precision and ease of a controlled environment. Population
dynamics may be affected by different environments. Hence, some experimental
populations will have variable environments and others will not. Population
dynamics may be affected by the genetics of the population. Hence, some
experimental populations will have little genetic variability and others will
have substantial genetic variability. Genetically uniform populations may be
expected to evolve little, and exhibit purely ecological responses. These
experiments are essential steps toward understanding to what extent populations
dynamics are driven by ecological versus genetic processes.