* 9001848
* Ozone Diminution, Ultraviolet Radiation and Phytoplankton   Biology in Antarctic Waters
* O/D,OPP
* 03/01/1990,02/29/1992
* Raymond Smith, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 02/29/1992
* USD 105,682.00

The Antarctic is now experiencing large springtime losses of stratospheric
ozone, resulting in an increase in ultraviolet B (UVB, 280-320nm) radiation. The
magnitude of ultraviolet radiation reaching the surface now approaches that
measured in tropical latitudes. Perhaps more importantly, UVB radiation has
increased in the Antarctic while both UVA (320-400nm) and photosynthetically
available radiation (PAR, 400-700nm) have remained unchanged. Recent
improvements in atmospheric modeling and technology in oceanographic
instrumentation will be used in a six week field study during the austral spring
1990. The prime objective will be to document the impact of UV radiation on the
phytoplankton community during the ice-edge spring bloom. During this time,
oceanographic processes create favorable conditions for increased UVB
susceptibility. Biological and bio-optical information will be used to define
and quantify linkages between ozone-dependent oscillations in UV to PAR ratios
and phytoplankton productivity. Special emphasis will be placed on defining
biological restraints imposed by enhanced UVB and altered UVB:UVA:PAR ratios on
the balance of UVB photodamage to photorepair, photoprotective and
photosynthetic mechanisms operating in the Southern Ocean. The overall aim is to
test the hypothesis that phytoplankton in Antarctic waters are adversely
influenced by ozone depletion.