* 9002064
* U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Research:  Deletions of          Interferon Genes in Mammalian Cell Lines
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1991,04/30/1993
* Manuel Diaz, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 04/30/1993
* USD 7,629.00

This award supports cooperative research in cell biology to be conducted by
Manuel Diaz of the University of Chicago and two counterpart scientists in
Buenos Aires, Irma Slavutsky and Irene Larripa of the Academy of Medicine. They
will carry out collaborative studies on the molecular analysis of mouse and
human cell lines that contain deletions of a certain genomic region, including a
cluster of genes belonging to the interferon gene family. The main purpose of
the study will be to analyze the deletions at the molecular level and to clone
and sequence their breakpoint junctions. They will determine the size of the
deletions, many of which are submicroscopic and study the mechanism by which
these deletions occur. The study will elucidate basic mechanisms of mutagenesis
that may be involved in all kinds of genetic processes: somatic or germinal
mutations related to the origin of congenital or acquired disease, somatic or
germinal spontaneous neutral mutations without pathologic consequences, or
normal evolutionary processes. The strength of Drs. Slavutsky and Larripa's
group, is the microscopic cytogenetic analysis of chromosome abnormalities in
cancer cells and experimental mammalian cytogenetics. They will develop the
methods of analysis of DNA rearrangements associated with the chromosome
abnormalities detected in their studies. Their interaction with Dr Diaz`s
laboratory will help them to develop this capability, and at the same time will
allow both groups to coordinate their efforts in the study of the molecular
basis of chromosome rearrangements in mammalian cells They have in their
laboratory the necessary equipment to perform DNA extraction from mammalian
cells and to perform Southern blot analysis of genomic DNA. This is in addition
to all the tissue culture, optical and photographic equipment and facilities
necessary for cytogenetic analysis. The strength of the University of Chicago
laboratory is the analysis of DNA rearrangements generated by such chromosomal
abnormalities, the identification and cloning of the DNA sequences located at
the translocation breakpoints, and the identification and characterization of
genes affected by these rearrangements. Because these two laboratories
complement each other so well, the mutual benefits of this collaboration are
evident.