* 9002521
* US-UK Cooperative Research:  A Comparative Study of Civic   Response to Child Sexual Abuse
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1992
* Thomas Frothingham, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 01/31/1992
* USD 10,592.00

This award will support collaborative research in sociology on the topic of
comparative U.S. and British civic response to child sexual abuse. The
investigators are Dr. Thomas Frothingham, Duke University Medical Center and Dr.
C.J. Hobb, St. James University Hospital, Leeds, England. In the county of
Cleveland, England in 1987, diagnoses of child sexual abuse increased suddenly,
and within a few months, more than 100 children were removed from their homes.
Public outcry and Parliamentary inquiry resulted in an extensive national
examination of all the arrangements for dealing with child abuse in England.
There are striking parallels between what has happened suddenly in England and
more gradually in Durham, North Carolina and other areas in the U.S. Change in
civic response in the U.S. is urgently needed but is proceeding slowly at best.
In this project, Dr. Frothingham proposes to study in collaboration with Dr.
Hobb the changes now occurring in England in the aftermath of the Cleveland
experience. Specifically, the following will be examined: 1) arrangements for
the detection and management of sexually abused children and their families 2)
intra- agency structure and function, i.e. medical organizations, social
services, police, judiciary and private agencies. 3) inter-agency collaboration
and 3) the effect of the Cleveland experience on current practices and recent
changes. The proposed research project is a significant opportunity to gather
data on a critical social problem in the U.S. Since England provides wide range
of social supports not available to any but the poorest sector in the U.S., the
cross-cultural data will be especially valuable.The results of this research
will provide a greater understanding of the linkages between the detection and
handling of child abuse and the promotion of family stability.