* 9002904
* Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Complex Function Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1993
* Peter Duren, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 06/30/1993
* USD 40,286.00

Work on this project will concentrate on problems arising in the analysis of
algebras generated by holomorphic or harmonic functions (function algebras). A
metric is used to measure the distance between any two functions consisting of
the maximum of the function value differences, often referred to as the uniform
norm. The underlying theme of the work concerns algebras of functions which lie
between familiar algebras. On a compact set in the plane one considers the
effect of adjoining a function to a given function algebra (of holomorphic
functions) and then completing the new collection into a larger algebra. A
fundamental question is whether or not the new algebra consists of all
continuous functions if the additional function was harmonic. This is resolved
in a recent work if the harmonic function is real-valued. A clarification of the
situation when it is complex-valued remains to be done. Some progress has also
been made in the setting of several complex variables, where the same basic
questions can be raised. At the present time, the domains are restricted to
balls and the functions adjoined to the ball algebra of continuous holomorphic
functions must have continuous first derivatives. A second goal of this work
will be to relax the differentiability condition which appears to be
unnecessary.