* 9002001
* U.S.-Chile Cooperative Research on Characterization of the Human Peroxisomal Membrane
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1993
* Paul Lazarow, CUNY Mount Sinai School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 07/31/1993
* USD 17,800.00

This award supports cooperative research in cell biology to be conducted by Paul
Lazarow of Mt. Sinai School of Medicine in New York collaborating with Manuel
Santos of the Catholic University in Santiago, Chile. The research will involve
the study of subcellular organelles, peroxisomes, that participate in lipid
metabolism and cellular respiration. The peroxisomal proteins seem to be formed
from pre-existing organelles by synthesis on free ribosomes and imported into
the organelle. Recently a series of human genetic disorders involving
peroxisomal functions has been described. Some of these peroxisomal disorders
are thought to be the consequence of a failure in the peroxisomal biogenetic
mechanisms, in which the peroxisomal membrane plays an essential role. Unfor-
tunately, the human peroxisomal membrane has been poorly studied: its protein
composition is largely unknown, there are not antibodies available against its
proteins, that can be used to study some aspects of peroxisomal biogenesis. This
research will obtain a battery of polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies against
the proteins of the human peroxisomal membrane, which can be used as reagents to
evaluate the presence, abundance and subcellular localization of these
peroxisomal proteins in fibroblasts derived from patients affected by disorders
of peroxisomal biogenesis. The information obtained in this project will
contribute to the knowledge of the structure, composition and function of human
peroxisomes and to knowledge of the mechanism of peroxisome biogenesis. In
addition, it will contribute to the under- standing of the role of peroxisome in
genetic pathology.