* 9002536
* Unusual Stereochemical Opportunities in Extended Helical Conformations
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/1991,06/30/1997
* Mark Green, Polytechnic University of New York
* Continuing grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/1997
* USD 793,850.00

This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program of the Chemistry Division and the
Polymers Program of the Division of Materials Research supports the continuing
work of Professor Green and Dr. Levon at the Polytechnic University. The results
of this research will give new understanding and insight to the right or left
hand helical nature of polymers. The factors that control the preferential
formation of right- or left- handed helices will be explored. Since bio-
polymers, such as peptides and DNA, can exist in right- or left- handed helices,
this work is of particular interest. Drs. Green and Levon will provide new and
important information in three areas, of which all are related to how the
chirality of the monomers effect the helical chirality of the polymers. In the
first area, the effect of a chiral center on the chiral helicity of isocyanate
polymers will be studied. It has been found that a chiral center by virtue of
deuterium substitution in R-1- deuteriohexylisocyanate had a profound effect on
the helical chirality of the polyisocyanate. This observation will be studied
further as well as the helical chirality of the polymer resulting from
R-2-deuteriohexylisocyanate. In the second area, a study will be made of the
relationship between helical twist of a side chain containing a biphenyl group
in an N-carboxyanhydride monomer and helicity of the polyglutamate polymer. In
the third area, the gelation of polyisocyanides as function of the
stereochemistry of the monomer will be investigated.