* 9002728
* Construction of calibrated eustatic sea level curve:        Mid-Jurassic through Mid-Cretaceous
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1990,09/30/1992
* Dork Sahagian, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 09/30/1992
* USD 38,710.00

The research program proposed here is based on the identification of a stable
reference frame for measurement, and its utilization in the construction of a
calibrated eustatic sea level curve for mid-Jurassic through mid-Tertiary. A
stable frame is found in the Russian Platform on which flat-lying Mesozoic and
Cenozoic marine sediments have remained undeformed since deposition. The
elevation of these deposits is a measure of post-depositional sea level change,
since factors such as compaction and loading are very small due to the thin
nature of the deposits. As such, the Russian Platform acts as a meter stick,
recording sea level through time. A sea level curve based on reliable tie points
will be constructed and compared to sea level curves obtained by other means.
Discrepancies will be reconciled in terms of measurement methods and mobile
reference frames. In obtaining independent information regarding past sea
levels, the results of this study will shed light on the passive margin
processes of thermal subsidence and sedimentation, as well as the motions of
active margins. As it stands now, sequence stratigraphic data must be used to
infer thermal subsidence and sedimentation history, as well as sea level
changes. A significant result of the proposed research project is that it will
introduce another data set, so that the sea level signal can be filtered out,
and sequence stratigraphic data can be used to measure thermal subsidence and
sedimentation history directly. Research bears on issues of global sea level
change.