* 9002353
* Design and Analysis of Cache Coherence Protocols for MIN    Based Multiprocessors
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1993
* Laxmi Bhuyan, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
*   name not available
* 08/31/1993
* USD 170,213.00

This project studies various configurations of shared busses in a Multistage
Interconnection Network (MIN) based system in order to maintain cache coherence.
These busses can be put separately or inside the MIN switches. It is also
possible to avoid using shared busses by redesigning a MIN switch to handle
broadcasting. The design and analysis of these cache coherence protocols are the
research objectives of this project. A thorough analysis and comparison of
various approaches can guide the future multiprocessor system designers in their
design process. Multiprocessor organizations are generally defined based on
their processor memory interconnections. MINs form a very suitable
interconnection medium for building large scale multiprocessor systems. The
efficiency of these systems can be further enhanced by putting cache memories
with the processors to reduce the memory access demands. However, such cache
memories give rise to inconsistency of shared data due to lack of coordination
among the processors while changing their shared cache contents. A hardware
solution to this problem is to broadcast the state changes through a shared bus
interconnection. Since MINs do not have a shared bus, maintaining cache
coherence in MIN based multiprocessors poses a serious challenge for research.