* 9002835
* Global Model Prediction Optimization Using Three DimensionalTruncation
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1993
* Ferdinand Baer, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pamela L. Stephens
* 01/31/1993
* USD 158,569.00

Solutions to the atmospheric (or oceanic) prediction equations require an
understanding of the three dimensional spatial nature of the fluid, including
dynamics and physics, conservation conditions, and forcing. Since the equations
are exceptionally complex and highly nonlinear, it is necessary to convert those
equations to some numerical form which will provide meaningful iterative
solutions within the constraints of available computational capabilities. The
challenge is to do so optimally. While the problem has been investigated,
because of the nature of the system, horizontal and vertical representations
have been considered independently in the past. It is the contention of the
principal investigator that systematic truncation of the atmosphere/ocean
prediction equations in all three dimensions simultaneously could improve
predictive skill. Thus, the purpose of this research is to study the correlation
of truncation in all dimensions in a numerical model, and to find a truncation
which is systematic in all three dimensions. The principal investigator will
select a truncation according to scaling arguments that are based on the results
from his previous studies and define appropriate functions. To establish the
optimal three dimensional truncation, the functions will be tested in the
operational numerical prediction model of NOAA's National Meteorological Center
(NMC). This project is part of the NSF-NMC Program Joint Program in Numerical
Weather Prediction.