* 9002866
* Ground Motion and Liquefaction Study of Fill Soils in San   Francisco - 1989 Loma Prieta Earthquake:  Collaborative     Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/1990,07/31/1991
* G. Wayne Clough, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 07/31/1991
* USD 20,000.00

This research program is part of the initiative to collect perishable data
resulting from the 17 October 1989 Northern California (Loma Prieta) earthquake.
This is a collaborative project with Professor Jean-Lou Chameau at Purdue
University. The Earth Technology Corporation, Long Beach, California, is
assisting in obtaining the field data: in addition Drs. Geoffrey Martin and
Edward Kavazanjian of Earth Technology Corporation are providing technical
assistance to the project. Drs. Clough, Chameau, and Kavazanjian during the
period 1979-1985 investigated the soil response and soil failures expected in
the Bay Area as a result of a large earthquake: however the effects observed as
a result of the Loma Prieta earthquake appear to be more extensive than was
expected, in part because the ground motions were more severe than anticipated
from data existing ten years ago. The project is utilizing these previous
studies, focusing on the areas that suffered significant ground failures, such
as the Marina District. At the same time it is using the improved understanding
of ground failure mechanisms that has occurred since the original studies were
undertaken. The objectives of this project are: to gather relevant geotechnical
data obtained since 1980; to map ground features that are important to identify
the extent of liquefaction and ground amplification effects; perform about 30
cone penetration tests at locations where earlier tests had been conducted;
organize the above information into a computerized data base; and make
preliminary assessments of the correlation between field observations and data
obtained before and after the 1989 earthquake.