* 9002208
* Support of American Scholars in the Natural and Social      Sciences in Collaborative Research in #India Award in U.S.  and Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1990,02/28/1994
* Ted Tanen, Asian Cultural Council Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/28/1994
* USD 383,709.00

Description: This project provides funds to the Asian Cultural Council (ACC) to
support research of scholars selected under the Indo-U.S. Subcommission on
Education and Culture. Eight awardees will come from a wide range of scientific
fields in the social and physical sciences, and will work with counterparts in
India. Funds from this grant are used for travel expenses and costs related to
the scholars' research projects, and to pay for stipends for awardees. The ACC
scientific committees select nominees for submission to NSF, which makes the
final technical evaluation of awardees. Past awardees have been engaged
primarily in social and behavioral sciences, with some in the geological and few
in physical sciences. The funds provided include U.S. $15,000 to cover part of
the ACC administrative work costs. Scope: Collaboration between U.S. and Indian
scientists is clearly demonstrated in this project. The ACC representative
office in India obtains the necessary clearances for the U.S. scientists to be
affiliated with various Indian academic and research institutions. They also
manage the logistics associated with the travel of the scientists, and his/her
family when appropriate, shipping of research material into and out of India, as
well as language training, and assisting with research arrangements. Past
performance under similar awards was judged by NSF staff and the U.S. scientific
community as being excellent. Funding: This award is for 30 months, with funding
provided as follows: FY U.S.Dollars Indian Rupees __ ___________ _____________
90 15,000 1,500,000 91 15,000 5,813,944