* 9002383
* Novel Separation Processes using Solvents with a Critical   Point of Miscibility
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1993
* Reuel Shinnar, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 01/31/1993
* USD 160,000.00

This proposal deals with a novel separation process recently developed that
could add a valuable and powerful tool to the process designer. It is concerned
with multistage countercurrent separation processes. The basic idea underlying
the approach is based on using pairs of solvents that have a critical point of
miscibility. By operating close to the critical point and changing the
temperature of the system, one can alternatively create regions where the two
solvents form homogeneous solution and others in which they separate into two
distinct phases. Such solvents are already used in separations, but at present
they are used far from the critical point of miscibility. By operating across
the critical point in each section, the mass transfer in the mixing zone as well
as the coalescence process is facilitated. This allows design with low intensity
of mixing, and this will be useful for separations in which there is a tendency
to emulsification or foaming due to impurities. It is also suitable for
separation of high molecular weight compound which have low diffusivities and
therefore high mass transfer resistance. This allows some novel design options
and will allow separations which are at present not economically feasible with
existing solvent separation methods. The basic concept has been demonstrated and
a small column has been successfully operated. However, in order to apply these
processes in an efficient way, a better understanding of the scientific
principles involved is required. The goal of this proposal is to provide
understanding, as well as to provide a better scientific base for future design.