* 9002977
* Timing of the Closure of the Central American Isthmus:      Evidence From Shallow-Water Benthic Foraminifera (Earth     Science)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1992
* Laurel Collins, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 01/31/1992
* USD 82,117.00

Approximately three million years ago the emergence of the Isthmus of Panama
from the sea divided the American tropical marine fauna in two, profoundly
affecting the evolution and geographic distribution of many animals. The time of
severance of deep.water connections has been studied, but Dr. Collins will
determine the time of final closure using shallow.water benthic foraminifera.
Fossil species of these abundant protists indicate the water depths in which
they formerly lived. From strata dated with the newest biostratigraphic
zonations, a sequence of water depths through time from both sides of the
isthmus will be combined with taxonomic data on the biogeographic divergence of
East Pacific and Caribbean foraminifera to date and the final closure of the
isthmus. Standard laboratory and analytical methods will be used. The date of
termination of the marine connection is important to evolutionary studies in
paleontology, molecular biological studies of rates of genetic divergence, and
calculations of regional tectonic uplift and the terrestrial interchange of
South and North American vertebrates. Interactions with the host institution
include: teaching an undergraduate course in biostratigraphy, leading a graduate
seminar in paleobiogeography, co-teaching summer geology field camp, and
arranging guest lectures by established women paleontologists. This project
furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide opportunities for women
to advance their careers in engineering and in the disciplines of science
supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and
engineering by providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers
employed in industry, government, and academic institutions. By encouraging the
participation of women in science, it is a valuable investment in the Nation's
future scientific vitality.