* 9002872
* Ozone Depletion, Ultraviolet Radiation and Phytoplankton    Biology in Antarctic Waters
* O/D,OPP
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1992
* Deneb Karentz, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 03/31/1992
* USD 78,620.00

The Antarctic is now experiencing large springtime losses of stratospheric
ozone, resulting in an increase in ultraviolet B (UVB, 280-320nm) radiation. The
magnitude of ultraviolet radiation reaching the surface now approaches that
measured in tropical latitudes. Perhaps more importantly, UVB radiation has
increased in the Antarctic while both UVA (320-400nm) and photosynthetically
available radiation (PAR, 400-700nm) have remained unchanged. Recent
improvements in atmospheric modeling and technology in oceanographic
instrumentation will be used in a six week field study during the austral spring
1990. The prime objective will be to document the impact of UV radiation on the
phytoplankton community during the ice-edge spring bloom. During this time,
oceanographic processes create favorable conditions for increased UVB
susceptibility. Biological and bio-optical information will be used to define
and quantify linkages between ozone-dependent oscillations in UV to PAR ratios
and phytoplankton productivity. Special emphasis will be place on defining
biological restraints imposed by enhanced UVB and altered UVB:UVA:PAR ratios on
the balance of UVB photodamage to photorepair, photoprotective and
photosynthetic mechanisms operating in the Southern Ocean. The overall aim is to
test the hypothesis that phytoplankton in Antarctic waters are adversely
influenced by ozone depletion.