* 9002615
* SGER:  A Negotiated Transition to Democracy:  Data          Collection for an Archive
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/1990,07/01/1990
* David Stark, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 07/01/1990
* USD 28,361.00

This award is supported through the Small Grants for Exploratory Research
mechanism. This project documents the negotiated transition to democracy in
Hungary. The researchers focus on the unprecedented negotiations in which the
ruling communist party reached agreements with representatives of opposition
parties and trade unions to establish the conditions for competitive political
parties, contested elections, and parliamentary governance. These intensive
roundtable negotiations, involving several hundred bargaining sessions (in
plenary, committee, and subcommittee meetings), were conducted from June 13th to
September 17th, 1989. A complete reconstruction of the negotiating process
requires interviews with the main participants supplemented by reports from
social scientists who observed the process. This project involves the use of
existing tape recordings, minutes, and other summaries of various bargaining
sessions, as well as in-depth interviews with those who participated in the
process. All materials will be cataloged and archived for use by other social
scientists interested in studying the transition to democracy in Hungary. The
project should add considerably to our understanding of how a democratic
political system with representative institutions and a vital public sphere is
constructed.