* 9002366
* Biomaker and Carbon Isotope Geochemistry of Pyrolytic and   Chemosynthetic Processes in Sedimented Hydrothermal Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1993
* Bernd Simoneit, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 01/31/1993
* USD 195,679.00

This is a continuing and collaborative research effort with biologists on the
hydrothermal emanations, primarily in Guaymas Basin, with follow up studies on
material from the Northeastern Pacific (Middle Valley, Juan de Fuca and Gorda
Ridges), African Rift Valley (Lake Tanganyika), and a hot spot under a continent
(Yellowstone Park). The organic matter (petroleum) brought to the seabed by
hydrothermal circulation represents the rapidly generated pyrolytic products
from organic detritus at depth and is a carbon source for the hemosynthetic food
web. This type of carbon cycling and its geological fate will be studied in a
sedimented rift system which is hydrothermally.active, receiving primarily
terrestrial organic detritus (Escanaba Trough). This will be done by coupling
organic and isotope geochemistry to examine interrelationships between
post.depositional pyrolytic alteration of organic matter (petroleum),
biodegradation/weathering processes and chemosynthetic carbon fixation. Chemical
reactions (e.g. aromatization, dehydration, isomerization) with temperature
constraints also will be studied to define formation "windows" for different
compound classes. The environmental fate of these compound classes will be
examined to assess solubility, oxidative weathering and biodegradation. Key
reactions and processes will be simulated in the laboratory by hydrous pyrolysis
experiments. Carbon.14 dating of different organic matter fractions will place
constraints on the sources and subbottom depths of the alteration of
carbonaceous materials. Thus, molecular and isotopic signatures will be able to
be used to trace the transfer of carbon from sources through these hydrothermal
environments.