* 9002569
* XXIIIrd General Assembly of the International Union of RadioScience (URSI); Prague, Czechoslovakia; 08/28 - 09/05/90.
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1991
* Robert Riemer, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 09/30/1991
* USD 16,666.00

This award will provide partial support for travel of selected U.S. participants
to the XXIIIrd General Assembly of the International Union of Radio Science
(URSI), to be held in Prague, Czechoslovakia, from August 28 to September 5,
1990. Funding will be provided to the National Academy of Sciences for this
program. The triennial General Assembly is the principal mechanism for URSI
activities. Participation by U.S. delegates in the past has resulted in
cooperative programs with other nations. In addition, Assembly activities have
been published in the "Proceedings of the General Assembly"; the "Review of
Radio Science"; the "URSI Information Bulletin"; and trip reports by
participants. As a constituent member of the International Council of Scientific
Unions (ICSU), URSI receives support from NSF for its U.S. membership dues and
for activities costs of its U.S. National Committee. The NSF Division of
International Programs coordinates the activities of NSF in fostering
international scientific cooperation. Under the Scientific Organizations and
Resources Program, U.S. scientists and engineers are provided with broad access
to the benefits of selected nongovernmental international organizations,
including ICSU. Support of this travel grant is consonant with this activity. In
consideration of the continued merit of URSI as a way of providing opportunities
for cooperation in a multinational and multidisciplinary context, and of the
highly satisfactory management of U.S. participation through the National
Academy of Sciences, the program manager recommends an award.