* 9002819
* Computational Algebraic Geometry
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1994
* Chee Yap, New York University
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 01/31/1994
* USD 270,404.00

The research is largely motivated by complexity considerations. To understand
complexity of algorithms, it is often necessary to obtain good lower and upper
bounds to commutative algebra. In the last few years, new bounds have been
achieved in three key areas: namely, Groebner Bases, Hilbert Nullstellensatz and
Wu-Ritt Characteristic Sets. The proof techniques employed are novel and contain
ideas that have much wider potential applications. These and a few other related
techniques will be further investigated and new algorithms based on these ideas
will be devised. Another area is the construction of efficient algorithms -- for
GCD. Sturm sequences, computations with algebraic numbers. Groebner bases and
Wu-Ritt characteristic sets. Here also some important progress has been
achieved. Further applications of these results to obtain decomposition of
ideals and varieties, and extensions to more general classes of algebraic
structures will be pursued. An important area that has not received much
attention is the one dealing with the choice of data structures in algebraic
algorithms . This seems a very exciting area because the computational objects
(multivariate polynomials, ideals) here are much richer in structure than
anything that has been traditionally studied in data structures. Research will
be undertaken in this area to address issues of the following kind: Selection of
data structures for various computational algebraic algorithms, Application of
amortization and hashing techniques to algebraic data structures, etc.