* 9002330
* PRF/J:  Quantitative Genetics of Adaptation and Apparent    "Constraint" in a Desert Annual
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1990,07/31/1992
* Gordon Fox, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Gregory J. McCants
* 07/31/1992
* USD 58,800.00

This research examines the genetic architecture of several demographic traits
and underlying physiological mechanisms in the model systems Eriogonum
abertiamum, a desert annual. The work is designed to further understanding of
the genetic basis for life history adaptation and of apparent evolutionary
"constraints." More Sonoran than Chihuahuan Desert Eriogonums begin flowering in
spring, but populations in both regions retain the ancestral character of
biseasonal reproduction (spring and summer). Demographic and genetic studies
suggest that natural selection may explain earlier Sonoran flowering. However,
retention of Biseasonality is not consistent with adaptive explanations in
Sonoran populations: Expected summer fecundity does not outweigh the risk of
between-season mortality. Fossil, distributional, and biogeographic evidence
suggest the same conclusion. Correlations among life history traits may block
selection for increased spring fecundity, as suggested by preliminary field and
greenhouse studies. Selection experiments are proposed to determine a) whether
heritabilities and genetic correlations among demographic traits are
significantly different from zero; and b) whether selection on the correlations
themselves can change their signs, i.e., whether the correlations can act as
constraints. Sib analyses of growth and allocation traits--which underlie
demographic traits--will examine genetic variation for these traits both within
and between populations.