* 9002300
* RUI: Purchase of a Spectropolarimeter for Research in AlaskaIncluding Undergraduate Biochemistry Research
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/1990,10/31/1992
* F. Gerald Plumley, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 10/31/1992
* USD 45,300.00

The Program in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology of the Department of Chemistry
and the Institute of Marine Science of the School of Fisheries and Ocean
Sciences will purchase a Jasco Spectropolarimeter with data
collection/manipulation system. This instrument will be initially used in five
research programs: 1. Role of pigments and protein in thylakoid membrane
biogenesis. 2. Analysis of synthetic amyloid peptides. 3. Structural resolution
of plant anti-herbivore secondary metabolites. 4. Structural/functional
relationships of protein upon gelation. 5. Structure/activity relationship in a
bacterial decardoxylase. Undergraduate students participate in the above
research programs during the academic year and during summer as part of the REU
program. Some of the current projects involving undergraduates are: 1. Analysis
of protein synthesis in the brains of salmon during smoltification. 2. Heavy
metal toxicity effects on photosynthetic membranes at the level of gene
expression. 3. Effect of plant secondary metabolites from forest floor litter on
rates of microbial nitrification. 4. Structure a diterpene isolated from
Colophospermum mophane. The spectropolarimeter will also be used in laboratory
portion of undergraduate courses. This instrument will be a significant addition
of the University's instrumentation capabilities. Since this will be the only
spectropolarimeter available in the state, it will function as a regional
instrument for users at other state campuses as well as at other University
sponsored research institutes.