* 9002223
* Science in Developing Countries: U.S.-Kenya Cooperative     Science Research on Electrocatalytic Reduction of           Organohalides in Surfactant Media
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1995
* James Rusling, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Frances Li
* 02/28/1995
* USD 20,000.00

This project supports the participation of Dr. Geoffrey Kamau of the University
of Nairobi in an ongoing, long-term project to develop new electrocatalytic
approaches for destruction of halogenated organic pollutants in aqueous
surfactant media. Specific aims for the two-year period of this collaborative
component center around optimizing experimental design factors to attain
significantly faster dehalogenation rates. The broad, long-term goals of the
research project are to make possible new strategies for permanently effective
detoxification of contaminated materials such as sediments, soils, and
industrial oils, and to provide new insights into toxic and environmental
interactions of organohalides by establishing fundamental kinetic and
thermodynamic characteristics of their electron-transfer reactions.
Environmental contamination with organohalide chemicals is a worldwide problem.
Dehalogenation methods being developed should be directly applicable to other
pollutants as well. The project is consistent with the criteria for the Science
in Developing Countries (SDC) program in that it strengthens collaboration
between U.S. scientists and engineers and their counterparts in developing
countries, and increases the capacity of scientists and engineers in developing
countries to address constraints to development.