* 9002703
* A New Method to Investigate Unsteady Heat Transfer in a     Turbine Research Rig
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/1990,06/30/1991
* Cengiz Camci, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 06/30/1991
* USD 30,000.00

One of the most difficult areas of experimental heat transfer is that of
determining the thermal response of solid surfaces placed inside the flow to
highly non-steady fluctuations in temperature, pressure, velocity, etc. In
recent years, very sophisticated computer codes have been developed which are
capable of analyzing such flows, but typically, they involve some semi-
empiricism. Experimental validation of these non- steady codes is therefore of
great importance. However, the progress of experimental techniques has not kept
pace with such computational developments, and much work is needed to provide
such validation. One area where non-steady effects are of great importance is
the area of turbo-machinery where high non-steadiness is produced by rotor-
stator flow interactions, shock wave generation, turbulence, blade-boundary
layer interaction, and the like. The Axial Flow Turbine Facility at Penn State
with its instrumentation in the rotor frame of reference is uniquely equipped to
attempt such validation. The innovation of the proposed research is to attempt
to simulate non-steady heat transfer in a turbo-machine by introducing a slug of
high temperature air flow at a relatively small segment of the periphery of the
turbo- machine, over a very small increment of time. If the simulation proves
valid, then the experimental study of non-steady transfer characteristics in
turbo-machines will be greatly simplified, and lead to relatively rapid progress
in this important field. In addition, fundamental information on non-steady heat
transfer will emerge from this study.