* 9002058
* The Genetic Control of Developmental Decisions
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1994
* Robin Denell, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 01/31/1994
* USD 337,000.00

Studies of the genetic mechanisms controlling developmental commitments during
embryogenesis are among the most active and significant in biomedical research.
The powerful methodological approaches possible with Drosophila have shown that
clusters of homeotic genes function to establish developmental fate. Recent
exciting results indicate that mammals have genes with recognizable homology
which are expressed in domains paralleling those of the insect homeotic genes.
Although the further developmental and molecular characterization of these
mammalian genes is a fascinating prospect, progress towards understanding their
precise roles will ultimately be limited by the difficulty of isolating and
studying mutations. The proposed project will focus on the homeotic genes of the
red flour beetle (Tribolium castenum), an insect offering the possibility of
integrated genetic, developmental and molecular studies with a resolution
similar to that possible with Drosophila, but which is evolutionarily well
diverged from flies and shows many interesting differences. Available balancers
and deficiencies will allow the identification by saturation mutagenesis of the
developmentally significant genes in the portion of the single homeotic complex
of Tribolium corresponding to the Drosophila ANT-C, and their mutant syndromes
will be described. Portions of several homeotic genes have already been
molecularly cloned from a genomic library, and embryonic cDNA and genomic YAC
libraries will also be screened. After these experiments have isolated the
remaining genes and correlated them with the genetic map, further studies will
determine their organization as well as spatial and temporal patterns of
expression. Such an integrated approach will enable studies of the interactions
of these homeotic genes with one another and with genes up and downstream in
this developmental pathway. Even in a research area as active as the evolution
and function of homeotic genes, the methodological advantages of Tribolium will
generate unique insights into the regulation of developmental fate.