* 9002145
* Acquisition of Instrumentation for Enhancing Chemical       Analyses in Ecological Research
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/1990,11/30/1992
* John Wehr, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* Joann P. Roskoski
* 11/30/1992
* USD 70,000.00

Ecological research is often enhanced by access to sophisticated instrumentation
for chemical analysis, but it is usually not cost-effective to have every
instrument in every ecologist's lab. This proposal requests funds for the
acquisition of shared-use instrumentation that will permit a group of five
ecologists at Fordham University's Calder Conservation and Ecology Center, with
diverse research interests, to enhance their chemical analytical capabilities.
The instruments include a Technicon TrAAcs-800 element analyzer, a Hewlett
Packard HP5890A Capillary Gas chromatograph, a Waters High Performance Liquid
Chromatography System, and a Perkin-Elmer HGA Graphite Furnace for an existing
Perking-Elmer 1100B atomic absorption spectrophotometer. These instruments will
be used in the analysis of essential inorganic nutrients in water, sediment and
plant tissue samples, complex organic compounds such as plant pigments and
allelochemicals, and trace elements and metals such as aluminum and selenium.
The research disciplines to which these enhanced analytical capabilities will be
applied include behavioral ecology (foraging choices of large primates based on
nutritional quality), community ecology (species responses to nutrients, metal
and biotic changes) and ecosystems ecology (biogeochemical cycles, paleoecology,
climate change).