* 9002225
* Design and Implementation of A Program Unification Tool:    Experiments on Vector Concurrent Processors
* CSE,OAC
* 05/15/1990,04/30/1993
* Vernon Rego, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Maxine Hynson
* 04/30/1993
* USD 128,094.00

The goal of this project is to exploit a novel idea for obtaining speedup on
vector and concurrent multiprocessors. Most, if not all, studies in parallelism
focus on maximizing parallelism within a program or algorithm. It is well known
that many programs/algorithms do not exhibit good characteristics of parallelism
(e.g. Monte Carlo and general simulations, numerical computations that proceed
iteratively, already existing poorly vectorized code, payroll programs,
optimization algorithms, etc.) Clearly, one cannot squeeze any more parallelism
from within a program if the program does not yield itself to this, and one
cannot take already existing code and vectorize it if the code does not
vectorize well (unless much time and money is spent in redesigning and rewriting
code). Consider, for example, expensive oil-exploration simulations that run for
several hours on a single data set. Simulation programs, being event based in
nature, simply do not exhibit good characteristics of parallelism. Suppose that
one has a program that does not vectorize well (such as the examples given
above). Since it is very often the case that the same program has to be executed
several times, each time on different data, why not create a Unified version of
the program that executes on all the data, so that a single run of the unified
program will achieve what a number of serial runs on different data achieves?
The advantage is that on vector concurrent multiprocessors, such unified
programs (1) yield speedup even though the original program does not, and (2)
increase machine utilization more efficiently by exploiting the vector
functional units heavily. A simple tool is made to transform the original
program into an N-component vector version. Since the different data sets have
different effects on program behavior, issues such as path divergence of
programs affect speedup. Encouraging results from pilot studies suggest that
path divergence can be dealt with through the use of a smart scheduler. The
final tool will consist of a transform algorithm, a scheduler, and a decision
support system that informs a user how to use the tool for a given program. The
support system will use the program graph and machine characteristics to make
its decisions.