* 9002135
* Automatic Extension of a Knowledge Base through Natural Lan-guage Text Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1990,05/31/1993
* Julia Hodges, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Reeker
* 05/31/1993
* USD 99,007.00

This research will develop a flexible knowledge representation medium and
sufficient natural language processing tools to allow the automated extension of
an expert system's knowledge base through access to machine-readable natural
language texts such as dictionaries, thesauri, and technical references. The
work on an early prototype has used the Merck manual as a source ıMerck 1977!.
Initial work will include the building of a parsing system consisting of a core
grammar and the means to expand the core grammar semi-automatically. Using this
parsing system, the effort will develop the incremental augmentation of the
knowledge system directly from the analysis of the text. The ability of an
expert system to extend its own knowledge base by extracting information from
machine readable text is valuable for a wide variety of systems, including
expert systems for large technical applications in a domain in which the
information is continually being updated. Other projects rely on human
intervention during the process that extracts new knowledge ıLenat et al. 1986;
Humphrey 1989; Antonacci et al. 1989!. This makes dealing with problems such as
contradictory information much easier. In contrast, here the feasibility of
automating the actual extraction of information, in a disciplined way, from a
structured technical reference will be examined.