* 9002413
* Integrating Explanation-Based and Neural Approaches to      Machine Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1994
* Jude Shavlik, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Su-Shing Chen
* 08/31/1994
* USD 170,069.00

To be considered intelligent, machines must be capable of learning. Symbolic and
neural approaches to machine learning both have been heavily investigated.
However, there has been little research into the synergies achievable by
combining these two learning paradigms. This work will develop a hybrid system
that combines the symbolically-oriented explanation-based learning paradigm with
the neural back-propagation algorithm. In this system, the initial neural
network configuration is determined by the generalized explanation of the
solution to a specific classification of planning task. This research addresses
the problem of choosing a good initial neural network configuration and
overcomes problems that arise when using imperfect theories to build
explanations. Most real-world problems can never be formalized exactly. However,
there is much to be gained by utilizing the capability to reason approximately
correctly. Explanation-based learning provides a way to profitably use casual
models of the world, while neural networks provide a way to refine roughly-
correct concepts. This research on combining these two learning paradigms
promises to broaden the applicability of machine learning techniques, producing
learning algorithms that are not brittle and which can produce concepts whose
accuracy improves through experience.