* 9002333
* Root Carbon Costs and Water Uptake for Desert Succulents
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1994
* Park Nobel, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 08/31/1994
* USD 233,997.00

One of the last major frontiers in understanding how plants function deals with
their roots. The roots benefit a plant by obtaining water and nutrients from the
soil and at the same time they impose a cost on the plant, which can most
readily be appreciated by considering the carbon incorporated into their
structure as well as expended by respiration for their growth and maintenance.
Thus, the overall objective of the research is to determine the carbon
requirements of water acquisition for the root systems of Agave deserti (an
agave native to the southwest of the U.S.), Ferocactus acanthodes (a cactus
sympatric with A. deserti), and Opuntia ficus-indica (a cactus that is
cultivated worldwide as a vegetable, for cattle fodder, and for its fruits). The
responses of the shoots of the three species to environmental conditions have
been extensively studied in Dr. Nobel's laboratory over the past 15 years,
providing valuable ecological information and also demonstrating that the
productivity of O. ficus-indica exceeds that of most conventional agronomic
crops. Moreover, the high productivities of such desert succulents are achieved
at a very low cost in terms of transpired water, because all three species
employ Crassulacean acid metabolism with its nocturnal stomatal opening and a
greatly enhanced water-use efficiency. Here, the influences of temperature, soil
water status, soil gas phase, and root age on root respiration and water- uptake
ability will be determined for individual roots as well as entire root systems
for A. deserti, F. acanthodes, and O. ficus-indica. The mechanisms for
preventing water loss from the roots to a dry soil will be examined, a feature
that is crucial for the survival of perennial plants in deserts. Performing
cost/benefit analyses on the roots of these highly successful and productive
species will not only provide basic information on how they respond in the
natural environment but also can be used to propose new land-use scenarios for
the beneficial exploitation of succulent plants under future climatic
conditions.