* 9002957
* Spectroscopic Studies of Supported Iron Carbidocarbonyl     Clusters (Engineering)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1990,02/29/1992
* Donna Blackmond, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 02/29/1992
* USD 106,272.00

IR and SS-NMR studies of supported iron carbidocarbonyl clusters will be
conducted. This research combines expertise developed in the field of supported
metal catalyst chemistry with that of organometallic chemistry and homogeneous
catalysis. Borrowing from surface chemistry techniques, metal clusters will be
anchored to supports to provide them with an environment more similar to that of
a heterogeneous catalyst is usually found. In this environment, the metal
cluster will be subjected to thermal and chemical treatments while monitoring
the transformations that the ligands and the metal framework undergo. An effort
will be made to probe the molecular chemistry of the supported cluster system
and compare the observations with the known solution chemistry of the
unsupported cluster and the less-well-defined surface chemistry of related
adsorbate-metal surface systems. The studies will provide an understanding of
the structure of the cluster systems throughout these interactions, giving the
potential to develop a fundamental understanding of a wide range of metal-
organic interactions that may provide invaluable clues concerning similar
interactions on metal surfaces. Interactive activities include a workshop for
women undergraduates entitled, "Graduate Education in Chemical Engineering."
This activity will help encourage young women to consider careers in scientific
research. In addition, a graduate course on topics in catalysis will be taught.
This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide
opportunities for women to advance their careers in engineering and in the
disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue
careers in science and engineering by providing greater visibility for women
scientists and engineers employed in industry, government, and academic
institutions. By encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a
valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.