* 9002917
* Applications of Artificial Intelligence to Materials        Logistics in Semiconductor Manufacturing (Engineering)
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1992
* Carol Shilepsky, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 01/31/1992
* USD 88,034.00

Potential applications will be investigated of artificial intelligence and
expert systems to the design and operation of materials logistics systems within
semiconductor manufacturing. The United States semiconductor industry faces
considerable pressure from international competition in a time of rapidly
changing products and processes. Problems such as scheduling and dispatching
within a production line are computationally intractible and must rely on
heuristics for system operation. Their complexity, size, and stochastic
variability suggest that they are best addressed by a combination of techniques
from Operations Research and Artificial Intelligence. Dr. Shilepsky will bring
together current models from Operations Research, scaling to reduce problem
size, and embedded AI submodules in the form of expert systems, neural nets,
and/or space state search to develop new models for production planning. The
interactive activities include teaching two courses during each of the fall and
spring semesters selected from Introduction to Engineering Probability,
Introduction to Stochastic Processes, and Inventory Theory. In addition, Dr.
Shilepsky will advise 10 undergraduate and 5 graduate students, supervising a
master's degree project in conjunction with the proposed research. This project
furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide opportunities for women
to advance their careers in engineering and in the disciplines of science
supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and
engineering by providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers
employed in industry, government, and academic institutions. By encouraging the
participation of women in science, it is a valuable investment in the Nation's
future scientific vitality.