* 9002986
* Cobalt Mediated Reactions in Organic Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1993
* Marie Krafft, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* John S. Showell
* 03/31/1993
* USD 236,234.00

This research is being funded by the Organic Synthesis Program. Dr. Krafft will
be continuing her studies of the synthetic potential of cobalt carbonyl
complexes as reagents for the controlled construction of five-membered rings.
Reagents like this enrich the armamentarium of synthetic organic chemists and
provide more powerful synthetic tools for the synthesis of more complex
molecules. The work on the directed Pauson reaction has progressed to the point
where one can now plan total syntheses with some confidence. The ene-yne
cycloaddition is highly regioselective due to the direction by nitrogen or
sulfur ligands tethered to the alkene. Further work is planned to improve the
synthetic efficiency of the directed Pauson reaction. Some efforts are now
directed toward the total synthesis of asteriscanolide. Two different approaches
are being examined. An asymmetric modification of the Pauson cycloaddition is
also under investigation. Other reactions using alkyne-cobalt carbonyls are
underway, i.e. selective oxidations and sulfoxide reductions. The second part of
the project involves the examination of reactions with acylcobalt carbonyl
complexes. Earlier work demonstrated that butenolides, with a variety of
substitution patterns, can be synthesized in high yield by the reaction of
alkynes with acylcobalt carbonyl complexes. One major problem associated with
the reaction will be addressed by the use of a directing ligand. The
intermediate formed in the reaction is a pi-allyl cobalt complex. The carbon-
carbon bond forming reactions of the pi-allyl complex will be investigated.
Insertion of acyl cobalt complexes into alkenes and the asymmetric versions of
these reactions will also be studied.