* 9002894
* Managing the Reefs: An Exploration of Local and Scientific  Knowledge (A Postdoctoral Fellowship in Studies in Science, Technology & Society).
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1990,09/30/1991
* Priscilla Weeks, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 09/30/1991
* USD 28,000.00

This one year, full-time award enables a new PhD in anthropologyto develop her
understanding of the scientific approaches to management of natural resources,
specifically oyster reefs. She will undertake a one-year course of study in the
Department of Wildlife and Fisheries Management at Texas A&M University,
sponsored by Dr. David J. Schmidly, Head of the Department. Attending classes
with future regulatory employees, she will learn about the scientific models on
which resource management is based, including oyster biology, population
dynamics, economics, growth, habitat and histories of local reefs. At the same
time, field work in the Galveston Bay area among oyster fishermen will focus on
elucidating the elements of indigenous models -- the local knowledge fishermen
use in managing their resource. Anthropological literature has shown that
fishermen often have models for self-regulation which are not apparent to
regulatory agencies or to scientists. Bureaucrats often introduce management
regimes with the assumption that fishermen have no management system (formal or
informal) or use one that must be ineffective since it is not based on
scientific information. This project hypothesizes that 1) adverse socio-economic
impacts from the institution of rationalized management will be lessened if
existing informal management systems are, where possible, incorporated, and 2)
both types of management models must be explicit for this to happen. The project
goal is to enable scientists to incorporate appropriate indigenous strategies
and to give fishermen a voice in management of their local resources. This
project addresses a central issue in both theory and practice in science
studies: the relationship between formalized, scientific ways of knowing and the
informal experience-based methods by which communities negotiate priorities and
practices. The investigator and her host specialist and host institution are
uniquely well-qualified to undertake and support this project; research and
related activities are likely to continue after the period of the award. Results
are likely to be appropriately disseminated and useful. An award in the amount
of $28,000 is therefore recommended.