* 9002177
* Structural Interactions and Biological Activity of          Allosteric Threonine Deaminase
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1993
* Edward Eisenstein, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 12/31/1993
* USD 219,000.00

Research on allosteric threonine deaminase from Escherichia coli will reveal
protein interactions that regulate enzyme activity. Cloning and high-level
expression will aid in purifying wild-type and mutant forms of threonine
deaminase for their biochemical characterization. Analysis of the protein
concentration dependence of enzyme kinetic parameters will elucidate a model for
the transition between low and high activity conformations. Identifying
malfunctioning variants by classical genetics will reveal structural domains
involved in catalysis and regulation, and their effect on the folding of
polypeptides will be evaluated by x-ray crystallography. Sedimentation
equilibrium studies of the tetramer-dimer interconversion of threonine deaminase
will permit quantitative determination of changes in subunit interaction energy.
Direct ligand binding measurements by equilibrium dialysis, coupled with the
energetics of dimer- tetramer assembly, will reveal the thermodynamic basis for
cooperativity. The cofactor pyridoxal 5'-phosphate, a chromophore in the active
site, can reveal local changes promoted by effector binding that alter
catalysis. Quantitative analysis of absorption spectra in terms of sums of
lognormal curves will establish a free energy profile for the enzyme to assess
the effect of heterotropic ligands on each step of the reaction pathway.
Presteady-state kinetic studies will correlate the kinetic and thermodynamic
effects of inhibitor binding.