* 9002852
* Mathematical Sciences: Classical Analysis: Complex Analysis,Computation, and Control
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/1990,10/31/1992
* Donald Marshall, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 10/31/1992
* USD 48,024.00

Work on this project combines investigations into mathematical questions of
classical complex analysis with applications to control problems and finitely
generated algebras of functions of several complex variables. The optimal
control problems, arising in engineering, are phrased in terms of vector-valued,
bounded, functions defined on certain cylinder-like sets. One is interested in
minimizing a certain functional over the class of functions. Sometimes there are
no extermal functions, other times they turn out to be analytic. Sometimes there
are unique solutions, but not always. The goal of this work is to describe the
cylinders which give rise to bounded analytic optimal functions which are smooth
on the boundary of the cylinder. A number of positive results in this area have
focused the problem to one of taking analytic selections of functions on sets
fibered over the unit circle and determining when such functions agree with a
given function when restricted to the unit interval. Work on algebra generators
evolves from an earlier result of Gleason which suggests that the classes of
continuous and holomorphic functions in the two-dimensional domains which vanish
at the origin are finitely generated algebras. This is easy to do for the
bidisc, although the minimum norm of the generators is not yet known (it is
probably unity). This particular question is to be addressed by computational
methods first to verify the conjectured minimum. For the general Gleason
problem, a new approach will be made by converting it to an equivalent problem
in first order partial differential equations. Estimates for the norm of the
generators should follow if this plan works out.