* 9002020
* A Miniature In-Chamber Co2 and H20 Sensor for PhotosynthesisStudies
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/1990,05/31/1993
* Keith Mott, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 05/31/1993
* USD 152,011.00

The PIs will develop and test a miniature open-cell CO2 and H20 (MICAH) sensor
that can be inserted into the leaf chamber of a plant gas exchange system or
used in eddy-covariance measurements of canopy photosynthesis and transpiration.
The MICAH sensor will be developed at the Space Dynamics Laboratory by the
technical personnel that recently delivered similar sensors to NASA for use in
space suits. This design will provide low- maintenance, battery-powered sensors
connected to open-sided absorption cells using infrared transmitting fiber
optics. Innovative miniature components and microprocessor control will provide
high-resolution performance in a hand-held, flexible instrument. This sensor is
an important improvement in technology for plant gas exchange because it will
allow accurate measurements of non- steady-state photosynthesis. Measurements of
this type are necessary in the study of plant responses to sunflecks, and have
been limited by the design of current instruments. Because the sensor will allow
analysis of CO2 concentration in the leaf chamber directly, it will also allow
the development of a true CO2 porometer, which will improve the speed, accuracy,
and portability of field gas exchange systems. Following the successful
development of this sensor, a cost- sharing arrangement with NSF to make copies
of it available to scientists whose research is limited by current sensor
technology will proposed.