* 9002251
* RUI: Algebras, Domains and Categories in Computation and    Semantics
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1993
* Philip Mulry, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Krishna M. Kavi
* 01/31/1993
* USD 43,665.00

Algebras and monads, domains and categories provide powerful approaches to
various connected problems in computation and semantics. The project employs
categories in formalizing the iterative process in fixed point constructions
suitable for wide computational interpretation. Questions such as producing a
systematic approach to interpreting non-termination and measuring the extent
recursion coexists in the presence of powerful closure properties, necessary for
semantic interpretation, will be answered. Recent progress in interpreting
domains in non-standard models of computation will continue. The objective here
is the enumeration of a powerful computation paradigm capable of broad semantic
utilization in which notions such as order, continuity and effectiveness are
intrinsically defined. An important goal is providing a logical framework that
will systematize present work, promote greater accessibility, and point to
possible future implementation. The research will utilize algebras and monads to
study partial data types and their computations. Utilizing recent success with
Kleisli and Eilenberg-Moore algebras, a systematic study of various monadic
refinements and their corresponding computation calculi will be undertaken.
Connections with other models of partial computation and with work in
operational semantics will also be explored.