* 9002515
* U.S.-Mexico Collaborative Research:  Peasant Economy and    Household Units:  Dynamics Structure and Reproduction in theValley of Oaxaca
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1990,03/30/1994
* Martha Rees, Agnes Scott College
* Standard Grant
* Emily B. Rudin
* 03/30/1994
* USD 38,935.00

This award will support Professor Martha Rees of Baylor University in a research
collaboration with Professor Ana Paula de Teresa of the Universidad Autonoma
Metropolitana de Iztapalapa, Mexico. The investigators intend to address the
issue of how do peasant households reproduce themselves, not only biologically,
but economically and socially as well, in the fact of adverse conditions posed
by the expansion of the market. Data collected in the Central Valley of Oaxaca,
Mexico will permit a diachronic and a synchronic analysis of the effect of
external factors (e.g., market) on internal household structure and organization
--the reverse of Chayanov's model in which internal needs determine peasant
production. Data include genealogies and work and reproductive histories to be
summed in matrices by chronological year and household age. Results will show
changes in consumer/ worker ratio, division of labor, expulsion or retention of
household members (via marriage or migration), changing productive and
subsistence activities, and demographic behavior. The collaborators have
experience with the field training of graduate and undergraduate students in
Anthropology. Such training will be an integral part of this research as much of
the data collecting and analysis will be performed by graduate and undergraduate
students in Mexico and the United States.