* 9002441
* Compact Storage Equipment, Herbarium of Brigham Young       University
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1993
* Stanley Welsh, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* David Schindel
* 12/31/1993
* USD 117,126.00

The Brigham Young Herbarium contains approximately 350,000 specimens, primarily
from the state of Utah. The holdings of this herbarium probably constitute the
world's best representation of the plants of this area. This collection has been
used extensively for preparation of the Intermountain Flora and the Flora of
Utah, and this herbarium is the primary resource for our understanding of the
transition between the floras of the Rocky Mountains to the east and the Great
Basin to the West. Research on the biogeography of the American West benefits
greatly from this collection. Dr. Stanley Welsh, Curator of the Herbarium, has
been responsible for the collection's steady growth over the past decades, and
he now proposes to install a new storage system of movable "compatorized"
herbarium cases. This improvement will support many years of continued growth of
the collection. Natural history collections such as the Brigham Young Herbarium
constitute the a valuable resource for understanding the diversity of life on
earth. They are indispensable to research in many fields of science, including
but not limited to systematic and evolutionary biology, ecology, biogeography,
and conservation. The continued support and improvement of these collections
will provide future generations of investigators with access to critical
research resources.