* 9002603
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on The Long Range Transport of Pollutants in the Pacific Rim Region Around South Korea
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1994
* Gregory Carmichael, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 07/31/1994
* USD 11,756.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Gregory R. Carmichael, Department of
Chemical and Biological Engineering, University of Iowa, to pursue with Dr. Min
Sun Hong, Department of Environmental Engineering, Ajou University, Korea, for a
period of 24 months, a program of cooperative research on the long range
transport of air pollutants in the Pacific Rim region around South Korea. The
research plan includes observation and modelling components. Background
measurements of aerosol, ozone, and oxides of nitrogen and of sulfur will be
obtained at Cheju Island located south-southwest of the Korean peninsula.
Comprehen- sive modelling analysis of the long range transport of pollutants and
their impact on the environment will be made. Chemicals released into the
atmosphere can have many adverse impacts on the environment including local air
pollution such as smog, regional problems such as acid rain, and global problems
including the reduction of stratospheric ozone and global warming. South Korea's
location between China, to the west, and Japan, to the east, provides an ideal
location to study the transport and chemical charac- teristics of the east Asia
plume. This research is of interest and benefit to the United States because it
has now been well established that neither pollutants nor their effects are
confined to the locations where the chemicals enter the atmosphere. The two
investigators are outstanding scientists in the field of the project who have a
record of successful collaboration in prior research. This project is relevant
to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to
increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and
engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and
techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. Dr. Hong's
participation in the project is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering
Foundation (KOSEF).