* 9002984
* Conformational Dynamics of Rhodopsin and Bacteriorhodopsin
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1994
* T. Dewey, University of Denver
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/1994
* USD 246,050.00

Fluorescence polarization and energy transfer is used to probe the
conformational dynamics of two light-activated proteins, rhodopsin and
bacteriorhodopsin. Over the years, these proteins have provided important model
systems for receptor action and ion transport, respectively. The goal of the
present study is to investigate changes in protein flexibility as a result of
conformational transitions. These systems are especially convenient for this
purpose because of the ease of inducing transitions with light. These
experiments should provide unique information on how protein dynamics influence
conformational transitions. Phase lifetime spectroscopy is used to measure
changes in fluorescence energy transfer and fluorescence polarization in
bacteriorhodopsin as it proceeds through its proton-pumping photocycle. This
novel technique will allow changes in position of the chromophore, retinal, to
be monitored for intermediates which exist on the millisecond time scale. In the
rhodopsin work, fluorescence labels are attached to a site located on the
carboxyl tail which is thought to anchor the tail to the membrane. The membrane
location of the this site will be established using fluorescence energy
transfer. Fluorescence anisotropy measurements will be used to characterize the
motion of the "tethered tail". Finally, theoretical models will be investigated
to provide link between molecular dynamics and conformational changes.