* 9003588
* Determining the Damageability of the Loma Prieta Earthquake Motions:  Predicted and Observed Damageability and Soil     Effects
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/1990,10/31/1991
* Robert Sewell, Risk Engineering, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 10/31/1991
* USD 57,428.00

This project addresses the lessons learned from the 17 October 1989 Northern
California (Loma Prieta) earthquake. The aim is to evaluate critical parameters
of the Loma Prieta earthquake ground motions (including after shocks) that have
engineering significance, and to demonstrate the use of these parameters in
predicting the damageability of future Bay Area earthquakes. Information on the
duration, time-variation and breadth of frequency content, cyclic history, etc.
- motion properties known to have important effects on structural damage, but
which are difficult to define and use explicitly - this information is
incorporated implicitly in the characterization. A comparison is made between
the predicted and observed damage-effective motion characteristics for the Loma
Prieta earthquake. The observed analytical characterizations are used to explain
specific cases of building damage and non- damage, while the influence of the
soil on the motion characterizations is determined statistically. These data
from the Loma Prieta earthquake are combined with data computed for earlier
events. The project is expected to result in improved statistical formulas for
the magnitude/distance/soil dependence of nonlinear damageability. These
formulas, when combined with local soils data, are used to conduct probabilistic
hazard analyses to derive maps of the damageability of future Bay Area
earthquakes.