* 9003093
* Research Initiation:  Solution Refinement by the Adaptive   Mesh Superposition Method
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/1990,11/30/1992
* Jacob Fish, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* George K. Lea
* 11/30/1992
* USD 66,000.00

One of the major challenges in computational mechanics is the development of
numerical methods for resolving the structure of functions with high gradients
in complicated geometries. In problems such as material failure due to
localization and crack propagation, or shocks in fluid dynamics, the regions of
high gradients are of several orders of magnitude smaller than the size of the
domain of interest. Therefore, if a uniform finite element mesh is used, a
tremendous amount of elements would be needed to accurately resolve the
structure of high gradients. The purpose of this research is to improve the
quality of finite element calculations in the regions of high gradients. This is
accomplished by superimposing a patch of higher order hierarchical elements on
the portion of the original finite element mesh where resolution is required.
Continuity of the displacement field is maintained by imposing homogenous
boundaries between the original and superimposed fields. The superimposed and
the original mesh topology. The research to be carried out as part of this
project will consider the following aspects: 1. The development and
implementation of the finite element mesh superposition method. 2. Automation of
the superposition method. High resolution of the fields will be obtained by
controlling the location of the superimposed field, its subdivision and the
polynomial order of the superimposed elements. The process of selection of these
variables will be steered by a posteriori information. Pointwise error and the
superimposed mesh will be designed to make a nearly optimal use of posterior
information.