* 9003982
* International Workshop on the Runup of Long Ocean Waves     Onto a Coastline
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/1990,04/30/1992
* Costas Synolakis, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 04/30/1992
* USD 39,408.00

The objectives of this workshop are: (1) to review the state of the art of long
wave (tsunami) runup onto a coastline; (2) help identify areas where knowledge
is fragmented and incomplete; (3) assist in the transfer of information between
theory and practice; (4) address the issues of the maintenance of numerical
codes for runup predictions, and the development of certain bench mark problems
for calibration and comparison purposes; and (5) suggest future directions in
tsunami runup hazard mitigation research. The attendance of tsunami researchers
from Japan and the Soviet Union is an important component in the planning of the
workshop. Tsunami research is very active in these countries, but due to
communication difficulties, this research is not well known in the United
States. Another goal of this meeting is to bring together researchers who do not
normally interact. This workshop brings together coastal engineers,
oceanographers, geologists and mathematicians engaged in the study of wave
runup, thereby improving the communication between specialists from different
scientific disciplines who work on different aspects of the runup problem. The
workshop addresses the related problem of computer code maintenance: given the
expense of developing new codes or of resurrecting existing ones, guidelines are
needed for the maintenance of existing codes. The dissemination of these codes
is also of concern. Given the current capabilities of electronic mail, it
appears that this offers a convenient method of dissemination, but there is a
need to agree upon protocols for governing the transfer of research codes. It is
expected that this workshop will have a very positive effect on directing
research toward tsunami hazard mitigation, including a more conspicuous effort
to contribute to the state of the art of tsunami warning systems (which are the
responsibility of the National Weather Service within the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration).