* 9003771
* Performance of Masonry and Masonry Veneer Buildings in the  1989 Loma Prieta Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/1990,02/28/1991
* Richard Klingner, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 02/28/1991
* USD 60,000.00

This is a post Loma Prieta earthquake (Oct. 1989) investigation project in
learning from this damaging event. The thrust of this project is to study the
earthquake effect on masonry and masonry veneer buildings based on analysis and
damage observations. The overall objective of this project is to improve the
seismic safety of masonry and masonry veneer buildings in the United States. Its
specific objective is to evaluate the seismic performance of masonry and masonry
veneer buildings in the October 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake, with particular
attention to the behavior of selected buildings. The following task will be
undertaken: l) review the overall behavior of masonry and masonry veneer
buildings; 2) select a small number (3-5) of such buildings for further study,
based on their usefulness as prototypes, and on the availability of strong-
motion records, 3) study their damages in detail, and compare their responses
with that predicted analytically; and 4) using this comparison, assess the
effectiveness of existing masonry design codes, estimate the probable hazard of
existing masonry buildings, and provide useful information to those concerned
with the repair and retrofit of masonry buildings. This study will lead to an
improved understanding of the seismic damage to masonry and masonry veneer
buildings and the development of practical ways to mitigate such future damage
to such existing buildings in seismic hazard areas.