* 9003815
* Women and Aggression in Aboriginal Australia:  A Cross-     Cultural Exploration (Anthropology)
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1992
* Victoria Burbank, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 06/30/1992
* USD 84,852.00

The principle objectives of this research are to learn new computer skills,
conduct analyses of 765 cases of men's and women's aggressive behavior in an
Australian Aboriginal community, and to integrate the results of these
quantitative analyses with material on the sociocultural context in which these
cases occur in a book titled: "Fighting Sticks and Spears: Women and Aggression
-- An Exploration." The publication will contribute to an understanding of how
and why women everywhere or anywhere, act aggressively. Detailed illustrations
will be presented of acts of female aggression and victimization and their
sociocultural context. It will also integrate the Aboriginal data with those of
other studies in order to address a number of current issues about female
aggression including gender/sex differences in aggression, female competition,
and women's roles in family violence. Finally, it will analyze the impact of
Western theories and stereotyped on the study of female aggression and
victimization and suggest appropriate modifications of current theory.
Interactive activities will include teaching a graduate seminar on women and
aggression as well as a team.taught undergraduate course on Australian
Aboriginal Ethnography. This project furthers VPW program objectives which are
(1) to provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in engineering
and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to
pursue careers in science and engineering by providing greater visibility for
women scientists and engineers employed in industry, government, and academic
institutions. By encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a
valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.