* 9003242
* Public Sector Accountability and Control (Decision, Risk,   and Management Science)
* EDU,EES
* 12/31/1990,05/31/1992
* Vivian Carpenter, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 05/31/1992
* USD 133,359.00

This research will apply interdisciplinary research methods to public sector
accountability issues. Use of interdisciplinary methods will be enhanced through
a joint association with the College of Engineering and the Institute for Public
Policy Studies. Public sector accountability and performance evaluation will be
addressed by investigating the choice of accounting practices and the nature and
amount of auditing performed by state and local governments. This will expand on
the research in public sector decision.making by: (1) conducting field studies
to gain a greater understanding of the organizational factors and conditions
which influence government accounting practices, budgetary allocations, and
auditing choice; (2) using the organizational theory literature and insights
from the field studies to contribute to the theory of accounting and auditing
choice under conditions of uncertainty; and (3) empirically testing the
implications drawn from the organizational theory literature. Analogies will be
drawn between this decision setting and similar group decision scenarios that
involve diverse parties with conflicting goals. Dr. Carpenter will teach a
research seminar in public sector accountability issues and a section of an
engineering economy course which considers theories of capital allocation in
private and public sector organizations during the second year. Additionally,
she will work with the university's Minority Program Office to develop
strategies and programs to increase the number of minority females pursuing
careers in the sciences. This project furthers VPW program objectives which are
(1) to provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in engineering
and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to
pursue careers in science and engineering by providing greater visibility for
women scientists and engineers employed in industry, government, and academic
institutions. By encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a
valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.