* 9003581
* Dynamic Behavior of Tieback Retaining Walls Using Data from the 1989 Loma Prieta Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/1990,08/31/1993
* W. Paul Grant, Shannon & Wilson Inc
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/1993
* USD 27,347.00

This project addresses the lessons learned from the 17 October 1989 Northern
California (Loma Prieta) earthquake. It addresses the seismic performance of
tieback retaining walls. Tieback retaining walls are commonly used for the
temporary support of excavations for building construction. These types of
support systems are typically designed on the basis of empirical experience with
little, if any, thought given to seismic design requirements. Questions
regarding the seismic performance of these types of structures are becoming more
important with the increasing use of these walls for the permanent support of
excavation cuts. While earthquake-related failures of tieback walls have not
been reported in the literature, it is not clear if this fortunate circumstance
is due to a conservative (but expensive) design practice, or to the limited
number of cases where these types of walls have been subjected to earthquake
ground motions. The aim of this project is to enhance the current state-of-the-
art in the seismic design of tieback retaining walls by reviewing the
performance of existing walls - both temporary and permanent - in the San
Francisco Bay area that were subjected to the ground shaking from the Loma
Prieta earthquake. Particular emphasis is given to tieback walls constructed
with the "soil nailing" technique, which is relatively new in the United States.
Available information on the horizontal displacement of the walls and/or load
increases in the tiebacks within the walls, and on any damage experienced, is
studied; these data are compared to the general design practice for these types
of walls. The benefit of this research is that it will improve the state of the
engineering practice in the design of permanent tieback walls. This should
facilitate the widespread use of tieback retaining walls in areas of high
seismicity, leading to a safer and more economical design.