* 9003142
* A Model for Anomaly Resolution in Scientific Change         (History and Philosophy of Science)
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1990,08/31/1992
* Lindley Darden, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 08/31/1992
* USD 107,585.00

Science is a problem-solving activity. This project will explore strategies for
solving problems, especially strategies for forming, testing and revising
hypotheses. In previous work, strategies exemplified in a historical case were
analyzed, including strategies for resolving anomalies for a theory and for
producing an improved version of the theory. This project will test the
sufficiency of such strategies in a computer model, using techniques from
artificial intelligence. The model will provide a method for representing a
biological theory (Mendelian genetics) and will incorporate reasoning strategies
to model changes in that theory. Experiments with alternative reasoning
strategies will be explored with the model. The completion of this project will
contribute to the growing body of knowledge about computational methods for
representing scientific theories and reasoning about such theories. Interactive
activities include teaching a graduate course on computational philosophy of
science, giving two departmental colloquia presentations, and, with support from
the Cognitive Science Center, organizing a symposium on Career Opportunities for
Women in Cognitive Science. This project furthers VPW program objectives which
are (1) to provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in
engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to
encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by providing
greater visibility for women scientists and engineers employed in industry,
government, and academic institutions. By encouraging the participation of women
in science, it is a valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific
vitality.