* 9003846
* Application of Accelerators in Research and Industry,       International Conference, Denton, TX Nov 5-8, 1990, Group   Travel Award in U.S. and Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1990,06/15/1991
* Jerome Duggan, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/15/1991
* USD 22,500.00

Description: This project provides support for participation by eight scientists
from India and one from Egypt in the 11th Conference on the Application of
Accelerators in Research and Industry to be held at the University of North
Texas, Denton, TX between November 5 and 8, 1990. The purpose of the conference
is to review current research and the wealth of industrial applications that are
in progress throughout the world with accelerators. The conference is composed
of two symposia which run in parallel, the Research Symposium, and the
Industrial Applications of Accelerators. Some of the sessions are of common
interest and will be open for both groups. Areas where papers have been accepted
include: Atomic physics and related phenomena, Trace &amp; Surface Analysis with
Ion Beams, Electron Beam Processing, Nuclear Physics, CTR &amp; Related
Phenomena, Neutron Activation Analysis &amp; Bulk Analysis with Accelerators,
Radiological Safety Aspects of Accelerators, Ion Implantation with particular
emphasis on Semiconductors &amp; Metallurgical Applications, Geosciences and
Related Phenomena, Charged Particle Microprobes, Super SIMS, Carbon Dating,
Computer Tomography, Synchrotron Light Source experiments, Insitu Beams,
Radiation Interaction with Ion Beams, Accelerator and component Design &amp;
Automation, Targetry, Detection &amp; electronics, Medical, Biological &amp;
Chemical Applications, Material Analysis with Ion Beams, Channeling, Stopping
Power &amp; Radiation Effects. The conference is a topical conference of the
American Physical Society and the abstracts will be published in the September
1990 issue of the Bulletin. Over 150 scientists from India, and 18 from Egypt
have expressed interest in attending. A selection committee from academia,
industry and government will select those to receive support. Scope: Past
participation of foreign scientists in this series of conferences has proved to
be quite beneficial to all concerned. This is the only conference in the world
that addresses itself to research and industrial applications of accelerators.
Participants get to hear "state-of-the-art" papers, and to discuss common
problems with world experts. Most participating countries have obtained
accelerators from U.S. manufacturers, and the interaction of user scientists
with scientists in the accelerator manufacturing industry is important.