* 9003498
* Mathematical Sciences:  Geometry of Singularities
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1994
* Dung Trang Le, Northeastern University
* Continuing grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1994
* USD 220,100.00

Gaffney, Le and Massey will continue their study of the singularities of
complex analytic spaces and mappings. Gaffney will investigate the
equisingularity of families of mappings using analytic invariants, extending his
results to C- zero finitely determined germs, and he will continue to develop an
infinitesimal theory of Whitney equisingularity using integral closure
operations. With Massey, he will investigate the correct generalizations of the
Le cycles to the complete intersection case. Using blowing up operations, he
will study the topology of maps between low dimensional spaces. Le will
investigate the relation between algebraic depth and rectified homotopical
depth, continuing his study of Lefschetz type theorems for singular spaces. Le
also plans to give a new proof of the Le-Ramanujam theorem using vector fields,
and he plans to study the canonical decomposition of the local monodromy of
complex hypersurfaces and its links with the resolution of singularities and the
geometry of polars. Massey will investigate questions concerning a topologically
invariant decomposition of a constructible function, the Euler characteristic of
the Milnor fibre of f-f(p) at p, and the related question of how the sheaf of
vanishing cycles of a map decomposes as a perverse sheaf. The machinery of the
derived category should allow for a powerful attack on the structure of non-
isolated hypersurface singularities. Understanding singular spaces is important
for realistic models of physical phenomena. Perhaps the most widely known
singularity is the cosmologists' "big bang."