* 9003232
* U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research:  The Campanian Ignimbrite  Eruption and Emplacement
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1990,12/31/1992
* Richard Fisher, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 12/31/1992
* USD 18,250.00

This award will support Professor Richard Fisher of the University of
California at Santa Barbara in a research collaboration with Professors G. Orsi,
G. Capaldi, and L. Civetta of the University of Naples. One of southern Europe's
great cities, Naples, is located on a young (approximately 33,500 years), large
volume (greater than 80 cubic kilometers) ignimbrite sheet resulting from a
volcanic eruption. This Campanian Ignimbrite (CI), occurs up to 100 km. from its
probable source, having moved as an energetic pyroclastic flow across high
mountain ridges. The source of the CI is believed to be in the Phlegrean Fields,
located in the Neapolitan suburbs. The researchers intend (1) to establish
chronology and chemical trends of the initial Campanian eruption that produced
the first-deposited tephra and the ignimbrite sheet; (2) to determine the type
of initiating eruption (pryoclastic and/or hydroclastic) and subsequent eruptive
activity; and (3) to interpret flow mechanisms by studying the origin of the
thin ground layer that occurs beneath the CI. Detailed field and laboratory
studies of this ignimbrite are necessary for the purpose of unraveling its
history and what that portends for future activity. If the CI originated from
beneath the sea, it will be the first such ignimbrite to be documented, and it
would be possible for the first time to characterize physical and chemical
attributes of subaqueous ignimbrite and provide petrologic criteria for their
recognition.