* 9003908
* Characterization of Drosophila Genes Similar to Mammalian Transcription Factor Genes
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1990,12/31/1994
* Stephen Poole, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 12/31/1994
* USD 240,000.00

The long term objectives of this project are to understand how genes interact to
specify the body plan during development. Several tissue specific mammalian
positive transcriptional activators share an approximately 150 amino acid
region, the POU domain. This proposal focuses on three newly isolated POU domain
genes from Drosophila: what are their structures, what are the natures of their
protein products, when and where in development are they expressed, and what are
the effects of perturbing their normal expression. The DNA sequences of cDNA
clones originating from each of the genes will show the expected structure of
the protein products and will allow their comparison with the mammalian POU
domain genes. Determination of the expression patterns of each gene by in situ
hybridization and by immunohistochemical staining with antibodies will help
indicate what their roles in regulating development may be. Fly strains
containing each of the three genes under heat inducible control will be made.
The effects of disrupting the normal expression of the genes will also show the
roles each may play in development. %%% A central question in developmental
biology is how genes act to produce a complex structure. This project is to
investigate that question by examining the regulation of genes involved in early
patterning events in the Drosophila embryo.