* 9003075
* Mathematical Sciences: Crossed Product Algebras and         Non-Commutative Duality
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1993
* Elliot Gootman, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Clancey
* 06/30/1993
* USD 47,252.00

Professor Gootman will continue his investigations concerning the ideal
structure, representation theory, and dual topology of crossed product
C*-algebras GxA determined by an action or coaction of a locally compact G on a
C*-algebra A. As in the past, Professor Gootman will combine the three major
methods for the study of such algebras: non-commutative duality theory,
representation theory, and spectral methods (non-abelian harmonic analysis).
Following such an approach, the proposer has already made progress on similar
questions in collaboration with Professor Aldo Lazar. Professor Gootman will
attempt to generalize a spectral characterization of simplicity of GxA which
came out of this collaboration to general amenable G, and also to extend his
investigations concerning the duality between induction and restriction of
representations. This study should yield new information on ordinary crossed
products, and in turn on groups, historically one of the major motivations for
studying crossed products. The notion of a C* algebra is an abstraction of the
idea of a family of linear transformations on a space. These transformations can
also be thought of as having values in the states of the space, and the property
of this family which is responsible for the symbol * is the fact that the
algebra is generated by transformations whose values in these states are real
numbers. The fact that these objects appear naturally in many branches of
mathematics and physics makes them important to study.