* 9003654
* Response and Damage of Unreinforced Masonry Buildings in    Loma Prieta Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/1990,12/31/1992
* Daniel Abrams, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 12/31/1992
* USD 112,782.00

This is a post Loma Prieta earthquake (Oct. 1989) investigation project in
learning from this damaging event. The project will focus on the study of
performance of unreinforced masonry buildings (UMR) during the earthquake.
Response of selected structures will be estimated using computational models,
and correlated with expectations of structural strength and observations of
damage. The study will encompass buildings located in the counties of Alameda,
Monterey, Santa Clara, Santa Cruz and San Francisco. Both damaged and undamaged
structures will be considered. The study will include a wide variety of masonry
element types including structural walls resisting forces within and normal to
their plane, infill panels in either steel or concrete frames, cladding,
parapets, and other nonstructural elements. Both engineered and nonengineered
construction will be studied. Candidate structures will be selected for
investigation based on degree of damage, expected force level, location, soil
conditions, and availability of information on ground motions and structural
descriptions. It is expected that knowledge gained will be helpful for
mitigating the earthquake hazard in the eastern USA because of the widespread
use of unreinforced masonry in those regions of a potential moderate intense
earthquake.