* 9003383
* Mathematical Sciences: Ranking Models with Covariates
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1992
* Michael Fligner, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Alan Izenman
* 06/30/1992
* USD 57,795.00

This research in statistical methods involves probability models for the
rankings that result when a group of subjects each independently ranks a set of
items from first place to last place. These include Thurstone order statistics
models, ranking models induced by paired comparisons and models based on
distances between rankings. In many practical problems the probability of
observing any particular ranking is affected by the values of one or more
independent variables, or subject covariates, associated with the subjects
performing the ranking. In a different but related situation, covariates
associated with the items can be used to describe the probability distribution
of the ranking. A principal goal of the proposed research is to investigate the
consequences of different methods of incorporating the information contained in
both item and subject covariates. The performance of the methods, which allow
for the development of formal inferential and graphical techniques for studying
the effects of the covariates, will be evaluated. A semi-parametric approach
will be described to detect systematic differences between rankings which arise
in pairs, such as pre- and post-treatment rankings produced by the same subject.
Residual spectral analytic techniques will be applied to ranking models in
general and covariate models in particular. Diagnostics based on the
distributional properties of the residuals will be developed.