* 9003132
* Probability and Statistics for Ocean and Atmospheric        Sciences (Atmospheric Science)
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1992
* H. Jean Thiebaux, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 01/31/1992
* USD 125,528.00

This project will involve the preparation of a graduate level text that will
introduce concepts and techniques of stochastic modeling and statistical
analysis in the contexts of ocean and atmospheric sciences. The text, which will
be based in part on lecture notes prepared by the late R. Preisendorfer during
his tenure at the Naval Postgraduate School in the G. Haltnier Research Chair,
will fill an important gap in current scientific literature. The concepts and
techniques that will be presented in the language and research settings of two
allied geophysical sciences, provide basic tools for diagnosis, analysis and
prediction of dynamical systems. Their presentation in this form will make them,
and their relationships with the evaluation of hypotheses, more accessible in
scientific terms. Interactive activities include seminars on subjects of Dr.
Thiebaux's previous research, teaching two graduate level courses, organization
of a workshop on professional careers in physical and mathematical sciences, and
interactions with faculty and students in their customary university meetings.
The courses and the discussions following seminars will complement the research
component of the academic visit, while they provide open opportunities for
interactions with students at a critical stage in the formation of their
personal professional expectations. Finally, the workshop will provide a
concrete look at career opportunities, with the inspiration of women who
achieved major goals. This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1)
to provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in engineering and
in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to
pursue careers in science and engineering by providing greater visibility for
women scientists and engineers employed in industry, government, and academic
institutions. By encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a
valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.