* 9003961
* Dissertation Research:  Ethnic Groups, Mobility, and the    Material World in an Emergent Market Economy
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1992
* Kathleen Deagan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1992
* USD 7,080.00

Under the direction of his advisors Drs. Kathleen Deagan and Elizabeth Wing,
Mr. James Cusick will analyze material from the archaeological site of St.
Augustine. The resulting data will provide the basis for his doctoral
dissertation. St. Augustine, located in Florida, is one of the oldest European
settlements in the New World. It was founded by the Spanish but also occupied by
Minorcans as well as other ethnic groups. Because of its age and cultural
complexity, the site has been extensively excavated. Its importance rests not
only on the amount of archaeological material which has been recovered but also
on the detailed archival records which contain information on individual
families. Mr. Cusick will focus his attention on a sample of nine households of
both Spanish and of Minorcan origin. Not only is archival information available
for all but the living sites of each have been carefully excavated. Mr. Cusick
will integrate the documentary evidence with information derived from analysis
of material objects, floral, and faunal remains. He will examine how the
economic and social strategies of these families changed over time and how these
shifts are related to ethnic, economic, and status factors. The goal of this
project is to examine the role which ethnicity plays in shaping household
adaptation strategies. Minorcans were a minority group in St. Augustine, and
with joint archaeological and archival data it will be possible to determine how
such groups reacted, in comparison with the dominant Spanish majority, to
changing economic and political conditions. One major theoretical question
debated in the sociological literature concerns the extent to which response
follows ethnic lines. Some argue it is more closely correlated with cross
cutting economic distinctions. This research is important for several reasons.
First, it provides a unique insight into mechanisms for ethnic adaptation and
assimilation and, thus, is directly relevant to social issues faced by the
United States today. Secondly, it will assist in the training of an extremely
promising young scientist.