* 9003021
* Kidney Function in Lizards (Biological Science)
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1992
* Carol Beuchat, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 12/31/1992
* USD 192,750.00

Current knowledge of the patterns of water and solute regulation in terrestrial
vertebrates is based largely on studies of mammals, birds, and amphibians.
Studies of reptiles are for the most part limited to turtles and snakes, for
which information has only just begun to accumulate, and lizards remain largely
unstudied. This research will exploit the ontogenetic variability in
osmoregulatory patterns of lizards as the mesonephric kidney ceases to function
after birth and the metanephric kidney assumes its adult role in water and ion
balance. These investigations are being conducted at several levels: 1)
Physiological properties of the whole kidney, as well as of individual nephrons,
will be studied with respect to the regulation of filtration and of ion and
water balance. 2) The morphological changes that occur in the mesonephric and
metanephric kidneys with postnatal development will be documented in terms of
both the structural organizations of the tissue and the ultrastructural changes
at the cellular level. 3) Information from the physiological and morphological
studies will be integrated to yield a picture of the interrelationships between
structure and function. This study is the first to examine the osmoregulatory
physiology and morphology of a neonatal reptile and in fact represents one of
only a very few to study osmoregulation in any newborn vertebrate. The
information gained from this study will not only significantly advance our
understanding of the patterns of osmoregulation in lizards and other reptiles,
but will also provide a basis for understanding the ontogenetic changes in the
osmoregulatory roles of the mesonephric and metanephric kidneys both before and
after birth in other vertebrates. The interactive activities will involve team-
teaching two courses in Physiology as well as presenting research seminars in
two departments on campus; and participation in an ongoing seminar on "Women in
the Biological Sciences," which centers on gender issues. Dr. Beuchat will also
teach a graduate seminar entitled "On Being a Scientist." This seminar will
focus on acquisition of information and skills necessary for success in academic
science that are not traditionally part of the graduate curriculum. The seminar
will include discussions of CV preparation, applying for research grants, giving
a talk at a meeting, getting a job in academia, and the ethics of science. This
project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide opportunities
for women to advance their careers in engineering and in the disciplines of
science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science
and engineering by providing greater visibility for women scientists and
engineers employed in industry, government, and academic institutions. By
encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable investment
in the Nation's future scientific vitality.