* 9003149
* Forced Oscillations for Lagrangian and Hamiltonian Systems  and the Nonhomogeneous Dirichlet Problem for Semilinear     Elliptic Equations Involving Critical Exponents
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1992
* Gabriella Tarantello, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 11/30/1992
* USD 42,300.00

Several problems in the field of differential equations will be under
investigation during the term of this project. They concern systems of
differential equations from the physical sciences, namely Lagrangian equations
representing forced motion of a mechanical system and the more general
Hamiltonian systems. A system of forced pendulums would give rise to the first
class of equations, whereas the motion of bodies under gravitational forces
often uses the Hamiltonian structure. The Lagrangian equations involved in this
study have periodic coefficients and forcing functions. It is natural to inquire
whether of not there will exist periodic solutions under such assumptions. As
with many equations modeling phenomena from the physical world, the Lagrangians
result from a principle of energy or action minimization. One seeks to find
critical points of a certain integral with admissible functions taken from a
Hilbert space. Depending on the growth of the potential, there may be many
distinct periodic solutions, whereas evidence suggests that for periodic
potentials, only finitely many periodic solutions may exist. A measure of the
number of such solutions in terms the structure of the potential will be sought.
Work on Hamiltonian systems will follow a similar vein concentrating on the case
of periodic Hamiltonians. Solutions of these systems are known as subharmonics.
There are known to be periodic subharmonics under very general conditions. The
most important subharmonics are those with minimal periods. This research will
look for a description of solutions with minimal periods in cases where
additional symmetry assumptions are made on the Hamiltonian. Solutions of
Hamiltonian systems must lie on surfaces of constant energy. A related goal of
this work will be to determine which surfaces of the Hamiltonian carry a
periodic orbit.