* 9003542
* Purchase of a 300 MHz Multinuclear NMR Spectrometer with a Widebore 7.05 T Magnet and Solid State NMR Capabilities
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1991
* Bernard Kirtman, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 05/31/1991
* USD 280,000.00

Modern solid-state Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy offers the
chemist one of the most powerful tools available for the study of the physical
and chemical properties of materials. Fundamental knowledge of structure and
dynamics of materials as diverse as biopolymers, resins, coals, and liquid
crystals is accessible by solid-state NMR techniques. Solid-state NMR studies
often complement those carried out using solution NMR and X-ray analysis. Access
to solid-state NMR is rapidly becoming essential to chemists carrying out
frontier research. This award from the Chemistry Shared Instrumentation Program
and the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program will help the Department
of Chemistry at the University of California in Santa Barbara, to acquire a
high-field NMR spectrometer suitable for carrying out solid-state NMR studies.
The areas of chemical research that will be enhanced by the acquisition include
the following: Structural Characterization of Non-Oxidic Glasses by Modern Solid
State NMR Techniques. Charge Carrier Inclusion in Zeolites Structural
Characterization of Electrically Conductive Polymers in the Doped and Undoped
State. Bio-Inorganic Chemistry of Vanadium. Photophysical Properties of
Copper(I) Halide Clusters, Intercalated in Zeolite Hosts. Studies of Protein
Structure by Fluorine NMR Spectroscopy Structure and Stereochemistry of
Polyphosphazenes Dynamics in Lithium Chalcogenide Glasses NMR Studies of DNA-
Protein Interactions Structural Studies of Metal-Carbon Bonded Species