* 9003108
* The Stable Isotope and Minor Element Geochemistry of Iron-  Rich Chemical Sediments
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1990,11/30/1992
* Crayton Yapp, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 11/30/1992
* USD 110,013.00

Chemical sediments dominated by iron(III) oxides are a manifestation of the
unique combination of abundant free oxygen and liquid water found in the surface
and many near-surface environments of Earth. Research performed in this
laboratory has shown that the stable isotope ratios of oxygen, hydrogen and
carbon in certain iron(III) oxides contain information on ancient temperatures,
sources of water and organic contributions to aqueous carbonate systems
associated with iron(III) oxide precipitation. In addition trapped CO2 abundance
data from geothites may be related to ambient CO2 partial pressures at the time
of mineral formation. The oxygen isotope systematics of ubiquitous phosphate-
iron(III) oxide pairs will be studied to determine if they contain information
on paleotemperatures. Knowledge obtained from this and our previous studies of
iron(III) oxides will be applied to isotopic, chemical and attendant
petrographic investigations of Phanerozoic oolitic ironstones, recent
bacterially mediated iron(III) oxide precipitate and Late Precambrian banded
iron formation(BIF). Fe(III) carbonate abundance and carbon-13 variations in a
Late Ordovician weathering surface could provide knowledge of ambient CO2
partial pressures and the role of organic matter in this ancient environment.
Oxygen, hydrogen and carbon abundance and isotopic data from tropical oolitic
ironstones that date from global "greenhouse" and "icehouse" intervals in the
Phanerozoic will be obtained. The ancient tropical temperatures and sources of
water will be compared for the deposits that represent these putative global
climatic extremes. Oxygen isotopic measurements of a Late Precambrian quartz-
hematite BIF should provide insight into the depositional environment of this
deposit. Paleoclimatic data of the type to be obtained in this research are
essential to an ultimate understanding of the possible link between global
tectonics and the types of climatic regimes that could produce apparent tropical
continental ice sheets in the Late Precambrian or polar ice sheets in the Late
Ordovician.