* 9003438
* Mathematical Sciences: Discrete Groups, Quasiconformal      Mappings, and Function Theoretic Inequalities
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1994
* Frederick Gehring, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 06/30/1994
* USD 260,261.00

Work to be done on this project focuses on questions arising at the interface
of geometry and mathematical analysis in Euclidean spaces. The basis for the
research lies within the geometric development of complex function theory, in
that it emphasizes the group structure underlying analytic function theory and
the infinitesimal behavior of such functions. It was their infinitesimal
regularity that led to the notion of quasiconformal mappings in the 1930's.
Decades passed before an intrinsic definition of these mappings was found which
could be applied to mappings in higher dimensions. This work is about those
mappings and their underlying domains. A quasiconformal mapping is a univalent
mapping between two domains which maps infinitesimal circles into infinitesimal
ellipses whose major and minor axes have bounded (the dilatation) ratios. An
important question in the understanding of their structure concerns the
decomposition of maps into iterates of maps with the same dilatation. Those with
no such decomposition would form a basis of irreducible maps. From the geometric
side, one would like to know how to determine when two domains are equivalent
under quasiconformal mappings. Even when one of the two domains is a ball, this
question is very difficult. The sufficient conditions given by Schoenflies type
theorems and the necessary ones arising from local connectivity are very far
apart. Some progress has been made in three dimensions when one of the domains
is a slit domain and the other is a ball. Other work, concentrating on planar
problems, will be concerned with Kleinian groups. This includes continuing work
on measuring the distance of elements from the identity in several natural
metrics. When applied to generators of groups, information about the singular
set can be obtained. As this work develops further, higher dimensional analogues
will be studied. Work will also continue on discrete convergence groups, a class
of transformation groups introduced several years ago which reflect many
properties of Mobius groups (they are conjugate to such groups by quasiconformal
maps). Investigations into the fine structure of convergence groups will be
conducted.