* 9003608
* Practical Methods for Total Synthesis of Complex Natural    Products
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1993
* Clayton Heathcock, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* John S. Showell
* 12/31/1993
* USD 406,120.00

This research is being funded by the Organic Synthesis Chemistry Program. The
synthesis of the complex new substances required by our society in a cost
effective manner is the goal of this research. This is a daunting challenge that
requires considerable insight and ingenuity to accomplish. Nature is replete
with organic compounds of intricate molecular structure. Often these materials
may be isolated from their natural sources in quantity; more often they cannot.
The alternative to isolation is synthesis--laboratory manufacture from commonly
available materials. Although chemists have over the last half-century become
rather adept at constructing small amounts of very complicated molecules, they
generally cannot prepare most desired organic compounds in an efficient,
practical, and cost-effective manner. This general inability to conceive and
execute practical laboratory syntheses constitutes a frailty of our science. It
is the long-term goal of this research to address this deficiency by inventing
new strategies for the laboratory synthesis of complex organic structures. The
compounds to be synthesized are molecules of nature--alkaloids and
polyisoprenoids. The intent is not just to make a compound, but to do it in a
way that will lead to something new about the architectural aspect of molecule-
building. The constant goals are: (a) to minimize the required number of
tranformations by eschewing protective groups whenever possible, (b) to minimize
the required number of transformations by finding ways in which "cascades" of
reactions can occur under the same reaction conditions, (c) to simplify the
total synthesis process by using, to the extent possible, "low-tech", rather
than exotic, expensive reagents. The specific systems to be studied are:
petrosin, sarain-A, nominine, aristone, dictyoxetane, velutinal, crinipellin A
and members of the daphniphyllum alkaloid family.