* 9003192
* Novel Techniques for the Synthesis and Coupling of Peptide Segments
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1994
* Louis Carpino, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* John S. Showell
* 06/30/1994
* USD 215,500.00

This research is being funded by the Organic Synthesis Chemistry Program. New
techniques for the synthesis of naturally occurring medium or long chain
peptides are being developed which will make them rapidly available in multi-
gram quantities for testing purposes. New synthetic techniques based on base-
and solvent-sensitive amino-protecting groups promise to make available quickly
multi-gram quantities of shorter peptides and to markedly improve the synthesis
of small quantities of longer peptides. Methods for the synthesis of long
peptide chains of 100 or more amino acid units which involve the coupling of
segments enjoy significant advantages over those involving stepwise approaches.
Three methods for assembling the appropriate segments will be studied: (a) the
FMOC/Polyamine solution technique, (b) the two polymer ("inverse merrifield")
approach and (c) the standard Merrifield solid phase method. In all three
approaches the applicability of newly-discovered FMOC amino acid fluorides as
rapid-acting, inexpensive coupling agents will be studied. Such reagents are now
available for all but four of the common amino acids. Synthesis of appropriate
acid fluoride reagents for these four compounds (Arg, Asn, Gln, His) will be
developed. To facilitate solid phase syntheses two special resin supports will
be investigated: (a) tertiary alcohol resins which should completely inhibit
loss of peptide from the resin due to diketopiperazine formation at the
depeptide stage, especially in the case of C-terminal or penultimate proline or
glycine and (b) resin supports bearing tertiary aminoalcohol functions which
should serve to catalyse loading of the first amino acid and thereby promote
complete on-line automated syntheses from the first to the last amino acid. Once
rapid, routine methods for the synthesis of protected segments are available,
both solution and solid phase methods of segment coupling will be examined. A
novel method of effecting racemization-free segment coupling involving
protection of the C-terminal amide bond by FM-bar or a related amide protectant
will be pursued. The model chosen to study the application of these techniques
is a 19-unit segment of a silkworm prothoracicotropic hormone, PTTH-II-(1-19).