* 9003124
* Reciprocal Interactions Between Herbivores and Plant        Pathogens on Cottonwood (Biotic Systems and Resources)
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/1990,08/31/1993
* Vera Krischik, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 08/31/1993
* USD 160,000.00

It is recognized that abiotic "stress" or damage and insect and disease attack
on plants can change their subsequent resistance to insects and diseases.
However, there is little consensus on whether stress and damage have the same
effects; whether abiotic and biotic perturbations have the same effects; whether
insects and diseases produce the same effects; whether overall resistance
increases or decreases; and what the mechanisms and evolutionary implications
are. In this research, an integrated approach will be taken using experiments
with a model system--cottonwood, a beetle, an aphid, and rust and leaf-spot
fungi--in order to determine if stress/damage caused by different insects or
diseases results in consistent patterns of plant physical and chemical
characteristics and insect and disease performance. By comparing these results
with data on chemical and resistance changes due to abiotic ozone induced
stress, the overall patterns of physical, chemical and biotic changes can be
elucidated, which mechanisms may be responsible can be infered, and the
implications to the evolution of plant defense can be deduced. An understanding
of how a plant responds to damage and stress due to ozone as well as insect
herbivory and pathogen-caused disease allows us to predict the consequences of
pollution on plant growth and mortality. These findings have direct implications
to issues in agriculture and forestry on the consequences of air pollution,
ozone, and acid rain on crop yield and forest vigor. Dr. Krischik will teach a
topic seminar in plant-insect-microbial interactions and be a panel member in a
full-day forum on "Opportunities in Ecology." Through the IES Education Program,
she will visit area schools and encourage young women to pursue careers in
science and teach in a "Workshop for School Science Teachers." Dr. Krischik will
also lecture in the ecology courses offered at nearby Vassar College. This
project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to provide opportunities
for women to advance their careers in engineering and in the disciplines of
science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science
and engineering by providing greater visibility for women scientists and
engineers employed in industry, government, and academic institutions. By
encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable investment
in the Nation's future scientific vitality.