* 9003737
* Probing the Infra-Structure of Two Deoxynucleotide          Metabolizing Enzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1994
* Gladys Maley, New York State Department of Health and Health Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 07/31/1994
* USD 252,000.00

A detailed study of the enzymes, deoxycytidylate (dCMP) (dCD) and thymidylate
(dTMP) synthase (TS), will be conducted in order to further understand how the
structures of these two enzymes determine their catalytic specificities. Both
enzymes are important in providing pyrimidine nucleotide precursors of DNA and
are notably elevated in mitotically active tissues and cells. The availability
of large quantities of T4 dCMP deaminase will make possible detailed studies on
locating the substrate binding sites as well as the allosteric sites for dCTP
and dTTP. Site- specific and random mutagenesis studies are planned to modify
amino acids at the above binding sites to determine their influence on enzyme
activity. dCMP deaminase is present in very low amounts in eucaryotic cells, but
has been isolated and purified to homogeneity by using a modified substrate
affinity column. Our ultimate goal is to use recombinant DNA methods to
synthesize large amounts of the human dCMP deaminase in bacteria or yeast for
further mechanistic and binding sites studies similar to those described in this
proposal for T4 dCMP deaminase. Attempts will be made to crystallize T4-dCMP
deaminase, as has been described by us for T2-dCMP deaminase, for x-ray
structural studies in collaboration with colleagues at the Medical Foundation of
Buffalo, Inc. Studies of T4-thymidylate synthase will center around the
additional proteins expressed by the complete gene, which is composed of two
exons separated by an intron. The significance of the Td gene encoded IRF
protein, which possesses a specific endonuclease activity, will be studied with
respect to its properties, its solubilization, processing and potential
transposase activity. In addition the high level expression of the exon I and
exon II genes of Td will be attempted. Continued emphasis will be placed on
x-ray crystallographic comparisons of TS from different sources, of particular
interest will be the structure of the phi3T phage TS.