* 9003412
* Mathematical Sciences: Pseudodifferential Operations and    Local Solvability
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1990,11/30/1992
* Daryl Geller, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 11/30/1992
* USD 40,000.00

About thirty-five years ago H. Lewy produced an example of a first order linear
partial differential equation with linear (complex) coefficients which had no
solution. A complete description of differential operators which are 'solvable'
remains a challenging, but unresolved issue in mathematical analysis. However,
the search has led to many fundamental results about partial differential
operators, especially in the context of the theory of several complex variables.
One of the more interesting aspects of the work in this area concerns the
question of describing the range of an 'unsolvable' operator, or, equivalently,
which inhomogeneous equations can be solved? The question is reformulated in
terms of the null space of the adjoint: whether the projection operator onto the
null space preserves real analyticity. The tools used to investigate the
question in this project involve the calculus of pseudodifferential operators
defined on a manifold, the Heisenberg group. Work will be done on the specific
case of the Szego projection restricted to a real analytic boundary of a bounded
pseudoconvex domain of finite type in two complex dimensions. Work will also be
done investigating specific one-parameter families of differential operators of
second order to determine conditions under which they will be analytic
hypoelliptic and on pseudodifferential operators defined on general nilpotent
Lie groups.