* 9003933
* Porphyrin Sponges:  Programmable Lattice Clathrates
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1993
* Charles Strouse, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* John Gilje
* 08/31/1993
* USD 375,000.00

This award is made in the Materials Chemistry and Chemical Processing Initiative
in support of the collaborative research of Professors Strouse and Anet at the
University of California at Los Angeles. Joint funding is provided by the
Divisions of Chemistry and Materials Research. The thrust of the research is the
synthesis, characterization and applications of programmable lattice clathrates
prepared from metalloporphyrins. Crystalline metallotetraphenylporphyrin
complexes represent a class of lattice clathrates in which the axial
coordination sites of the porphyrin metal atoms are directed into hydrophobic
channels. This feature provides a simple means for programming the clathrate
lattice which will be the basis for a new strategy for molecular recognition, to
exercise control over the metal atom environment, or to manipulate the structure
of the porphyrin lattice. Applications will be sought which will take advantage
of the rich chemistry of metalloporphyrins, the accessibility and selectivity
provided by the channel structure, and the rigidity of the clathrate lattice.
Materials characterization and synthetic modification studies will be directed
toward applications which range from chemical separations to energy conversion.
Parallel chemical studies and computational analyses will be designed to provide
a more fundamental understanding of the dynamics and energetics of clathrate
binding. The database afforded by the combined investigations will allow
efficient exploitation of these materials in a broad range of scientific and
technological applications.