* 9003041
* Kin Selection, Aggression, and Demography in Prairie Vole   Populations:  A Test of the Charnov-Finerty Hypothesis      (Population Biology)
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1990,02/29/1992
* Zuleyma Tang-Martinez, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 02/29/1992
* USD 96,737.00

This research on the prairie vole, Microtus ochrogaster, has three objectives:
1) to test the Charnov.Finerty (1980) hypothesis, which proposed that
differences in genetic relatedness at high versus low population densities
drives vole population cycles: 2) to determine whether the proximate mechanism
of this hypothesis is genetic relatedness per se, or familiarity (as suggested
by Bekoff 1981); 3) to determine whether either degree of genetic relatedness or
familiarity influences the mating system under field conditions. By manipulating
matings and housing conditions in the laboratory, four populations of varying
degrees of genetic relatedness and familiarity will be created: Kin-Familiar,
Kin-Unfamiliar, Non Kin-Familiar, Non-Kin Unfamiliar. These populatins will be
released into four field enclosures and live-trapped every two weeks. Wounding
(as a measure of aggression), dispersal rates, reproductive condition,
population numbers and spacing patterns will be monitored. DNA fingerprinting
will be used to determine reproductive success and mating system in each
enclosure. The interactive component consists of teaching a graduate seminar on
women animal behaviorists, organizing a discussion group for women students and
faculty, organizing a symposium on women and science, and presenting a
department seminar. This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1)
to provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in engineering and
in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to encourage women to
pursue careers in science and engineering by providing greater visibility for
women scientists and engineers employed in industry, government, and academic
institutions. By encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a
valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.