* 9003789
* Evaluation of the Performance of Earth Dams During the      October 17, 1989 Loma Prieta Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/1990,02/29/1992
* Sami Masri, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 02/29/1992
* USD 77,999.00

This is a post Loma Prieta earthquake (Oct. 1989) investigation project in
learning from this damaging event. This project is directed toward the
evaluation of the performance, including interpretation and analysis of
earthquake-response records, of the well-instrumented six earth dams which were
shaken by the Loma Prieta, California earthquake (M=7.1) of October 17, 1989.
The shaking during the main and after shocks triggered most of the
accelerographs on the six dams (one of them is partially damaged) providing the
most extensive array of earthquake response measurements yet obtained in the
U.S. and abroad. The data obtained will be used to (1) study the effects of
sequential earthquakes on the safety of earth dams, (2) correlate dynamic
properties (shear modulus and damping) extracted from field performance during
earthquakes, via system identification techniques, with existing laboratory-
measured properties of the dam materials, (3) verify the adequacy of existing
procedures for seismic analysis of earth dams by applying them to observational
data and by comparing predicted results with measured responses, (4) disseminate
research findings, and (5) document and improve capability to assess the safety
of earth dams. The study will provide a comprehensive knowledge base for
evaluation of seismic safety of earth dams.