* 9003087
* PHRASING
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/1990,08/31/1994
* William Swartout, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Larry H. Reeker
* 08/31/1994
* USD 218,741.00

When humans use language, they show an essential responsiveness to their
hearers. When language is automatically generated, it is similarly necessary to
ensure that language is appropriate for its intended audience. Much previous
research in computational linguistics has focused on building user models and
selecting information from a knowledge base to present to the user. It is
important, however, that the phrasing of a text be also tailored to the hearer -
otherwise it may be just as ineffective as texts which rely on knowledge the
hearer does not have. The realization that situations systematically affect
language can greatly help the tailoring process: given appropriate
classifications of situation-types, the consequences of these situations on
language can be specified, and suitable language can be produced. In a pilot
study that involved generating explanations for an expert system tailored to
three user types, previous work has shown that is is possible to specify the
type of language required in a given situation and to build a text planning
system that uses that specification to control phrasing of its text. This
research will extend that work. The goal is to create a framework within which
it is possible to gain systematic control over phrasing by designing
methodologies and mechanisms by which the systematic relationship between
situations and language can be found, represented, and used to tailor generated
texts.