* 9003686
* Biochemistry of Luminescence
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1993
* Osamu Shimomura, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 12/31/1993
* USD 342,000.00

Bioluminescence is a highly diversified phenomenon involving a large energy
change. The ultimate goal of this project is the complete biochemical
understanding of bioluminescence and its roles in living organisms. To achieve
this goal, it is essential to determine the chemical structures of key
substances involved in various bioluminescence systems. Main aims in the next
five years are as follows. (1) Fungal bioluminescence: Preliminary studies
suggested that light is emitted when fugal luciferin reacts with 02- (superoxide
anion) and 02 in the presence of a surfactant-like substance. The structure of
the luciferin will be determined, and the mechanism of light-emitting reaction
will be investigated from various angles. The luciferin might be useful as a 02
indicator. (2) Bioluminescence of euphausiids and dinoflagellates: Tetrapyrroles
play key roles in both bioluminescence systems, but in different manners. In the
euphausiid system, the fluorescent substance F (a tetrapyrrole) catalyzes the
aerobic oxidation of a photoprotein. In the dinoflagellate system, luciferin (a
tetrapyrrole) is oxidized into oxyluciferin in the presence of a luciferase.
Despite the apparent difference, both systems may involve the same basic
chemistry The reactions involved will be investigated to clarify the mechanisms
of light emission. The oxidizable group of the euphausiid photoprotein will be
determined.