* 9003890
* Review, Evaluation, and Revision of ATC-20 Postearthquake Building Safety Evaluation Procedures
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1990,08/31/1992
* Robert Bruce, Applied Technology Council
* Standard Grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 08/31/1992
* USD 68,414.00

This is a post Loma Prieta earthquake (Oct. 1989) investigation project in
learning from this damaging event. The ATC-20 "Procedures for Postearthquake
Safety Evaluation of Buildings," published by Applied Technology Council (ATC)
on September 19, 1989, were used extensively throughout Northern California to
evaluate buildings damaged by the magnitude-7.1 October 17, 1989 Loma Prieta,
California, earthquake. The widespread application of the methodology on several
thousand buildings by building officials and volunteer structural engineers from
throughout the state has provided a rare and ideal opportunity to assess the
merits and possible pitfalls of the methodology. Based upon such an experience,
this project will conduct a study to review, evaluate, and possibly revise the
ATC- 20. The specific objectives are to: (1) document the application of the
ATC-20 methodology; (2) conduct a workshop to review, expand, and evaluate this
documentation and develop recommendations for improved procedures; (3) develop
and publish an addendum to the ATC-20 Report containing a summary of the Loma
Prieta earthquake experience, a summary of the project workshop findings,
additional instructions and clarifications for "difficult to determine" posting
situations, and a recommended management program for local building officials;
(4) revise and re-publish, if necessary, the ATC-20 Report and ATC-20-1 Field
Manual; and (5) conduct training seminars that include an overview of the Loma
Prieta experience. This effort will enhance the methodology for safety
evaluation of buildings following an earthquake.