* 9003327
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research:   Dynamic Local Field and  Structure of an Electron Gas at Metallic Densities
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1991,02/29/1996
* Howard Lee, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 02/29/1996
* USD 20,250.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. M. Howard Lee, Professor of Physics,
University of Georgia, to pursue with Dr. Jongbae Hong, Associate Professor of
Physics, Seoul National University, for a period of 24 months, a program of
cooperative research on the dynamical behavior of an electron gas. Specifically,
the research will address problems concerning the frequency or time dependent
behavior of electron gases, such as critical damping of the plasmon, dynamics of
a classical electron gas and the fifth moment, and dynamics of a layered
electron gas. The time and frequency behavior of an electron gas at metallic
densities has been the subject of intense research by a number of workers during
the past decade. The present cooperative project is based on advances made in
research under NSF Grant No. INT-8517639 on the time and frequency dependent
response of an electron gas at metallic densities and at intermediate wave
vectors. This research may contribute to a better understanding of electronic
systems in metal-oxide-semiconductors and in heterostructures. This project is
relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which
seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists
and engineers through the exchange of information, ideas, skills, and techniques
and through collaboration on problems of mutual interest and benefit. Support
for Korean participation in the project is provided by the Korea Science and
Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).