* 9003540
* Designing a Computer System to Support an Electronic        Scientific Community
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1990,10/31/1991
* Bruce Schatz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 10/31/1991
* USD 43,920.00

Professor Schatz is undertaking a one-year investigation to understand and
outline the design of a computer system to support an electronic scientific
community. While later proposals will be submitted to support the system, this
project is to lay the necessary groundwork to enable the implementation to
proceed as planned. When implemented, this system should be a new form of
biological instrumentation which can effectively manipulate scientific
databases. Appropriate community knowledge will be identified to be collected
into a digital library and the design will incorporate the systems technology
necessary to manipulate this library over nationwide networks. The community
chosen is the group of scientists studying the nematode worm Caenorhabditis
elegans, a major model organism in molecular biology. The "worm community"
consists of some 500 members worldwide, with an unusual degree of open
communication and sharing of unpublished information. The community knowledge
includes formal data, such as published literature and experimental results, and
informal data, such as newsletters and experimental methods. The designed system
will capture a significant portion of this knowledge in electronic form and
encode it into a "worm information space" which can be transparently browsed by
scientists anywhere on nationwide scientific networks. Preparation of the system
design requires understanding user needs and available technology. this will be
accomplished by working with researchers who will be the system's initial users
and who are experts on the available data and technology. Such investigation
should enable the design to ensure that the system will contribute to making
valuable scientific discoveries.