* 9003912
* Genetic and Molecular Analysis of Development               Caenorhabditis Elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1994
* Eleanor Maine, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 01/31/1994
* USD 247,200.00

Regulatory information is passed from one cell or tissue type to another during
the development of multicellular organisms. Development of the nematode,
Caenorhabditis elegans, has been described in detail at the cellular level and
includes several instances where regulatory cell-cell interactions decide cell
fate. This proposal investigates the mechanisms underlying two such regulatory
interactions: induction of mitosis in the germ line and induction of pharyngeal
muscle cells in the early embryo. These two events occur at different times and
in different tissues but share a common component: the glp-1 gene. Extensive
genetic and molecular studies suggest that glp-1 acts as a signal receptor in
each of the induced tissues. Dr. Maine has generated extragenic suppressors of
glp-1 mutations as a way of identifying genes responsible for signal production
in the inducing tissue and signal transduction in the induced tissue. This
proposal outlines genetic and molecular studies and cell ablation experiments
that are designed to analyze the role(s) of these newly identified genes in the
germ line and embryonic cell- cell interactions. In particular, the proposal
focuses on one gene identified as a recessive suppressors, sog-1, and on a set
of dominant suppressors that are linked to glp-1. %%% The proposed studies are
designed to investigate how cell fate is specified during the development of
multicellular organisms. In particular, the experiments will focus on the cell-
cell interactions that are reguired to specify the fates of individual cells as
they differentiate into one or another adult cell type.