* 9003157
* U.S.-Venezuela Cooperative Research:  Long-Term AstronomicalSurveys Using Electronic Detectors on a Wide-Field Telescope
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1990,11/30/1994
* David Koo, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 11/30/1994
* USD 17,298.00

This award will support Drs. David Chih-yuen Koo, Joseph S. Miller, and Lloyd
B. Robinson of the University of California Lick Observatory in a research
collaboration with Dr. Gustavo Bruzual of the Centro de Investigaciones de
Astronomia (CIDA) in Merida, Venezuela. The purpose of the collaboration is to
establish a long-term joint program involving two parts: the first involves
travel and data-transfer support for a pilot instrumentation project to develop
a large-format electronic (CCD) camera for use on the new CIDA 1-meter Schmidt
telescope. Lick and CIDA astronomers will then use this powerful combination to
undertake various extensive new photometric and synoptic surveys of joint
scientific interest. One of these will be a major new long-term observational
survey of 20 areas in the sky. Among many potential programs using these data
will be a multicolor photometric survey to study the luminosity function of
galaxies and a synoptic program to search for very distant supernovae. The
second part of the collaboration will attempt to develop new quantitative
methods of analyzing extensive multidimensional data, aimed mainly at exploring
the evolution of galaxies and cosmology. Major observational surveys are some of
the most productive astronomical tools to understand the universe. Such surveys
allow astronomers to measure distributions of properties of known objects and
also to discover new, rare, or unusual classes of objects. Despite their
importance, photometric surveys that cover large areas, synoptic programs, or
any long-term projects are all particularly difficult to undertake in today's
climate of scarce telescope time. The CIDA observatory in Venezuela has recently
finished the construction of a 1-meter Schmidt telescope that has overall
optical properties similar to the one at Palomar and is the among the three
largest in the northern hemisphere. The collaborators' plan to develop imaging
cameras for the telescope at CIDA using charge coupled detectors (CCDs) of very
large format developed at the Detector Laboratory at Lick, plus the ability of
CIDA to provide dedicated observers time for long-term surveys should allow
astronomers to undertake a variety of new surveys of unprecedented depth, time
and areal coverage.