* 9003915
* Crystal Chemical Controls on Trace Element Incorporation    in Carbonate Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1993
* Richard Reeder, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 05/31/1993
* USD 135,000.00

Trace and minor element distributions have played a major role in interpreting
carbonate mineral formation and diagenesis in sedimentary environments. Sorption
and coprecipitation processes involving carbonates also figure importantly in
controlling trace metal concentrations in near-surface waters. However, major
limitations in efforts to model such processes quantitatively result from a poor
understanding of factors that influence partitioning of elements between aqueous
solutions and carbonate minerals, especially the abundant mineral calcite.
Findings that surface crystal structure, and particularly the geometry and
structure of growth steps, exert strong influences on selective element
incorporation, offer a means by which to examine the very surface mechanisms
that cause such selectivity in partitioning. By correlating surface structural
features imaged by differential interference contrast microscopy with
quantitative trends of selective enrichment for various elements over a range of
conditions, the relative influences of growth rate and surface structure on
element partitioning will be evaluated. The present research project will
provide insight to the most fundamental mechanisms operating during crystal
growth, specifically those factors that influence trace and minor element
distribution. In addition, this research will lead to a capability of predicting
differential partitioning trends that are element specific and their associated
crystal growth rate effects.