* 9003847
* Measurement and Analysis of Kodaikanal Solar Images,        Award in U.S. and Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1995
* K. Sivaraman, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 03/31/1995
* USD 46,855.00

Description: Under this project, scientists from the U.S. and from India will
work to enlarge the data base on the motion of sunspots. The source of the new
data is the Indian white-light solar plates began in 1905 in the Kodaikanal
Observatory, which is of excellent quality. The combination of the Kodaikanal
and Mount Wilson data could make the finest sunspot data set in existence. It
will provide many times the number of sunspots now available for statistical
studies of rotation and latitude drift and spot areas. This will increase the
precision of the averaged results for the cycle-related rotation rate changes
found in the data set. It will also increase the confidence in small-amplitude
effects which is low given the the limits of the U.S. data set, as well as
increase the potential for detecting low-amplitude effects. These measured
drifts have an important bearing on the large-scale dynamics of the solar
convection zone and is believed to be responsible for the 11-year activity
cycle. Scope: The U.S. P.I. Dr. Robert Howard, of the National Solar Observatory
(NSO) in Tucson, AZ, and the Indian P.I. Dr. K.R. Sivaraman, of the Indian
Institute of Astrophysics, (IIA) in Bangalore, India have collaborated in
earlier studies under the Mount Wilson Program funded by NSF/AST. This action
extends and formalizes the international collaboration by providing funds to the
NSO for the per diem of the Indian scientists, and providing IIA with funds in
Indian currency for travel to the U.S. and for computer operation for
digitization of data. Funding: This project is being funded under two grants: 1.
To The Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy $10,500 plus
$36,555 in Indian Currency 2. To The Indian Institute of Astrophysics $49,600 in
Indian Currency.