* 9003341
* Distributed Processing of Rule-Programs in Knowledge Bases
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/1990,05/26/1992
* Ouri Wolfson, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 05/26/1992
* USD 114,767.00

This research focuses on performance issues in rule-based knowledge bases that
have to manage large amounts of rules and data. An effective implementation of
such systems, particularly if they are distributed, has proven to be a major
stumbling block in the way of their efficient performance. In this project,
parallel processing for solving the performance problem is investigated. The
goals of the research are: (1) to establish a theory of parallel and distributed
rule processing; and (2) based on the theory, to devise processing strategies
and criteria for comparing them, so that an optimal strategy can be selected for
a given rule-based program, data structures, and a parallel/distributed
architecture. The results of the research will be experimentally evaluated in
Net-mate, a system for management of very large communication networks (hundreds
of thousands of interconnected computers), that is currently under development
at Columbia University. An important issue in network management is automatic
detection of fault conditions. Rule-based programming is ideal for this purpose,
but it requires the analysis of very large amounts of statistical and
configuration data that is distributed, leading to the type of performance
problems that this research aims to solve. Hence, the Net-mate system is an
ideal testbed for this research, and both projects are expected to benefit from
the cooperation and provide results applicable to distributed and parallel
computing.