* 9003868
* Cultural Values and the Transformation of the Soviet Union
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1990,01/31/1991
* James Gibson, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Kimberley C. Johnson
* 01/31/1991
* USD 12,700.00

Within recent years the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe have undergone major
changes at a dramatic pace. While it might be expected that political values in
a culture influence processes of change, there is little systematic knowledge
about the legal and political culture of the Soviet Union. This research
constitutes a unique and important opportunity to advance our understanding of
how beliefs, values, and attitudes of ordinary citizens structure both the pace
and the possibility of change. The core of the study is a survey of public
opinion in greater Moscow. It is anticipated that approximately 500 respondents
will be interviewed face-to-face in hour long sessions. While the research team
is an interdisciplinary group of U.S. scholars, the data collection itself will
be performed under the direction of the Institute of Sociology, National Academy
of Sciences. This research anticipates several contributions. First, it should
enable developing a profile of the major attributes of Soviet legal and
political culture. Second, it should permit testing a variety of hypotheses
about the origins of Soviet values. Third, these survey data should lend
themselves to exploratory analyses of the differences in value content and
structure between the Soviet Union, Western Europe, and the United States.
Finally, the survey will be extremely useful in establishing baseline data for
studying processes of political change in the future.