* 9003298
* Mathematical Sciences: Topology, Geometry, and Energetics ofClosed Circular DNA
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1994
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/1994
* USD 37,874.00

The objective of this research is to understand the structure and dynamics of
supercoiled DNA. Emphasis will be on the determination of the three-dimensional
structure of supercoiled DNA as a function of linking number; upon the
prediction of interaction of local segments that are separated by a considerable
distance along the contour length of the DNA; and upon the elucidation of the
effects on DNA structure of wrapping on a protein surface. The specific aims are
divided into three categories. (1) Description of the tertiary structure of
supercoiled DNA using the finite element method. The finite element method from
nonlinear structural mechanics will be applied to the analysis of closed DNA
structure. Energy minimization criteria will be used to predict the most stable
configuration at each linking number. The writhe and twist will be calculated
and the results used to predict the hydrodynamic behavior of closed DNA as well
as the equilibrium distribution of topoisomers. (2) Description of the
generalized helical periodicity of supercoiled DNA. The generalized winding
number and generalized helical repeat will be defined for supercoiled DNA and a
formula for the linking number of the DNA developed in terms of this winding
number. These results will be applied to various experiments involving nuclease
digestion and chemical probes in vitro and phasing in vivo. (3) Determination of
the writhe, the surface twist and the surface linking number for DNA wrapped on
piecewise smooth surfaces. Writhe and the surface twist will be calculated for
closed circular DNA wrapped on a connected series of proteins of various
geometric shapes. The writhe will be analyzed into its piecewise components and
into the contributions due to pairwise interactions, including those between the
protein complexes, between the linker regions, and between the protein complexes
and the linker regions.