* 9003917
* Proteins Associated with the Carbon Dioxide Concentrating   Mechanism of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1993
* James Moroney, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 12/31/1993
* USD 200,000.00

Unicellular algae, including Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, have the capacity to
concentrate CO2 internally, allowing these organisms to grow
photoautotrophically at CO2 concentrations lower than most higher plants can
tolerate. This CO2 concentrating mechanism is inducible; it is present only in
cells that have been grown with limiting CO2 conditions. An important aspect of
this Ci (Ci = CO2 + HCO3- + CO3-2) accumulation system is located in the
chloroplast. Intact chloroplasts isolated from low CO2- grown C. reinhardtii
cells retain the ability to accumulate Ci to much higher levels than intact
chloroplasts isolated from high Co2-grown cells. Five polypeptides that are
specifically induced by growth on low CO2 and are missing in the high
CO2-requiring strain CIA-5 have been identified. One of these proteins is a
carbonic anhydrase located in the periplasmic space and another is a 36 kDa
membrane associated polypeptide located in intact chloroplasts. The other three
proteins are soluble and their function is unknown. The role of the chloroplast
in Ci accumulation is being characterized by determining Ci uptake in intact
chloroplasts from wild-type and high CO2-requiring C. reinhardtii strains. The
role of the 36 kDa polypeptide in this uptake process is also being
investigated. This protein is located on the chloroplast, possibly in the
chloroplast envelope, and may be responsible, in part, for the increase in Ci
uptake observed in chloroplasts from low CO2-grown cultures. The chloroplast
carbonic anhydrase a low abundance, constitutively made protein that is required
for efficient CO2 fixation is also being studied. The role of the three other
low CO2-induced polypeptides is unknown. A cDNA library is being made to mRNA
isolated from low CO2-grown cells and differentially screened with cDNA made
from mRNA from low and high CO2-grown cells. This will identify many of the low
CO2-inducible genes required for growth on low CO2. The eventual
characterization of the proteins of this transport system will increase our
understanding of the low CO2 adjustment in algae and the role of the chloroplast
in this photosynthetic adaptation. Photosynthesis involves the photoassimilation
of carbon dioxide (CO2) and the photoevolution of oxygen (O2). Partly due to
this gas exchange activity of plants, earth's atmosphere changed in composition
from one that was high in CO2 and low in O2 to one that is high in O2 and low in
CO2. Under current conditions, the rate of CO2 fixation and thus plant growth,
can be limited by CO2. Many unicellular algae can adapt to low CO2 conditions so
that they become very efficient in their utiliation of CO2 for photosynthesis.
This adaptation results from an enhancement of the cells' ability to transport
and accumulate inorganic carbon. These studies characterize the protein
components required for the efficient use of CO2 in the green alga Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii. Emphasis is placed on the role of the chloroplast in inorganic
carbon acquisition.