* 9003042
* The Rise of Molecular Biology:  Roots in Protein Research   and the Problematic Relationship to Biochemistry
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1991,05/31/1992
* Angela Creager, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Michael M. Sokal
* 05/31/1992
* USD 28,000.00

Dr. Creager, a trained biochemist, is entering a postdoctoral training and
research program at the History of Science Department of Harvard University.
Working with Professor Everett Mendelsohn, she is investigating two questions
relating to the emergence of molecular biology in this century. First, how did
the preexisting program of research on proteins contribute to the ascension of
molecular biology and how was that program changed by it? Physiologists and
biochemists appropriated experimental methodology from the physical sciences
before molecular biologists exploited this approach to answer fundamental
questions in genetics. Dr. Creager is examining the development of this physico-
chemical approach at the Physical Chemistry Laboratory at Harvard Medical School
in the first decades of this century. Second, she is asking is the concept of
the molecular biological revolution of the life sciences a suitable or accurate
expression of the nature of scientific change in biology in this century. She is
studying the relationship of molecular biology to the older field of
biochemistry in order to assess whether molecular biology introduced a novel
methodology or approach. Her investigations of whether developments in the life
sciences in this century have been continuous or discontinuous with previous
traditions should provide a basis for assessing the nature of scientific change
in modern biology.