* 9003513
* Elements, Structures, and Adaptive Learning Algorithms in   Stochastic Neural Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1990,08/31/1992
* P. Papantoni-Kazakos, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/1992
* USD 109,831.00

This program will address novel neural network models,for distributed stochastic
operations. Distributed stochastic operations arise in a number of interesting
systems, such as: (1) Multisensor target tracking, (2) Distributed and
hierarchical decision making in organization structures, (3) Distributed and
cooperative computer data processing, and (4) Global forecasting of economy
factors in complex distributed systems. The neural network modeling of such
systems is highly important, since it can dictate appropriate operations to be
executed and important factors to be extracted and communicated, for effective
system operation with simultaneously reduced complexity. Such modeling may also
assist in the understanding of the basic elementary features and processes in
complex systems as the above. The P.I. considers neural network structures whose
objective is either hypothesis testing or parameter estimation. She will test
specific approaches for the design and analysis of such networks, with
performance criteria matching to the environment the network operates in and its
objectives. The P.I. will also investigate new adaptive network training
algorithms, with superior robustness and convergence characteristics. These
algorithms outperform far the popular Least Mean Squares (LMS) algorithm, using
error criteria that are more relevant than the minimum mean square error for the
classification of patterns.