* 9003483
* Pyroxene Phase Equilibria for Thermobarometry of FeldspathicMafic and Ultramafic Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1993
* William Carlson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 07/31/1993
* USD 50,000.00

Experiments to determine the compositions of pyroxenes in the assemblage
enstatite + diopside + forsterite + anorthite will be performed in the systems
CaO-MgO-Al2O3-SiO at temperatures from 925oC to 1175oC, and pressures of 5000
and 7500 bars. Results from these experiments will be combined with results
obtained earlier in this experimental program at atmospheric pressure, and at
2500 and 5000 bars. The experimental data will be used to construct and to
constrain empirical and thermodynamic models of subsolidus pyroxene phase
equilibria, which may then be applied to methods of estimating temperatures and
pressures of equilibration of felspathic, mafic and ultramafic rocks. Pyroxene
compositions will be reversed, both in terms of Ca/Mg ratio and Al contents by
approaching the equilibrium compositions from starting compositions with both
higher and lower values. Experiments will use vanadium pentoxide as a high-
temperature solvent to promote grain growth and chemical equilibration; several
lines of evidence developed earlier in this experimental program demonstrate
that this technique produces negligible effects upon the equilibria under
investigation. Analysis of compositions and phase assemblages will be performed
petrographically, by electron microprobe, and powder X-ray diffraction,
supplemented by scanning and transmission electron microscopy and single crystal
X-ray diffraction as required.