* 9003888
* Evaluation of Building Performance During the Loma Prieta   Earthquake Based on Strong-Motion Records
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/1990,03/31/1992
* Sheng-Taur Mau, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 03/31/1992
* USD 44,730.00

This is a post Loma Prieta earthquake (Oct. 1989) investigation project in
learning from this damaging event. The objectives of the research are to use
these records to: (1) conduct a comprehensive building performance study for the
time-varying nature of vibration periods and damping, and (2) estimate the
maximum story drift, a crucial quantity for the assessment of possible building
damage. A well established system identification method, improved in accuracy
and efficiency in a related research program supported by the National Science
Foundation, will be used for the parameter identification in this research. The
identification of the vibration period and damping will be carried out for about
40 building records. The story drift estimation requires the development of a
new method and will be carried out for selected buildings. The time-varying
nature of the building period, damping, and story drift will be used to assess
and calibrate the building damage state. The information obtained will form the
basis for a building performance evaluation procedure. Based on the findings of
this research, a procedure of post-earthquake building performance evaluation
using strong motion records will be recommended for future applications.