* 9003018
* Simulation Studies of Entropically-Stabilized Quasicrystals and of Nanophase Materials (Materials Research)
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1992
* Katherine Strandburg, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 12/31/1992
* USD 110,486.00

Quasicrystalline materials are intriguing because of their fivefold symmetry
which is incompatible with periodic translational order. Two models of
quasicrystal structure were originally proposed: the quasiperiodic crystal or
"Penrose tiling" model and the icosahedral glass model. Dr. Strandburg's
research, along with that of a number of others, suggested a third possibility -
the entropically stabilized or "random tiling" model. In this project she will
use computer simulation techniques to study: (1) properties of the random tiling
model in three dimensions. Results will allow comparisons with experiment, to
distinguish between the suggested structural models; and (2) crystal growth and
interface roughness of the random tiling model. Nanocrystals are compactions of
nanometer-sized crystallites. They have novel properties due to their large
density of grain boundaries. The anomalous stability of these materials against
grain growth will be investigated using a simple topological model. Interactive
activities include a mentorship program pairing female students with women
scientists at Argonne and Fermilab; regular gatherings of female physics
students for discussion of issues of interest to women in science; Ph.D. thesis
research supervision; and teaching introductory undergraduate physics and
graduate solid state physics. This project furthers VPW program objectives which
are (1) to provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in
engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and (2) to
encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by providing
greater visibility for women scientists and engineers employed in industry,
government, and academic institutions. By encouraging the participation of women
in science, it is a valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific
vitality.