* 9004213
* Single and Two-Phase Thermosyphon Heat Transfer from Arrays of Discrete Heat Sources Submerged in a Dielectric Liquid
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1990,02/28/1994
* Satish Ramadhyani, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1994
* USD 175,479.00

Interest in convection heat transfer from arrays of discrete heat sources has
been stimulated by rapid advancements in VLSI chip technologies and the
attendant need for effective heat dissipation. Recently, it has become clear
that an important cooling option involves direct immersion of electronic
components in a dielectric liquid, and considerable effort is being directed
towards use of this option to dissipate large heat fluxes (&gt; 100 W/cm2). Such
efforts typically involve single-phase forced convection and forced convection
boiling, with measures for effecting heat transfer enhancement. However, it is
believed that, in the quest for achieving larger levels dissipation with forced
convection, insufficient attention is being given to moderate heat flux
applications for which cooling with no imposed flow of the dielectric liquid is
desirable, if not mandatory. Such cooling schemes, involving either single-or
two-phase thermosyphons, offer benign, passive conditions for which pumping
requirements are eliminated, thereby reducing mechanical problems related to the
hydrodynamic loads and vibrations induced by high speed flows. High-powered
desktop computers and workstations of the future would constitute an important
application of this technology, since complex coolant distribution units cannot
be used in such situations. The proposed study seeks to assess means by which
non boiling and boiling heat transfer from arrays of discrete sources may be
enhanced for free convection in a cavity. For heat sources with and without
extended surfaces, experiments and numerical simulations will be used to
establish a basic understanding of related flow and thermal conditions and to
determine operating conditions which maximize heat transfer per unit package
volume. Heat transfer enhancement schemes to be considered include, but are not
restricted to, low-profile studs, pin-fin arrays, longitudinal fin arrays, and
porous fin arrays. Three-dimensional models, including the conjugate problem of
substrate conduction, will be used for comparison with experimental results. The
work is expected to enhance understanding of basic flow and heat transfer
associated with discrete sources in a dielectric liquid with particular
attention to heat transfer enhancement schemes which maximize heat flux at low
coolant volumetric flow rate and low coolant system volume.