* 9004013
* Developmental Regulation of the Synthesis of                Peroxisomal Enzymes
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1992
* Wayne Becker, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/1992
* USD 170,000.00

Dr. Becker's laboratory is interested in the regulation of nuclear genes
encoding enzymes that are involved in the process of photorespiration and
localized in leaf peroxisomes. The expression of these genes is organ specific,
developmentally regulated, and strongly modulated by light, as studied in
emerging cucumber seedlings. He has recently isolated cDNA and genomic clones
for two photorespiratory enzymes, hydroxypyruvate reductase (HPR) and
serine:glyoxylate aminotransferase (SGAT), and have sequenced an HPR clone
containing the entire coding region plus 2.2kb of 5' flanking sequence. Here, he
proposes to confirm (by nuclear run-on studies) the transcriptional regulation
suggested by prior mRNA assays and transcript analyses. He then intends to use
the isolated clones to assay for cis acting regulatory elements (be deletion
analysis in transgenic tobacco), trans acting factors (by gel shift and foot
printing assays), and possible changes in chromatin structure accompanying both
developmental and light regulation. %%% The process of photorespiration is
linked to but independent of photosynthesis. The function of photorespiration
for the plant is to return to the Calvin cycle three out of every four carbon
atoms diverted from it by the oxygenase activity of the carbon dioxide fixing
enzyme of the photosynthetic cycle. This is of major metabolic importance to the
plant. The regulation of the enzymes of that pathway are the topic of the
current study.