* 9004048
* Structure/Function Analysis of a Bacterial Protein Kinase   Phosphoprotein Phosphatase
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1994
* Alexander Ninfa, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 01/31/1994
* USD 268,000.00

Over 20 different bacterial adaptive responses to environmental stimuli are
regulated by a family of proteins, response regulators, sharing a conserved
amino terminal domain. The activity of these response regulators is controlled
by a second family of proteins sharing a conserved domain, usually located at
the carboxyl terminus. Recent experiments with the purified signal transduction
proteins that control nitrogen assimilation (NTR regulon), chemotaxis (Che) and
osmoregulation (OMP regulon) indicate that the proteins of this second family
are protein kinases and, in some cases, phosphoprotein phosphatases that
regulate the adaptive responses by controlling the level of phosphorylation of
the response regulators. Of these protein kinases, the best understood is NRII
which regulates nitrogen assimilation by catalyzing the phosphorylation and
dephosphorylation of the enhancer-binding transcription factor NRI. In this
proposal, the PI presents experiments designed to further elucidate the
mechanisms of the kinase and phosphatase reactions catalyzed by NRII The results
of these experiments will probably be applicable to all of the homologous
protein kinases. NRII has three activities: in the presence of ATP, NRII is
autophosphorylated on a histidine residue. This phosphoryl group is then
transferred to an aspartyl residue within the N-terminal domain of the response
regulator NRI. Finally, in the presence of the signal transduction protein PII
and ATP, NRII catalyzes the dephosphorylation of P-NRI. Genetic experiments are
proposed that should define the requirements for nucleotide binding and the
autokinase, phosphotransferase. and phosphatase activities by isolating or
constructing mutants specifically deficient in these activities. In addition,
experiments are proposed that should directly elucidate the identity of the
autophosphorylated histidine residue, the stoichiometry of autophosphorylation,
and the sites of nucleotide binding.