* 9004775
* Characterization of a Germ Line Expressed Gene of DrosophilaMelanogaster
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/1990,11/30/1993
* Robert Schulz, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 11/30/1993
* USD 180,000.00

gonadal (gdl) is a gene that is differentially expressed in the male and female
germ lines of Drosophila. This proposal describes experiments that address gdl
function in the germ line, sex- specific expression of the gdl gene products,
and complex regulation of the gene during gametogenesis. The specific goals of
the research are summarized as follows. First, complementing genetic techniques
will be used to isolate gdl mutant alleles. The gdl mutants will then be
characterized as to specific phenotype, with the overall objective being to
determine the role gdl plays in the male and/or female germ line. Second, Dr.
Schulz will generate antibodies directed against gdl proteins so as to
facilitate the characterization of the gene products. The objective is to
determine whether the proteins have common or different functions during
spermatogenesis and oogenesis. Third, he will study gdl expression in mutations
affecting germ cell differentiation. These studies may identify genes that
regulate gdl and should provide additional information on gene expression in the
early germ line. Additionally, gdl may serve as a sensitive sex specific
differentiation marker during gametogenesis. Overall, the extensive analysis of
the gdl gene should enhance the current understanding of germ cell
differentiation in Drosophila.