* 9004030
* Genetics of the Mitochondrial Translational Machinery
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1994
* Alexander Tzagoloff, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 06/30/1994
* USD 270,000.00

Mitochondria, whether in lower or higher eukaryotes, are endowed with the
capability to translate a small number of proteins encoded by their genomes.
With the exception of the transfer and ribosomal RNAs, and a single ribosomal
protein, whose genes are located in mitochondrial DNA, all other components of
the translational machinery are derived from nuclear genes. During the past
grant period, nuclear respiratory deficient mutants of yeast affected in various
aspects of mitochondrial metabolism have been isolated and characterized. Among
this collection, approximately 55 complementation groups have been ascertained
to be impaired in mitochondrial protein synthesis. This subset of mutants has
allowed characterization of different mitochondrial aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases,
ribosomal proteins, and translational initiation and elongation factions. The
analysis of the aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase genes have been particularly fruitful
in revealing new and unsuspected evolutionary relationships between different
members of this enzyme family.The studies embodied in the present proposal will
provide addition insights into the nature of the mitochondrial translation
system through continued biochemical and genetic analyses of respiratory
deficient yeast mutants. Several objectives will be pursued in the course of
these investigations. First, the PI intends to complete the characterization of
other mitochondrial aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases and to start structural studies
on the lysyl-tRNA synthetase. This information will be used to further assess
the evolutionary derivation of this multigene family. A second important goal is
to delineate the factors responsible for regulating the expression of
mitochondrial synthetases and to clarify the biochemical rationale for the
existence of separate genes for some of the mitochondrial and cytoplasmic
homologues. Finally they expect to work out an in vitro system of mitochondrial
protein synthesis which will permit more incisive studies on the mechanism by
which the products of nuclear genes such as CBP6, CBP7 (CBS2), and CBS1
facilitate translation of the cytochrome b mRNA and pre-mRNA.