* 9004557
* Pyridine Nucleotide-Linked Reduction of Nitroxides
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1994
* Carl Bernofsky, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 07/31/1994
* USD 268,000.00

When neutrophils are activated by contact with bacteria, foreign particles, and
various chemicals such as phorbol esters, they generate a large quantity of
superoxide by means of the NADPH oxidase and its associated electron transport
chain. Most of this superoxide is converted to hydrogen peroxide, and most of
the peroxide is converted to hypochlorous acid (HOC1) by the action of
myeloperoxidase. In the presence of the spin-trapping agent
5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline-N-oxide (DMPO), activated neutrophils yield the
nitroxide adducts of both superoxide (DMPO-OOH) and hydroxyl radical (DMPO-OH).
The origin of DMPO- OOH is controversial, and many workers believe that it
arises from breakdown of DMPO-OOH. In addition, the principal investigator
recently showed that HOC1 catalyzes the incorporation of ı17O!H2O into
ı17O!DMPO-OH, thus suggesting an alternative origin of DMPO-OH in neutrophils.
In these model studies, the DMPO-OH was further oxidized by HIC1 to 55-dimethyl
1-2 pyrrolidone-N-oxyl (DMPOX). The latter product has not been seen with
activated neutrophils. However, the principal investigator has found that DMPOX
is readily converted by NADPH into an EPR-silent species, presumably the
hydroxylamine. The proposed research will test the hypothesis that activated
neutrophils form DMPO-OH and DMPOX from HOC1 but subsequently reduce the DMPOX
with NADPH generated by the respiratory burst. Synthetic DMPOX will be incubated
with activated neutrophils and its reduction monitored by electron paramagnetic
resonance (EPR). The role of NADPH as a source of reducing equivalents will be
examined with site-specific inhibitors, chemical agents that oxide NADPH, and a
recycling system for regenerating NADPH. The reaction of DMPOX with NADPH will
be quantitated and the reaction product identified. In addition, activated
neutrophils will be incubated with DMPO in the presence of 17O-labeled O2 and
H2O to determine the origin of the DMPO-OH produced. Enzymic reactions that
reduce nitroxides and oxidize the corresponding hydroxylamines may be
responsible, in part, for the conflicting observations of radicals formed by
neutrophils using spin-trapping techniques . The proposed research will help
clarify the basis of this inconsistency.