* 9004353
* Regulation of Gene Expression by Ethylene
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1993
* Robert Fischer, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 07/31/1993
* USD 255,000.00

The long term objective of this research is to understand the molecular and
cellular processes by which ethylene controls fruit ripening and gene
expression. The model system is Lycopersicon esculentum (tomato). By analyzing
the effect of promoter deletions on gene expression in fruit from transformed
plants, and in a recently developed microprojectile transient assay system,
5'-flanking regions that control gene expression in a positive and negative
manner have been identified. Sites that react with developmentally regulated
DNA-binding activities have been delineated, and a clone encoding a DNA-binding
protein has been isolated. The specific goal is to elucidate the mechanisms of
ethylene action at the gene level. Ethylene-inducible promoter fine structure
will be analyzed by determining the effect of promoter mutations on gene
expression in a transient gene expression system and in transgenic fruit.
Specific mutations will include deletion of sites that react with DNA binding
proteins, and alterations of binding site position and orientation within the
promoter. Factors that regulate ethylene inducible gene expression will be
studied by cloning DNA binding proteins that bind to critical DNA regulatory
sequences. The cloned gene will be used to generate specific antibodies and
these tools will be used to determine the mechanism that regulates DNA binding
activity. DNA binding protein function will be elucidated genetically by
analyzing the phenotype of transgenic plants with reduced levels of DNA binding
activity due to the expression of an antisense DNA binding protein gene. The
interaction of the DNA binding protein with ethylene and/or other nuclear
proteins will be analyzed. %%% The plant hormone, ethylene, controls fruit
ripening. This project is an investigation, at the molecular and genetic level,
of how that control is carried out.