* 9004078
* Mathematical Sciences: Stability, Regularity and Long Time  Behavior of Hyperbolic Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Manoussos Grillakis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1992
* USD 36,522.00

The work undertaken in this project concerns partial differential equations of
hyperbolic type. These equations are frequently used to model wave phenomena
occurring the physical universe. Examples can be found in the theories of
elasticity, elementary particle physics and general relativity. The general
paradigm for studying a class of hyperbolic equations is to show first the
existence of what are known as weak solutions, to establish properties of these
solutions and then examine the large time behavior of the solutions. In the last
context, one looks for stationary or static solutions through a conversion of
the (now time-independent) equation to elliptic form. This research will focus
on nonlinear waves described by equations whose primary nonlinear term (as
distinct from the fundamental wave equation) is a power of the modulus of the
solution. At issue is whether solutions can be shown to exist for all time or
will singularities develop? It turns out that a nonlinearity equal to the fifth
power of the solution is the critical exponent for existing theory. For all
values less than five, regularity obtains. Recent work provides proof of the
regularity even at the critical value. Current work will now be confined to
equations involving higher powers of the nonlinearity. Past methods will
definitely not work here. Other investigations will be carried out on the wave
equation in curved space-time to determine whether the energy of the solution
decays locally in space and on Hamiltonian systems that are invariant under the
action of a Lie group. Analysis of these systems will be directed toward a
better understanding of the stability of periodic solutions.