* 9004528
* 5th Annual Penn State Symposium in  Plant Physiology; May   l7-19, l990, University Park, PA.
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/1990,03/31/1991
* Richard Arteca, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 03/31/1991
* USD 4,000.00

This symposium provides an up-to-date assessment of our knowledge of the
biosynthesis, metabolism and molecular biology of polyamines and ethylene.
Presentations by outstanding researchers in the field will provide a critical
analysis of the involvement of polyamines and ethylene in plant growth,
development, and responses to stress. The antagonistic roles of these molecules
in senescence, plant stress and development will be examined, as well as the
possible regulatory mechanisms for the ethylene and polyamine pathways.
Polyamines and ethylene are the two important topics that will be discussed
during the 5th Annual Penn State Symposium in Plant Physiology. Polyamines are
compounds that have been implicated as markers for male fertility and in flower
development. Evidence also suggests that polyamines may retard senescence.
Ethylene has been shown to play an important regulatory role in many
physiological processes including sex expression, flower initiation and the
promotion of senescence. The purpose of this symposium is to address a variety
of topics on polyamine and researchers working on these two distinct yet
overlapping subjects and provide a catalyst for innovative approaches in the
future. The symposium will provide students and post doctoral fellows an unusual
opportunity to meet and interact in a small group setting with the leaders in
this research area. The published proceedings will provide an up-to-date review
of research in these rapidly advancing fields which will be of general value to
students and scientists in colleges and universities, government, and industry.