* 9004614
* A New Approach to Monitoring Groundwater/Surface Flow       Relationships, Using 222Rn and SF6
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1993
* Katherine Ellins, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1993
* USD 74,315.00

The measurement of natural 222Rn and deliberately introduced SF6 can be used to
accurately detect and quantify groundwater delivery to stream flow. Experiments,
involving the simultaneous measurement of 222RN and SF6 will be conducted in the
Santa Fe River in Florida. The detection of anomalously high levels of 222Rn in
the stream will permit the identification of locations of groundwater input. The
observed variations between SF6 and 222Rn will be used to determine accurate gas
exchange rates, which are needed to estimate the groundwater component of
surface discharge. The rate of gas exchange, which can be expressed as a
reaeration coefficient, is also a determining factor in assessing water quality
in a stream. Thus, the measurement of 222Rn and SF6 together will yield another
geochemical technique for assessing the water quality of aquatic systems.
Measurements of the D/H and 180/160 ratios in water samples collected from the
Sante Fe during a 222Rn survey following a major precipitation event when the
difference between the precipitation derived surface runoff and the well
integrated groundwater component is maximized will provide an independent check
on estimates of groundwater delivery based on the 222Rn data. The proposed
research will benefit hydrologists and water resource managers by establishing a
powerful new geochemical technique for examining the interconnections between
groundwater and surface flow. In addition, the research will provide a
hydrologic and water quality data base not easily obtained by conventional
methods.