* 9004278
* PRF/M:  Fitness Consequences of Genetic Recombination in    Natural Populations of Bacillus subtilis
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1991
* Edwin Parker, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Gregory J. McCants
* 07/31/1991
* USD 40,381.00

These experiments will examine the evolutionary dynamics of genetically
variable Bacillus subtilis populations in soil microcosms and examine the
biological and physical factors which facilitate recombination. The experiments
will be performed during a sabbatical leave in the laboratory of Dr.C.A. Istock
at the University of Arizona. These questions will be addressed: 1) Do natural
genotypes of B. subtilis differ in fitness? 2) Do relative fitnesses of
genotypes change as a function of biotic or physical environmental conditions?
3) Is recombination frequency correlated with specific habitat conditions? 4)
Are genetically variable soil populations of B. subtilis more resistant to
bacteriophage predators than are monomorphic cultures? 5) Is there a genetic
cost to sexual reproduction in B. subtilis? The basic procedure in these
experiments will be to 1) inoculate soil microcosms with heat-shock spores or
vegetative cells of one or more isogenic strains of B. subtilis, 2) sample these
populations at intervals, 3) estimate the density of vegetative cells and
spores, and 4) determine genotype/recombination frequencies by protein,
antibiotic resistance, colony morph, and DNA restriction fragment polymorphisms.
Additionally, to address question 5 the PI will transform competent B. subtilis
in broth culture using prepared donor DNA. These results will illuminate the
relative costs, benefits, and ecological and evolutionary consequences of
genetic recombination and diversity in a species with a primitively asexual
breeding system.