* 9004559
* Collab Study: Tectonomagmatic and Event-Stratigraphic sig-  nificant of Lower Paleozoic K-bentonites in the Iapetus     Region of North America and Northwestern Europe
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1990,05/31/1993
* Stig Bergstrom, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Felicia Fauntleroy
* 05/31/1993
* USD 69,000.00

PIs will investigate the tectonic setting, magmatic origin and stratigraphic
significance of altered volcanic ash beds (K- bentonites) in the Middle and
Upper Ordovician strata of Baltoscandia and to compare these data with similar
data from North America. Preliminary studies strongly suggest these K- bentonite
beds on both sides of lapetus had a common source and a common tectonic setting.
If this indication proves correct, the most widespread of these beds will have
profound event- stratigraphic implications for the Ordovician, and our
understanding of Laurentia and Baltica plate positions during the Taconian
orogeny will be substantially improved. Similarly, the abundance of Silurian
K-bentonites throughout Baltoscandia and the UK indicates ongoing plate-margin
volcanism from Llandovery through Ludlow time. PIs will collect samples of the
most extensive beds from cores and outcrops in Estonia, Sweden and Norway. They
will add to existing information on the biostratigraphic position of these beds
and use chemical fingerprinting of both bulk samples and selected phenocrysts to
make accurate correlations with North American beds. These will be compared with
trans-Atlantic stratigraphic relations of K- bentonites suggested by traditional
biostratigraphy and by graphic correlation using conodonts. We will also obtain
high- resolution Ar age spectra and U-Pb dates from biotite and zircon separates
from biostratigraphically well-constrained K-bentonites that will add key ages
to the Ordovician time scale. Trace element data will be plotted on
discrimination diagrams to interpret the tectonic and magmatic settings of these
beds.