* 9004707
* The Mechanism of Folding of Dihydrofolate Reductase
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1990,04/30/1994
* C Robert Matthews, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 04/30/1994
* USD 427,905.00

The overall goal of this proposal is to determine the mechanism by which the
amino acid sequence of a protein directs the rapid and efficient folding to the
native conformation. The approach is to use site-directed mutagenesis to
identify sidechains which play key roles in folding. Those that have such roles
will, when replaced, have discernable effects on the equilibrium and kinetic
properties of folding. The protein to be studied is dihydrofolate reductase
(DHFR) from Escherchia coli. DHFR is a relatively small monomeric protein which
has no disulfide bonds or prosthetic groups and for which a high resolution
X-ray structure exists. A combination of absorbance, fluorescence and circular
dichroism spectroscopies have been used to establish a folding model for DHFR.
This model postulates the existence of a number of transient folding
intermediates whose structures and energetics will be studied. The rate limiting
steps in folding which immediately precede the native conformation will also be
subjects for further investigation. The information obtained from these studies
will enhance the possibility of predicting the tertiary structure of a protein
from its amino acid sequence, advance our understanding of the molecular defects
in genetically transmitted diseases, and improve our ability to alter enzymes to
improve catalytic properties.