* 9004708
* Mutagenic Activity of Drosophila Retrotransposons
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/1990,02/28/1993
* Lillie Searles, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 02/28/1993
* USD 218,900.00

Spontaneous mutation in Drosophila melanogaster are frequently caused by
insertions of retrotransposons. Mutant phenotypes result from insertions into
both coding and noncoding regions, and the mutagenic effects caused by
insertions into coding and noncoding regions are not well understood. Some
phenotypes resulting from retrotransposoninsertions can be reversed by
extrangenic suppressor and intragenic reversion mutations. The long term
objective of this study is to understand how these mobile elements disrupt the
expression of nearby genes and to elucidate the role of suppressors in
modulating the mutagenic activity of retrotransposons. A suppressible mutation
caused by insertion of the 412 element into the vermilion (v) gene of Drosophila
is being investigated. In this case, the 412 element inserted into the 5'
untranslated region of the first exon, and transposable element sequences are
almost entirely eliminated from the mature RNA by splicing at sites near the
ends of 412. Mutations at suppressor of sable (su(s)) cause increased
accumulation of nearly wild-type sized v transcripts. One objective of this
proposal is to investigate the mechanism of suppression. The proposed
experiments will define whether su(s) mutations affect transcription, RNA
stability or splicing. Other experiments will indicate whether specific 412
sequences interfere with v RNA accumulation and are required for the response to
su(s) mutations or whether interference is due to the position of the 412
insertion. A second objective is to investigate the mechanism of intragenic
reversion. In one v revertant, a second retrotransposon inserted into one end of
the 412 element, altering the splicing pattern. The proposed experiments will
ascertain whether the secondary insertion significantly improves the rate of
splicing to remove transposon sequences. If so, the effect of changes in splice
sites on the response to su(s) mutations will be determined. These goals will be
accomplished by examining levels of precursor and mature v RNA produced by in
vitro generated variants of the mutant and revertant alleles after
transformation into the Drosophila germ line.***