* 9004747
* Petrology of Mafic and Intermediate-Composition Magmas      Associated with Rhyolite Ash-flow Volcanism, Sierra Madre   Occidental
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/1990,05/31/1993
* David Wark, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 05/31/1993
* USD 37,000.00

This study addresses the role of mafic and intermediate- composition magmas in
the genesis of rhyolites at the Tomochic volcanic center (TVC), where the
stratigraphic section is the most complete and where the history of volcanism is
best documented among known eruptive centers in the Sierra Madre Occidental.
Recent field and chronologic work at the TVC has indicated that two distinct
lithologies, porphyritic two-pyroxene andesite and crystal-poor basaltic
andesite, were important components of the magma systems that fed large-volume
rhyolite ash-flow eruptions. A genetic relationship between these lithologies
and the rhyolites is allowed, but is poorly constrained, by available data. The
principal goal of this study will be to evaluate that relationship further, via:
(a)comparison and modeling of mineralogic, isotopic (Sr, Nd), and geochemical
variations among all rock types, and (b) petrologic study of hybrid post-
collapse lavas, to characterize the deep, mafic parts of the reservoir beneath
the Las Varas caldera, for comparison with extruded basaltic andesite. Results
will constrain model pertaining to the genesis of rhyolites, and of associated,
more mafic magmas, in what is considered the world's largest "rhyolite-
dominated"volcanic field. Results will also be important to models linking style
of volcanism with tectonic regime, and to our understanding of processes
associated with the evolution of large-volume subcaldera reservoirs.