* 9004111
* U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research:  The Role of Peptide       Fragments of Proteins in Folding and Assembly
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1990,12/31/1994
* George Nemethy, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 12/31/1994
* USD 16,490.00

This award will support Professor Harold Scheraga of Cornell University and
Professor George Nemethy of the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in a research
collaboration with Professor Adriana Zagari of the University of Naples, Italy.
The purpose of the collaboration is the determination of the preferred
conformations of several short peptides that form structurally and functionally
important parts of proteins. Two specific problems will be investigated. The
first problem is that of the nonhelical telopeptides of collagen. These peptides
play an important role in directing and stabilizing the particular manner of
assembly of collagen, by means of specific interactions with neighboring
molecules in aggregates. The second problem concerns several peptides that occur
in bovine pancreatic and seminal ribonucleases and have been proposed to play a
role in the folding process of these molecules. The aim of both of these
investigations is to establish the nature of the interactions of the peptides
with the rest of the protein molecule and thereby understand their role in the
folding and assembly of native proteins. Preferred conformations of the peptides
will be determined by conformational energy computations, X-ray crystallography,
and NMR and fluorescence measurements. Interatomic inter- actions between
molecules in aggregates will be modeled by energy computations. Peptide
synthesis and solution physicochemical measurements will be carried out in
Scheraga's laboratory at Cornell. Crystallization and X-ray structural
determination will be done by Zagari in Napoli. Conformational energy
computations will be carried out by all three groups, coordinated by Nemethy at
Mount Sinai. The planning of the project and the interpretation of the results
will require the combination of theoretical and experimental approaches.