* 9004191
* The Role of Calcium and the Cytoskeleton in                 Pollen Tube Growth
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1993
* James Walker, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 12/31/1993
* USD 285,000.00

Calcium ions and cytoskeleton contribute importantly to the process of pollen
tube growth. A calcium gradient located at the tip of the pollen tube may
control the fusion of incoming vesicles, while the microfilament cytoskeleton
appears to move the vesicles to the tip. The proposed project will further
explore the role these factors play in tip growth, and in addition examine the
impact of calcium ion on the cytoskeleton and vice versa. Dr. Hepler will
measure the gradient in free calcium ion using ratiometric fluorescent dyes that
have been microinjected in single pollen tubes. He will determine the
extracellular inward calcium current using a ion specific vibrating electrode.
He will explore the detailed ultrastructure of the cytoskeleton in pollen tubes
that have been prepared by rapid freeze fixation-freeze substitution. Finally,
he will identify the cytoskeletal components at the electron microscope level
using gold tagged antibodies. The above analytical methods when applied to cells
cultured under experimental conditions that block elongation through
perturbation of either the calcium ion gradient or cytoskeletal function may
provide important new information about the control of growth and polarity in
developing pollen tubes. %%% Understanding how the pollen tube of plants grows
could have important impact on plant breeding in agriculture and horticulture.