* 9004869
* Developmentoof a Unified Kinematic Theory of Combination    Serial and Parallel Mechanisms
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1991,04/30/1993
* Kenneth Waldron, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Devendra P. Garg
* 04/30/1993
* USD 160,860.00

The proposed research addresses forward and inverse position kinematics of
mechanical configurations comprising combinations of both serial and parallel
chain segments. The intent is to lay the foundations of a general theory which
will address issues of controllability and complexity of coordination
computations. This research covers a broad class of mechanisms which includes
systems as diverse as autonomous planetary rover vehicles and flexible
manufacturing systems. The study addresses the implications of different ways of
combining serial and parallel substructures for the direct and inverse position
and rate kinematics of these mechanism, and for the associated force
decomposition characteristics. Many examples of such mechanisms have already
been developed and include the multi-fingered hand with multiple independently
actuated joints in each finger, a parallel mechanism in an overall sense, but
with each limb comprising a serial chain with several actuated joints connected
in series. Some study of combined serial and parallel mechanisms has occurred,
but the topic is clearly in need of expanded research to provide for a
comprehensive theory. The theory should allow designers to make use of
combination structures in a manner which will provide improved performance over
either purely serial or purely parallel architectures.