* 9004022
* 1990 Workshop on Site-specific Recombination                and Transpostion: September 12-16, 1990, Woods Hole,        Massachusetts.
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1991
* Nancy Kleckner, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 07/31/1991
* USD 6,000.00

The purpose of this workshop is to assemble for discussions a select but
representative group of scientists who are actively working at the forefront of
research on the biochemical mechanisms used in site-specific recombination and
transposition. This interrelated group reactions lie at the heart of a number of
very important biological processes: integration of retroviruses generation of
antibody diversity, transmission of antibiotic resistance genes, rearrangement
of bacterial chromosomes and mobility of eukaryotic introns. The oral
presentations at this Workshop will emphasize the mechanistic aspects of these
recombination reactions. There is currently rapid progress in this area, and a
specialized meeting for leaders in this field should be both timely and
productive. The roster of speakers includes several scientists who have pushed
the analysis of recombination for the first time into the realm of enzyme
kinetics, as well as many scientists who have applied other types of
biochemical, genetic and topological analysis. Topics will include retroviral
integration, reactions of the integrase and resolvase families, Holliday
junctions, immunoglobulin rearrangements, prokaryotic transposable elements, and
Drosophila P elements. We are also encouraging poster presentations from
scientists working in systems which are not yet amenable to mechanistic
analysis. This should serve both to broaden the biological base of the meeting
and to encourage those working in relatively undeveloped systems to undertake a
more mechanistic approach. The meeting will be limited to 100-135 participants.
This number is sufficient to include all of the principal investigators who are
working productively in this area as well as a reasonable sampling of post-
doctoral fellows and an occasional outstanding graduate student. However, this
number is small enough that efficient interchange amongst all the participants
is still possible.