* 9004171
* Phylogenetic Relationships of Pelycosaurs
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1990,03/31/1994
* Robert Reisz, Carnegie Institute
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 03/31/1994
* USD 117,170.00

The evolution of synapsids is documented by an unusually rich fossil record,
extending over 300 million years. Primitive synapsids, the pelycosaurs, are the
most conspicuous terrestrial vertebrates of their time, and their fossil remains
record the earliest successful adaptive radiation of amniotes to a broad array
of herbivorous and predators modes of life. The PIs will undertake a thorough
reassessment of the phylogenetic relationships of pelycosaurs by combining
detailed anatomical studies of specimens with a cladistic analysis that
considers a large suite of characters. Their first hand knowledge of this group,
previous studies of numerous pelycosaur taxa, and availability of representative
specimens of three outgroups for direct osteological comparisons will eliminate
the need to rely heavily on outdated literature. In addition to providing an
assessment of the ingroup relationships of pelycosaurs, the present study will
assess the relationship of pelycosaurs to other Paleozoic vertebrates, including
their therapsid descendants. Computer algorithms that utilize cladistic
techniques will be used to analyze phylogenetic relationships. This project will
provide a solid basis for the analysis of the paleoecology and paleobiogeography
of pelycosaurs. The PIs also expect to be able to construct a macroevolutionary
model of the group and to address the perplexing problem of the origin of
amniotes (higher vertebrates that include recent reptiles, birds, and mammals).