* 9004024
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  40 Ar/39 Ar and Structural Investi-gation and Constraints for the Tectonothermal Evolution of  the Avalon Composite Terrane, SW New Brunswick
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1994
* R. David Dallmeyer, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 01/31/1994
* USD 99,884.00

The Avalon composite terrane of the northern Appalachian orogen represent a
college of tectonostratigraphic terranes that were amalgamated in the late
Precambrian, accreted as a composite terrane to North America during the early-
middle Paleozoic, and were subsequently dispersed variable distances relative to
each other. Identification of the constituent terrane elements within the
composite terrane has been controversial, their tectonothermal evolution is
uncertain, and the nature and timing of amalgamation, accretion and dispersal
are poorly constrained. This project will address these issue through a
comprehensive structural and 40Ar/39Ar geochronological study of a
representative portion of the Avalon composite terrane in southwestern New
Brunswick where recent studies have shown an important late Precambrain terrane
boundary may exist. Results of a reconnaissance 40Ar//39Ar isotopic survey
indicate that a significant contribution can be made in the proposed study area.
The project couples detailed structural mapping kinematic analysis and
petrological studies with a program of 40Ar/39Ar mineral dating designed to
resolve the region's tectonothermal evolution. The study will substantially
improve knowledge of the nature, timing and kinematics of tectonothermal events
recorded in the Avalon composite terrane and, thereby, will greatly facilitate
the identification and correlation of constituent late Precambrian terranes.