* 9004570
* Regulation of Intracardiac Shunting in Chelonians
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1990,07/01/1992
* James Hicks, Creighton University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce L. Umminger
* 07/01/1992
* USD 48,100.00

Turtles (chelonians) exhibit the remarkable ability to survive long periods
without breathing. For example during diving in aquatic turtles, breatholds for
1 to 2 hours have been observed. The organ that plays a critical role in the
turtles remarkable breatholding ability during diving is the heart. The heart of
the turtle is comprised of only 3 chambers (as compared to the 4 chambers of
mammals and humans). The unique anatomy results in the potential for the blood
returning from the body to either circulate through the lungs or to bypass the
lungs. When the blood bypasses the lungs it is referred to as a right-to-left
intracardiac shunt. Previous scientific investigations have reported that the
amount of blood bypassing the lung is often coupled with ventilatory patterns,
with the right-to-left shunt increasing during breatholding. In contrast, during
breathing the amount of blood circulating to the lungs increases and the right-
to-left shunt is reduced. While a large right-to-left shunt would produce
harmful results in mammals and humans, the ability of reptiles to bypass the
lungs may play several important roles during breatholding. These include
reducing the energy expenditure of the heart, the "metering" of oxygen from the
lung (analogous to a scuba tank) and maintaining the balance of fluids between
the lung and blood. However, the precise process by which the heart of turtles
can accomplish varying levels of blood shunting have been controversial and not
well understood. The study proposed by Dr. Hicks will utilize a combination of
sophisticated radiological techniques, blood flow measurements and injections of
tracer gases to image the heart and determine blood flow patterns through the
heart during a variety of physiological conditions. These techniques and the
experiments outlined in Dr. Hicks' proposal will determine if the process of
blood shunting results either from factors external to the heart (i.e.
regulation by the lung) or factors intrinsic to the heart to understanding the
evolutionary development of the cardiovascular system in vertebrate animals. His
elucidation of the mechanism of blood shunting in reptiles will help to answer
the question of what functional role blood shunting plays in this ancient but
important group of animals.