* 9004795
* Petrogenesis of Garnet Periodotites and Eclogites in the    Bohemian Massif, Czechoslovakia
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1992
* L. Gordon Medaris, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 12/31/1992
* USD 68,700.00

An integrated field and laboratory investigation is planned of garnet
peridotites and eclogites in the Czech portion of the Bohemian Massif, which is
the easternmost extent of the Variscan Orogen in Europe. These high-pressure
rocks occur in sequence of continental crustal rocks in the Moldanubian Zone,
which is the most internal and highly metamorphosed tectonostratigraphic unit of
the Variscan Orogen. Previous studies have demonstrated: 1) the occurrence of
two types of garnet peridotites, which exhibit different modes of origin, T-p
histories, and cooling rates, and 2) a mantle origin for Group A eclogite lenses
in peridotites, which formed by high-pressure crystal accumulation and were
carried into the crust by enclosing peridotites that were tectonically emplaced
during the Variscan Orogeny. Further isotopic investigations will be performed
on selected peridotite and ecologite samples that have already been
characterized petrologically, and integrated field, petrologic, geochemical, and
isotopic studies will be made of additional peridotite bodies and Group B
eclogite lenses in gneisses. The results should provide a basis for establishing
the timing and nature of high-pressure metamorphism in this portion of the
Variscan belt, an improve our understanding of the complexities involved in the
interaction of mantle and crust during orogenesis.