* 9004751
* Biostratigraphy, Phytogeography and Evolution of Middle     Ordovician-Earlier Silurian Land Plants Based on their      Spores
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1990,11/01/1990
* Jane Gray, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Felicia Fauntleroy
* 11/01/1990
* USD 1,609.00

Mid-Ordovician/Early Silurian land plant spores can contribute to the
resolution of two important problems. Land plant spores provide the only
entrance into terrestrial and fresh H2O environments in this interval of
Phanerozoic time. The research described in this proposal is the first to
attempt to establish a Late Ordovician/Early Silurian nonmarine biostratigraphy
and phytogeography. Throughout the post-Silurian Phanerozoic, land plant
spores/pollen have proved vital in stratigraphic zonation of nonmarine and
shallow-water, nearshore marine rocks. Only local attempts have been made to
extend spore biostratigraphy into the Late Silurian, and none effectively into
the pre-Late Silurian. It now appears possible to establish a continuous
biostratigraphy for shallow-water nearshore marine and nonmarine rocks from the
mid-Ordovician to the Devonian. This will be the first zonation possible for
nonmarine rocks; it will also provide the only precise means of correlating
shallow-water, nearshore, Late Ordovician-Silurian strata since marine
invertebrates/organic microfossils are absent or not presently
biostratigraphically useful in the nearshore facies. Equally important is the
fact that the spore-producing plants represent a hitherto unknown group of land
plants that placed an important source of vegetation into continental habitats
well before the traditional Early Devonian benchmark commonly considered to mark
the major, initial radiation of the tracheophytes.