* 9004376
* Comparison of GPS and Historical Triangulation Data for     Mapping Crustal Strain Across the Great Sumatran Fault      System
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1991,02/28/1993
* Yehuda Bock, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 02/28/1993
* USD 50,000.00

This proposal is to support a graduate student for two years to thoroughly
research the Indonesian geodetic archives of the Dutch period in West Java and
the archives of the Netherlands Geodetic Commission in Delft, and to perform a
strain analysis across the Great Sumatran Fault System using historical
triangulation data located in these archives and ongoing GPS measurements. This
work will be coordinated with two Indonesian colleagues who will also be using
the triangulation and GPS data as part of their doctoral studies. These data
will provide important constraints on the decoupling of oblique convergence west
of Sumatra into subduction normal to the margin between the Indian-Australian
and Eurasian plates and right-lateral faulting parallel to it. Specifically,
this comparison will enable us to measure horizontal strain rates both along the
Sumatran fault to outline sections of differing fault behavior and far from the
"fault, in the southwest to constrain the partitioning os shear" "throughout the
forearc, and in the northeast to study the accumulation of elastic strain across
the Sumatran Fault system. In addition, these data will provide valuable
information on earthquake-and fault-related processes in this very seismically
active region. These data are particularly valuable since the Dutch often
resurveyed parts of the triangulation network after earthquakes.