* 9004735
* RUI: Glycosidase Release and the Block to Polyspermy in     Ascidian Eggs
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1995
* Charles Lambert, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 12/31/1995
* USD 200,826.00

Dr.Lambert and Dr.Goode will study a block to polyspermy in the Ascidian egg.
According to their model, the sperm bind to glycosides on the vitelline coat of
the egg. An increase in the number of sperm binding to the vitelline coat is
followed by a rapid decline. This decline in binding helps insure that only a
single sperm enters the egg. Sperm binding is inhibited by the Na+-dependent
release of a glycosidase that modifies the vitelline coat sperm receptors. They
hypothesize that the glycosidase is initially linked to the egg membrane and is
rapidly discharged at fertilization. The fact that detergents and Phospholipase
C can free the enzyme from the unfertilized egg suggest that the enzyme is
linked to a membrane phospholipid. Their model includes linkage of the
glycosidase to a phosphatidylcholine and the Na+-dependent activation of a
phospholipase that causes enzyme release. The glycosidase and phospholipase will
be isolated and extensively characterized. Antibodies will be prepared to both
proteins for ultrastructural enzyme localization. The mechanism of release will
be probed through the use of phospholipase agonists and antagonists and also
through the direct measurement of phospholipase activity in unfertilized and
fertilized eggs. The role of G proteins and ions in Ascidian egg activation will
also be probed. %%% Although millions of sperm are produced for each egg, if
more than a single sperm enters the egg,cleavage is grossly abnormal and death
is inevitable. As a consequence, blocking the entry of additional sperm is of
critical importance to fertility. Dr.Lambert and Dr. Goode will further the
understanding of this phenomenon by studying the molecular details of sperm
entry and blocking in the Ascidian system.