* 9004218
* Dependence of Fission Track Annealing Kinetics on           Crystallographic Orientation and Crystal Chemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1991
* Donald Miller, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 11/30/1991
* USD 45,000.00

The PIs have developed and tested a method whereby the mean etchable fission
track (FT) lengths parallel and perpendicular to the crystallographic c-axis in
apatite may be precisely determined. The lengths so determined differ for a
single population of FTs (parallel tracks > perpendicular) but, because of their
equivalent thermal histories, they are defined as "equivalent lengths". The PIs
plane to use this new method to determine whether the physical process of FT
annealing in apatite varies with crystallographic orientation or whether we are
observing experimental artifacts due to anisotropic etching. Similarly, they
will determine whether the FT annealing process varies with crystal chemistry
(e.g. Cl-rich track lengths> F- rich) or whether this is also an etching
phenomenon. The method proposed, in order to address these questions and to
better calibrate this important thermochronometer, is a series of isochronal
laboratory annealing experiments (ranging from O.3- 1OOOO hours and 23-400oC).
Specifically, they will investigate: 1) the correlation of observed FT length
anisotropy with etching anisotropy in apatite, 2) the variation of mean etchable
FT length with time, temperature and crystallographic orientation for a range of
apatite compositions ;(F-, Cl-, OH-, and Mn-rich) at low temperature (23oC) and
elevated temperatures, 3) how activation energy for FT annealing varies a) with
mean FT length at fixed orientation, b) between equivalent lengths, and c) with
host crystal chemistry, 4) the relationship of the above results with currently
published results (Galbraith and Laslett, 1988) relating the dependence of FT
density (tracks/unit area) to the mean etchable FT length. These new data will
then be used to derive a mathematical expression relating the "equivalent
length" to the time- temperature (t-T) history of the apatite. This new
expression should result in a significant improvement in estimates of t-T paths
experienced by geologic samples.