* 9004139
* Biochemical Characterization of the 2-5A Synthetase/RNase L Pathway by 2',5'-Phosphorothioate and Affinity Probes
* BIO,MCB
* 11/15/1990,10/31/1995
* Robert Suhadolnik, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Valerie W. Hu
* 10/31/1995
* USD 246,000.00

The research proposed focusses on the biochemical characterization of
nucleotide-protein interactions required for maintenance of the 2-5A
synthetase/RNase L pathway, a vital process in cellular antiviral defense. RNase
L is distinctive among nucleases in its dependence on 2- 5A for activation and
cleavage specificity at uridylate residues. The molecular mechanism of 2-5A in
the binding and activation of RNase L will be examined. To this end, The Pi
chemically synthesized a new class of metabolically stable agonists and
antagonists of 2-5A to study the biochemical processes for RNA hydrolysis in
vitro and in vivo. Transmembrane passage of the 2', 5`-phosphorothioates into
virus infected cells will be accomplished by poly(L-lysine) conjugation and the
effect of these probes on the stability of viral and cellular mRNA will be
measured. In addition, experiments are designed to examine (i) the order of
addition of the substrate and allosteric activator to RNase L needed for
productive complex formation, (ii) the requirement for complementary base
pairing between 2-5A and RNA for RNase L activation, and (iii) the contribution
of each 2', 5'- phosphodiester bond in 2-5A to the binding and activation
processes of RNase L. Finally, mono- and bifunctional nucleotide site-directed
affinity labels have been synthesized to study the acceptor and 2' -adenylation
sites of recombinant 40 kDA, homogeneously pure 100 kDa and 110 kDa 2-5A
synthetases, the ATP binding site of protein kinase, and the 2-5A binding site
of RNase L.