* 9004790
* Dynamics of the 1902 Eruptions of Montagne Pelee Determined from Size, Shape, and Textures of Vitric Pyroclasts
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Stanley Williams, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 12/31/1992
* USD 45,000.00

This project will investigate juvenile glassy tephra from the nuee-ardente
deposits produced the cataclysmic eruptions on Montagne Pelee in 1902, as a
basis for interpretation of the role of hydrovolcanism in the eruption dynamics
of this cycle of activity. The research is undertaken specifically to provide
sharper insights into the physical processes responsible for such large and
devastating explosive eruptions. Electron microprobe (EMP), scanning electron
microscope (SEM), image analysis, and size distribution analysis will be the
main techniques used to investigate tephra deposits left by the passage of
successive nuees ardentes or sediment gravity flows in the vicinity of St.
Pierre, Martinique. Internal and surficial textural information observed on
juvenile vitric fragments from the nuee ardente deposits will shed light on (1)
processes of magma vesiculavesiculation and fragmentamentation as a result of
sion of juvenile magmatic volatiles; (2) the role and timing of hydromagmatism
during the eruption; (3) the genesis of nuee ardentes; and (4) the mechanics of
particle-particle interaction during transtransport and deposition of nuee-
ardente tephra. Grain size distribution analysis using the new model of
sequential fragmentation and transport will allow the identification of maturity
of fragmentation and transportation processes to be evaluated for various parts
of the nuees at various distances from the source. This information should be
extremely useful in the evaluation of volcanic hazards at volcanoes with a
history of large expolosions such as those of Montagne Pelee.