* 9004461
* PRF/M:  Molecular Evolutionary Systematics
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1992
* Lowell Urbatsch, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Scott L. Collins
* 01/31/1992
* USD 38,600.00

The Mid-Career Fellowship will provide the PI with the opportunity to learn the
methodology of molecular evolutionary systematics. The PI will work in the
laboratory of Dr. Robert K. Jansen, University of Connecticut to learn the
methods of restriction site mapping of chloroplast and nuclear ribosomal DNA for
phylogeny reconstruction. Procedures to be learned include DNA extraction,
restriction endonuclease digestions, gel electrophoresis, filter hybridizations
and the maintenance of clone banks. Familiarity with the appropriate literature
and with the methodology of restriction site mapping and phylogenetic analysis
of restriction site data will be accomplished. The organisms to investigated
include the coneflower genera Dracopis, Echinacea, Ratibida, and Rudbeckia and
probable related genera in Asteraceae tribe Heliantheae. The objectives of the
investigations, in addition to the training aspects, are to solve the status of
problematic taxa within genera, achieve phylogenetic insights among species and
genera of the study organisms, and determine the affinities of the coneflowers
with other genera of the Heliantheae. Dr. Jansen is the leading authority on the
evolutionary systematics of the Asteraceae and the PI will also have the
opportunity to collaborate with Dr. KI- Joong Kim who has done considerable work
on the tribe Heliantheae.