* 9004147
* The Bell Island Pluton, S.E. Alaska:  Paleomagnetic         Analysis of a Tilted Pluton
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/1990,10/31/1991
* Robert Butler, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 10/31/1991
* USD 34,922.00

Discordant Cretaceous paleomagnetic directions observed in plutons of the North
Cascades and the Coast Mountains Batholith indicate major tectonic disturbance
subsequent to magnetization. Several lines of geological evidence suggest that
consistent and large-scale tilting has affected intrusive rocks of this Mesozoic
plutonic welt along the western margin of North America from the North Cascades
to southeast Alaska. This may be a fundamental tectonic process the scope of
which has not been previously appreciated. The Bell Island pluton is a 90 Ma
pluton on the western flank of the Coast Mountain Batholith north of Ketchikan
in southeast Alaska. Extensive structural, petrologic, and isotopic data
indicate that the Bell Island pluton experienced 25o of northeast-side-up
tilting in the 90 Ma to 50 Ma interval. This pluton provides an excellent
opportunity to study the paleomagnetic and geologic record resulting from
tilting of a large panel of crust and the tectonic processes involved in
regional-scale tilting. This study is a combined geologic and paleomagnetic
investigation along a southwest to northeast transect across the Bell Island
pluton. The research could provide crucial information towards: (1) resolution
of the northwards transport - versus - crustal tilting debate regarding
discordant Cretaceous paleomagnetic directions (and therefore determination of a
Cretaceous paleogeography for North America); and (2) determination of the
importance of tilting of crustal panels in the tectonic evolution of North
America.