* 9004662
* Science in Developing Countries Workshop on Modern Light    Microscopy and Video Analysis, Mendoza, Argentina,          Nov. 12-18, 1990
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1992
* Shinya Inoue, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 08/31/1992
* USD 17,420.00

This award supports an international workshop on modern light microscopy to be
held in Mendoza, Argentina from November 12- 18, 1990. The U.S. organizer is Dr.
Shinya Inoue of the Woods Hole Marine Biological Laboratory in Massachusetts.
His Argentinean counterpart is Dr. Mario Burgos of the National University of
Cuyo in Mendoza. The speakers consist of four experienced microscopists from
each country, the U.S. and Argentina. Video microscopy is a powerful tool for
biology, medicine and materials science. For this reason, this workshop assumes
greater importance than just discussions of equipment or techniques. The three
general areas to be covered are: (A) foundations of light microscopy, including
analysis of image resolution and contrast, impact of illumination, and
principles and applications of phase contrast, differential interference
contrast, polarization microscopy, confocal imaging, and optical sectioning; (B)
fluorescence microscopy, including target-specific probes, instruments, and
ratio imaging; and (C) video microscopy and digital image processing and
analysis, including video principles, contrast and feature enhancement, noise
integra- tion, and examples of applications. The workshop will bring together
Latin American and U.S. scientists to explore future collaborations. Also they
will share with academic and industrial investigators, including advanced
graduate students in Latin America, the forefronts of this emerging field in
order to encourage applications in research. The mornings will generally be
devoted to lectures and discussions, and the afternoons to laboratory demonstra-
tions with extensive opportunities for hands-on experience with modern optical
and video equipment. The lecturers are well-experienced, having participated in
similar workshops before at the Marine Biological Laboratory, in Woods Hole,
Massachusetts.