* 9004643
* U.S.-U.S.S.R. Exploratory Visit Concerning Baikal Drilling Project (Pirkutsk, USSR; January 8-13, 1990)
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1991,05/15/1991
* Douglas Williams, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Gerson Sher
* 05/15/1991
* USD 0.00

The purpose of this travel award is to allow Dr. Douglas F. Williams to continue
the dialogue with the Soviet Academy of Sciences (SAS) and USSR Ministry of
Geology (MINGEO) about a program for long-term research of Lake Baikal as it
relates to global climate change, biogeochemical cycles, continental rifting and
geophysics, and joint US-USSR continental scientific drilling. This would build
directly on earlier discussions about a possible Baikal Drilling Project (BDP)
held at the University of South Carolina in July 1989 and at Yaroslavl, Moscow
and Irkutsk in August 1989. Dr. Williams would also be able to discuss with his
Soviet counterparts the results of the first processing by US geophysicists of
Soviet geophysical multi- channel seismic (MCS) data from Lake Baikal, collected
by the Institute of Oceanology (Moscow) in the summer of 1989. That would be
particularly important because is shows real progress in the step-wise process
of initiating US-USSR basic geoscience research on Lake Baikal. This project
fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling
leading researchers in the United States and the U.S.S.R. to combine
complementary efforts and capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and
competence in the field of basic scientific research on the basis of equality,
reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.