* 9004064
* Dissertation Research:  Paleonutrition of the Lower Pecos   Region
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/1990,04/30/1991
* NONE NONE, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 04/30/1991
* USD 7,960.00

Under the direction of Dr. Vaughn Bryant, Ms. Kristin Sobolik will analyze
archaeological materials and comparative samples which will provide the basis
for her doctoral dissertation. The project focuses on the subsistence adaptation
of Archaic peoples, early hunters and gatherers, who lived in the Lower Pecos
Region (Texas) of the Chihuahuan Desert. It utilizes two approaches. Ms. Sobolik
will visit this research area in each of the four major seasons and conduct
biological surveys to determine the types and the densities of resources
available. She will also collect samples which will provide a comparative base
for the identification of archaeological materials. Secondly, she will examine
archaeological remains, stored at the Texas Archaeological Research Laboratories
in Austin, from a number of Pecos sites. She will combine the results of faunal,
floral, and coprolite analyses with data drawn from skeletal studies of
prehistoric inhabitants to delineate Archaic subsistence patterns and draw
inferences about paleodiet. The archaeological sites in the Lower Pecos region
are of interest for several reasons. First, although a large number have been
carefully excavated over the last several decades, much of the material has not
been analyzed. This is unfortunate because in this desert region preservation is
excellent. Plant remains which can serve both to reconstruct diet and
environment are abundant and such situations are rare. The archaeology of the
region is also important because the long prehistoric record documents how
technologically simple populations adapted to and survived in a harsh and
variable desert environment. Ms. Sobolik's research will synthesize a broad
range of data from a number of sites. This project is important for several
other reasons as well. Methodologically it is valuable because it explores how
very diverse data sets may be drawn together and analyzed to yield nutritional
information. If successful it will provide a model which may be applied in other
regions of the world. The work will also assist in the training of an extremely
promising young scientist.