* 9004057
* Evolution of Miocene Fluvial Environments in Northern       Pakistan
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1992
* John Bridge, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Felicia Fauntleroy
* 06/30/1992
* USD 90,000.00

Research wil continue on the fluvial, Miocene Siwalik deposits of the Potwar
Plateau in northern Pakistan. This involves construction of detailed
sedimentological logs through the Chinji, Magri and Shok Pathan formations
formations in several different parts of the basin where there is paleomagnetic
age dating. Several important 50 to 100 m thick stratigraphic intervals in each
measured sequence will be detailed sedimentologically and paleontologically over
several km laterally, using photo mosaics and closely-spaced (100 m) logs.
Paleosol carbonates will be sampled for Carbon isotope analysis. This will allow
us to reconstruct the temporally and spatially varying paleoenvironments in
terms of paleochannel geometry and hydraulics, nature of paleosols, animal and
plant activity and deposition rates. Particular attention will be paid to: (1)
the upper Shok Pathan Formation (6mpBP) where there is evidence for a major
climatic, vegetational and faunal change and (2) the Chinji-Nagri transition (10
m.y.B.P.) where there is evidence of a major faunal turnover, increasing
depositional rates, increasing proportion and grain size of channel deposits,
and increasing channel size, but no evidence of a climatic change. It will then
be possible to understand an important period of evolution of land organisms in
relation to changes in the physical and chemical environment. This study will
also have more general implications for the relationship between fluvial
deposits (and the fossils they contain), tectonism and climate.