* 9004085
* RUI:  Biochemistry of Nitrogen-limited Growth of Wood             Decaying Fungi
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1994
* Walt Lilly, Southeast Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Uffen
* 01/31/1994
* USD 138,000.00

This research elucidates mechanisms of sustained mycelial growth of the wood-
decaying fungus, Schizophyllum commune. The first phase of the project involves
characterization of proteolytic enzyme systems involved in intramycelial protein
turnover and recycling during nitrogen-limited growth. This problem is being
addressed by purifying several proteases found in control and nitrogen-starved
colonies. Subsequent classification of these enzymes is being based on
biochemical characteristics, substrate and inhibitor specificity, and
subcellular localization. An investigation for potential ubiquitin-mediated
proteolysis also is being performed. The second phase provides initial data for
studying the regulation of the nitrogen-stress response. Antibodies are being
generated to specific proteases which are differentially expressed. These
antibodies are to be used to assess levels of expression during nitrogen-stress
and to analyze mutants for deficiencies in specific protease production. In vivo
and in vitro translation products for control and nitrogen- stressed colonies
are being analyzed. In addition, the potential for using heterologous cDNA
probes for some specific protease messages is being investigated. This project
complements other Schizophyllum research and provides a fungal system in which
nutrient-stress related autolysis can be studied in the absence of sexual
differentiation. Schizophyllum commune is a model system for studying biological
processes in basidiomycetes and other fungi. Because it is a wood-decayer in
nature, results from the proposed research should lead to a better understanding
of other, more economically important wood-decaying fungi. Such fungi are of
interest either because of their capability to destroy wood building materials
or for their potential in biomass conversion of agricultural waste materials. It
is thought that nitrogen is the limiting factor in the natural growth substrate
for wood-decayers, thus our understanding of nitrogen nutrition of these
organisms may lead to better methods for their control in the first instance or
better methods and/or genetically engineered strains for cultivation in the
latter.