* 9004498
* The LHRH System and Reproductive Function
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1993
* Joan King, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 12/31/1993
* USD 319,161.00

Fertility depends upon timely ovulation, which is induced by a pituitary
hormone, gonadotropin, the secretion of which is, in turn, controlled by a
releasing hormone synthesized in the hypothalamus. The neurons which synthesize
this releasing hormone, Luteinizing hormone relcasing hormone ıLHRH!, are
dispersed as individual cells or small clusters of cells across a broad region
of the base of the brain. Apparently diffuse, the positioning of these LHRH
neurons may be exquisitely regulated to facilitate integration of multiple
internal and external factors to synchronize secretion and optimize reproductive
success. Previous experiments using computer-assisted visualization techniques
indicate that this group of neurons is composed of diverse subgroups. Using
specialized staining procedures, i.e. immunocytochemistry, together with
automated computerized visualization techniques, Dr. King will examine the
hypotheses that: ı1! activity is enhanced in a "core" subgroup of neurons in
relation to the LH surge, using a marker protein ıc-fos! as an indicator
metabolic/secretory activity; ı2! the pattern of neural input to the diverse
subgroups of LHRH neurons differ, using tracing techniques and specialized
staining techniques to identify the transmitters involved; and finally ı3! a
"core" subgroup controls the activity of other subgroups. These studies will
yield important insights into the mechanisms that control this critical system
of neurons.