* 9004843
* Debris-Flow Fans
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1990,08/31/1993
* Thomas Dunne, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 08/31/1993
* USD 159,166.00

Debris flows pose a hazard to lives and structures in mountain communities
throughout the world. Motivated by the need to enhance prediction and
mitigation, research projects, particularly in the U.S. and Japan, have produced
wealth of information on initiation and dynamics of debris flows. By comparison,
little research has been devoted to understanding debris flows in the
environment where their hazard potential is most serious: i.e., on debris-flow
fans. Debris-flow fans form a significant portion of the landscape and aside
from concerns about hazards, the dearth of rigorous studies of the processes
forming debris-flow fans represents a basic lack of scientific knowledge about a
major landform of Earth's surface. The proposed research will address the
mechanics of formation of debris-flow fans. The study complements on-going
debris-flow monitoring programs in this country and in East Asia in that we will
develop a methodology for interpreting the vast amounts of information on debris
flows and fan formation stored in the debris-flow deposits themselves. Our
approach considers the processes of, and controls on, debris-flow initiation,
conveyance, and interaction with the channels of the fan surface, starting with
the lithologic and climatic conditions in the source area and their influence on
flow mobility, volume, and frequency of occurrence. The approach is a general
one, applicable in a range of environments, and not limited to the specific
conditions in the chosen field study site: Owens Valley, CA. The model will be
built around an rheological description of debris-flow dynamics and will be
based on field and laboratory data.