* 9004719
* Mechanisms of Mitochondrial Distribution in Mitosis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1993
* Michael Yaffe, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/1993
* USD 288,784.00

The distribution of mitochondria and other subcellular organelles during cell
division is an essential process for the proliferation of eukaryotic cells, yet
the mechanisms facilitating and controlling this process are unknown. The goal
of this study is to analyze the molecular basis for the distribution of
mitochondria during mitosis. A primary aim is to identify proteins and
subcellular structures which mediate this transport process. A second goal is to
characterize the specific roles of these components in intracellular
mitochondrial movements. A long-term objective is to understand how the
distribution of mitochondria and other organelles is coordinated with other
essential events of the cell division cycle. Mechanisms that distribute
mitochondria during mitosis will be studied using a combined biochemical and
genetic approach. This approach will focus on a characterization of mutant cells
of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae which are defective in the segreation of
mitochondria. These mutants, which were isolated previously, first will be
analyzed morphologically to examine the effect of the mutations on cellular
structures and events of the cell cycle. The mutants will be used next to clone
genes that encode components which facilitate mitochondrial distribution, and
information from gene analysis will guide the production of antisera against the
gene products. These antibodies will be used to identify and localize the
proteins, and to examine changes in cellular distribution of the proteins during
the cell cycle. Binding studies will be employed to characterize the interaction
of these MDM (mitochondrial distribution and morphology) proteins with
mitochondria or other subcellular structures. In a latter stage on the
investigation, additional components that interact with MDM proteins will be
identified by both biochemical and genetic approaches, and the function of these
new components will be examined. Additionally, proteins that mediate
mitochondrial movement will be investigated in cells that divide by a different
mitotic pattern, fission. These studies of mitochondiral movement should reveal
new details of cellular organization and cell division, and provide a foundation
for understanding the changes in cellular structure that accompany
differentiation.