* 9004960
* Structural Homology of Plant Enzymes Degrading S-SubstitutedCysteines
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1993
* Mendel Mazelis, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/1993
* USD 95,000.00

A number of S-substituted cysteines are major constituents of the non-protein
amino acid pool in species of genera which are widely-separated taxonomically.
Enzymes are present which act as C-S lyases and by a beta-elimination reaction
yield, in many cases, the characteristic odors and flavors of those plants used
as food. In addition the garlic and onion enzymes are of particular interest
because the products produced also appear to have marked effects in a number of
medical applications. There is one C-S lyase which is present in all autotrophic
plants. This is cystathionine-beta-lyase (EC 4.4.1.8) which is required in the
biosynthetic pathway of methionine. The other C-S lyases studied to date do not
utilize cystathionine as a substrate or do so very poorly. This proposal
clarifies the evolutionary relationships among various C-S lyases that have been
purified to homogeneity by determining the structural homologies which exist in
the protein molecules. Typical examples of each type of lyase have been obtained
in a homogeneous state and by the use of peptide mapping and immunological
cross-reactions, the homologous regions, if any, are being determined. The
active site peptide should be distinguished from the others because of the
pyridoxal- 5'-phosphate bound as the secondary amine after reduction. Studying
the conservation of protein structure among proteins with similar functions in
different organisms has been one approach to elucidate evolutionary origins and
relationships. This project examines the degree of relatedness of a group of
enzymes limited to a few widely-divergent plant families whose substrates are
S-substituted cysteines, which are common secondary metabolites in these
families. Determining the evolutionary relationship between these enzymes is
important both agriculturally and medically. There is considerable commercial
interest in these enzymes in several species such as garlic, onion and broccoli
because of their relationship to the characteristic flavors and odors associated
with these vegetables. Furthermore, the products resulting from these enzymes
have potential medical applications and have aroused pharmaceutical interest.