* 9004170
* RUI: Reactivation of the Sperm Nucleus at Fertilization
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1994
* Dominic Poccia, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 08/31/1994
* USD 261,760.00

This proposal will test two working models which explain the relationship
between phosphorylation of the two sperm specific basic nuclear proteins (Sp
histones) of the sea urchin, chromatin structural alterations and male nuclear
decondensation. The first model postulates that the phosphorylation of specific
tetrapeptide sites in these proteins alters physical properties such as thermal
stability, nuclease accessibility, average nucleosomal repeat length and histone
DNA binding affinities that reveal how the histones and DNA are arranged. The
experiments are designed to assess the contribution of each Sp histone
separately. Measurements will be made on chromatin reconstituted from purified
histones and DNA in the absence of complicating factors present in the living
cell. The results will elucidate some of the alterations on first order
chromatin structure observed in vivo. The second model addresses the potential
consequences of Sp histone phosphorylation upon male chromatin decondensation
and postulates at least two requirements for decondensation: phosphorylation and
activation of a factor(s) sensitive to the drug 6-dimethylaminopurine. Using
microinjection of condensed nuclei differing in their degree of phosphorylation,
several factors will be evaluated including the role of Sp histone
phosphorylation in decondensation, and the role of other metabolic activities.
The factors absent in immature oocytes will be investigated, and an assay will
be developed for the decondensation factor(s) which are sensitive to the drug.
The consequences of phosphorylation at the specific tetrapeptide sites are
unlikely to be restricted to sea urchin male germ cells. Similar sites are known
in most H1 histones and in several nucleic acid packaging proteins and
regulators, emphasizing the general importance of studying their
phosphorylation. %%% The long term objective of this research is an
understanding of the inactivation/activation of the sperm nucleus which occurs
during spermatogenesis and following fertilization. The successful genetic
reactivation of the dormant sperm nucleus by egg cytoplasm, following
fertilization, is essential to successful biparental embryonic development.