* 9004812
* Collaborative Research:  Magmatism of the Baikal Rift, USSR:Asthenospheric Upwelling Along a Lithospheric Boundary
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1992
* Michael Dungan, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 07/31/1992
* USD 30,000.00

We propose to advance the Baikal project by concentrating on characterization of
the 150 samples currently in hand. No travel to the USSR is planned under the
aegis of 1990-91 funding. If results of our analytical work warrant additional
field studies and collecting, we will formulate a new proposal based on these
results. The SMU portion of the project will focus on obtaining K-Ar dates, and
on mineral chemistry. The new dates are essential, because we intend to evaluate
the geochemical variations among lavas in a temporal-spatial framework. We have
found the Soviet dates to be completely unreliable. I will contract for
approximately 20 dates on whole-rock basalt samples. As the whole-rock
geochemistry and isotopic analyses will be done at Washington University, it is
appropriate that the mineral chemistry work be done at SMU. I will perform
microprobe analyses of phenocrysts, xenocrysts, and xenoliths. The budget
includes funds for travel to St. Louis in order to allow us to get together
after the sample characterization phase, integrate our data, and arrive at
interpretations of the results. Dr. Sergey Rasskazov, with whom we are
collaborating, has been invited to spend a month in the laboratories of Luhr and
Bowring during late 1990 in order to maintain project momentum and facilitate
cooperation.