* 9004492
* Calibration of the Radiocarbon Time Scale
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1994
* Minze Stuiver, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1994
* USD 300,004.00

This research permits Dr. Minze Stuiver, together with colleagues from other
laboratories, to conduct radiocarbon determinations on a series of German and
Irish oak trees, which date from between ca. 5,000 and 8,000 B.C. The absolute
ages of tree rings within this sample are independently determined through the
construction of an annual ring chronology which starts at the present and works
back into the past. With these new determinations, Dr. Stuiver will construct a
series of calibrations which will allow the accurate conversion of radio carbon
years into true age. Although the two are closely correlated they are not
identical. Using this technique calibrations have been established from the
present back to 5,000 B.C., and this project will extend this by approximately
another 3,000 years. Because of the complicated relationship between
"radiocarbon age" and "true age," sometimes materials with different true ages
can give the same radiocarbon age. At some radiocarbon ages, the possible range
of true ages can be smaller and at others larger. For archaeologists these
discrepancies can be extremely important when comparisons are made from one
culture area to another. For the more recent period, Dr. Stuiver's calibration
curve allows one to correct for this, and it is important that this be extended
further back in time. This research is important not only to archaeologists but
to astronomers and geophysicists, since the data provides information about
changes in both solar radiation and in the earth's magnetic field.