* 9004300
* Experimental Models for Hydrodynamic Transport of Conodonts (Chordata) in Shallow Marine Environments
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1992
* Thomas Broadhead, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Felicia Fauntleroy
* 12/31/1992
* USD 47,000.00

Conodonts have been utilized, especially during the last 50 years, as principal
biologic indices of geologic age. Paleoecologic interpretations of observed
distributions have been attributed largely to life habits of conodont animals,
and only general mention has been made of the potential for post-mortem
disruption of death assemblages. The effects of post-mortem transport processes
on distributions of conodont elements in shallow-marine carbonate environments
will be investigated by means of laboratory settling and flume experiments.
Because of the highly variable sizes and shapes of these phosphatic grains,
significant differences exist in terminal settling velocity in a static fluid
and are suggested for (1) critical conditions (mean flow velocity) for
initiation of movement, (2) transport within migrating small bedforms, (3)
differential sorting of elements along a transport path, and (4) amount of
breakage during fluid transport. These hydrodynamic differences are extremely
important because they would have strongly influenced the distribution of
discrete conodont elements, particularly in moderate to high energy regimes.
Quantification of these factors can then be used to constrain the paleoecologic
interpretation of preserved assemblages of conodonts in peritidal carbonate
rocks. This will permit a quantitative approach to determining the amount of
post-mortem transport experienced by conodont elements prior to their burial and
will also allow for direct statistical comparison of the composition of
different samples, when taphonomic effects are factored. Quantification of post-
mortem transport broadly enhances the interpretation of biostratigraphic and
paleoenvironmental data of conodonts, with implications for the study of other
skeletal allochems, by providing models for the interpretation of physical
environmental processes that played a major role in the formation of
fossiliferous deposits.