* 9004449
* Developmental Genetics of the Pituitary Gland
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/1990,08/31/1993
* Ric Lloyd, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 08/31/1993
* USD 170,000.00

There are two mouse dwarfing mutations that provide good models for studying
the basis for induction of tissue specific transcription during embryogenesis.
Both mutants lack the three pituitary cell types which produce prolactin, growth
hormone, and thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH). The similarity of the mutant
phenotypes suggests that the three missing cell types may derive from a common
precursor cell and that at least two genes are involved in this differentiation
pathway. Classical genetic and molecular biology will clarify how the affected
genes normally interact and whether they have overlapping functions.
Specifically, double heterozygotes and double mutants will be produced and the
phenotypes characterized in terms of neurological, development, immune
dysfunction and ablation of additional pituitary cell types. An intersubspecific
backcross will be used to screen candidate genes for linkage to the Ames dwarf
mutation (df) on chromosome 11 and for fine mapping of the df gene. Closely
linked molecular probes will be used to generate a long range map of the df
region using pulsed field gel electrophoresis. The df mutant was generated by
X-irradiation, therefore the long range map may reveal evidence for a deletion
or rearrangement, which would facilitate locating and subsequent cloning of the
df gene. Linked molecular probes will be used to screen a yeast artificial
chromosome (YAC) library of the mouse. Pituitary cDNA and cross species homology
will be used to identify the df gene within the YACs. Identification of the
mutant gene by reverse genetics will clarify the basis for the failure of
progenitor cells to differentiate into hormone producing cells and expand our
understanding of the basic cellular commitment process. %%% The anterior
pituitary is composed of a number of cell types, each specialized in the
synthesis and secretion of different hormones. This study will determine if the
products of genes essential for the development of the specific cell types act
independently in each cell or whether their expression affects the development
of neighbor cells.