* 9005614
* Molecular Features of the Colchicine Site on Tublin
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1994
* Susan Bane, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 07/31/1994
* USD 286,000.00

One of the characteristic properties of tubulin, a 100 kdal protein comprising
the central core of microtubules, is its ability to bind colchicine, an alkaloid
isolated from the Autumn crocus. Colchicine binding to tubulin results in
substoichiometric inhibition of tubulin polymerization and subsequent disruption
of microtubule-mediated processes. The ubiquity and specificity of colchicine
binding activity in higher eukaryotes implicates the colchicine binding site as
having a possible role in the in vivo regulation of microtubule assembly. In
order to confirm or deny the validity of this proposition, the interactions
between tubulin and ligands binding to the colchicine site must first be
understood. The location and sequence of the colchicine site on tubulin will be
found using several novel photoaffinity labeling derivatives of colchicine in
which the photolabile groups are situated very close to the interior of the
binding site. This approach is innovative in that it is designed to identify
peptides in the individual subdomains of the binding site. The unique
spectroscopic properties of colchicine bound to tubulin have led the PI to
propose that ligands bound to tubulin are engaged in a pi-stacking interaction
with a tryptophan in the binding site. Associations of this type are known to
occur between single-stranded DNA binding proteins and nucleic acids but have
not yet been observed between a small molecule and a protein. Dr. Hastie will
use the method of optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) to directly
examine the effect of ligand binding on tubulin tryptophan(s). By employing
heavy atom derivatives of the ligands, she intends to determine which aromatic
ring of the ligand is stacking with the tryptophan. Kinetic and equilibrium
parameters of selected ligands binding to tubulin will be determined in order to
test a unified mechanism that explains how ligands which are structurally
diverse bind to the protein at a single site. This information coupled with the
photoaffinity labeling and ODMR results, will be used to construct a low
resolution map of the receptor site.