* 9005801
* International Conference on Pholoem Transport and           Assimilate Compartmentation: Cognac, France; August 19 - 24,1990.
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1991
* William Lucas, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Bruce L. Umminger
* 06/30/1991
* USD 7,540.00

This proposal requests funds to help pay international travel and accommodation
costs of North American scientists participating in the Fourth International
Conference on Phloem Transport and Assimilate Compartmentation. The conference
will be held in Cognac, France from August 19 through 24, 1990. Scientists will
focus on the specific processes that are involved in orchestrating the
development of the long-distance transport system of the plant (the phloem in
particular) and form a framework for the integration of events from the
cellular, tissue and whole plant level. The last conference in this series, held
at Asilomar, California, focussed on the controversies surrounding the
interpretation of experimental data. Since then, the emergence of plant
molecular biology has provided new avenues by which to study the phloem and
these approaches will be presented for discussion at the Cognac meeting. In
addition, the program is designed to integrate structural, physiological and
biophysical studies in a manner that should potentiate conceptual and
experimental advances. The format of the Cognac meeting has been designed to
allow those who attend to be exposed to related areas of translocation. The
meeting will be a true "workshop" in that the program contains a balance of
invited special lectures, formal group discussions on predetermined topics,
group discussions on topics identified by conference participants as being in
need of research focus (so called trouble spots), review periods during which
the international representatives from each country will discuss strategies that
will foster and encourage the coordination of research efforts in this important
area of plant biology.