* 9005421
* Iron Uptake and Metabolism in the Bradyrhizobium/Soybean    Symbiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1990,10/31/1994
* Mary Lou Guerinot, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 10/31/1994
* USD 248,300.00

Iron-containing proteins figure prominently in the nitrogen- fixing symbioses
between bacteria and their respective plant hosts. Although iron is abundant in
the soil, the acquisition of iron is problematic due to its low solubility at
biological pH under aerobic conditions. The study of iron acquisition as it
pertains to economically important symbioses is directed at answering three
questions: 1) how do rhizobial cells acquire iron as free-living microorganisms
where they must compete for this nutrient with other soil inhabitants 2) how do
rhizobia acquire iron as symbionts and 3) does iron regulate gene expression?
Studies are continuing on the utilization of the siderophores citrate,
ferrichrome and rhodoturulate as iron sources by B. japonicum as well as on the
iron regulation of genes involved in iron uptake. This research: 1) further
characterizes biochemically the acquisition of iron by both free-living and
symbiotic cells of B. japonicum, 2) identifies and characterizes genes involved
in iron acquisition, including those which encode iron-inducible outer membrane
proteins, and 3) investigates the control of gene expression by iron. The
increasing world demand for protein and the increasing expense of producing
nitrogen fertilizer has resulted in a widespread interest in biological nitrogen
fixation. Although the nitrogen-fixing Bradyrhizobium/legume symbioses supply
much of the fixed nitrogen for agriculture in the temperate regions of the
world, many aspects of the symbioses are still poorly understood. The importance
of iron in animal/pathogen interactions is now well established; the role of
this metal in the nitrogen-fixing rhizobial/legume symbioses is just beginning
to be explored. The research proposed here provides for a better understanding
of the role of iron in regulating the symbiotic interaction. Such an
understanding elucidates how rhizobia survive in the soil as well as how they
interact with their plant host to establish an effective symbiosis. This is
essential to any efforts to engineer a better symbiosis and for the ultimate
extension of the symbiosis to other plant hosts.