* 9005826
* Identification and Characterization of Protozoa PolypeptidesRecognized by T Cells
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1994
* Fernando Villalta, Meharry Medical College
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1994
* USD 249,997.00

Acquired immunity to Leishmaniasis is cell mediated (CMI) (4.5). Two
subpopulation of CD4+T cells determine the outcome of disease by Leishmania
infection. Cure in genetically resistant mice and immunity in vaccinated
susceptible BALB/c H-2K mice correlates with the presence of a high frequency of
Thy2+ CD4+T cell subsets (6.9). These observations raise the following
questions: (i) What T cell epitopes are involved in the activation of protective
versus disease promoting TH subsets?, and, (ii) What are the properties of the
different T cell epitopes?, and, (iii) How do these epitopes influence the
interaction of the MHC (Ia) molecule with the TCRa/B in order to selectively
activate a TH subset? The above questions are amenable to investigation using
Leishmania antigens. This is because, there are candidate Leishmania strain and
stage specific antigens that either induce protective immunity or exacerbate
disease by selectively activating a specific subset of primed TH cells
(7,10,14). Therefore, we propose that the expression of the antigens is
regulated in a stage and strain specific manner. The identification of these
antigens and their genes from stage and strain specific cDNA library is
possible. Sequence information and T cell proliferative assay would lead to the
identification of the T cell epitopes. The presence of a relevant animal model,
with a wealth of immunological information will facilitate the establishment of
the relationship between antigen structure and function in vivo.