* 9005702
* Phylogenetic Systematics of South American Akodontine       Rodents (Muridae: Sigmodontinae)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1994
* James Patton, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 07/31/1994
* USD 160,000.00

Rats and mice of the South American murid rodent radiation (the largely endemic
subfamily Sigmodontinae) represent a very large array of organisms that range in
morphologic adaptations from subfossorial to aquatic to arborel and in habitat
from tropical rainforest of the Amazon Basin to puna grassland in the highest
elevations of the Andes. This adaptive radiation comprises some 70 genera, most
of which are commonly divided into one of five major lineages. Among these, the
akodontines are among the most diverse and oldest, with fossils of modern forms
extending back some 6 million years in Argentina. Despite the widely recognized
diversification of this lineage, most taxa are both poorly known and defined,
and phylogenetic, ecologic, and life history aspects of their biology are either
totally unknown or only barely so. This is particularly true for the akodontine
group, a radiation of some 15 genera and about 50 species largely confined to
grassland habitats from the northern Andes to the Patagonian steppes. The
present research will utilize DNA sequences, obtained from several genes within
the mithochrondrial genome by the technique of the Polymerase Chain Reaction, to
address the following set of general goals: (1) establish an hypothesis of
phylogenetic relationships among all genera and most species of the complex; (2)
perform a text of the model of species formation resulting from divergence
across strong habitat gradients, using selected species inhabiting the steep
eastern slope of the Andes as exemplars; and (3) determine whether or not
particular cranial conformations that identify highly derived taxa within this
assemblage share a close common ancestor or whether this type of cranial
structure has evolved repeatedly in separate lineages. The exciting aspect of
this research is that, since DNA can be extracted and amplified from dried skin
specimens already preserved within natural history collections, now extinct or
exceedingly rare taxa can be compared in ways never before available. Five of
the genera of concern, for example, are each known form very few specimens, most
of which only collected once from very remote areas. This is, therefore, the
first study of relationships within the group to examine all extant taxa in a
comparative way.