* 9005589
* Multiple Calmodulin-Like Proteins in a Unicellular Eukaryote
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1994
* Chandler Fulton, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/1994
* USD 279,879.00

The dramatic cell differentiation undergone by Naegleria gruberi, from amoebae
to flagellates, is unique as a model system in the rapidity, synchrony,
reproducibility, homogeneity, and Accessibility of a major phenotypic change.
Differentiation-specific molecules synthesized during this change include two
calmodulins, one that becomes localized in the flagella and the other that
remains in the cell body. Cloning and sequencing of the single flagellar
calmodulin gene revealed provocative structural features that may be implicated
in regulation of its programmed transcription, in the stability of its mRNA, and
in the localization of its protein. In order to test these possibilities, and to
make this system advantageous for other studies, this laboratory is working
vigorously to obtain DNA-mediated transformation of Naegleria. In addition,
initial searches for DNA clones to cell body calmodulin have led to the
discovery of two additional calcium-binding protein genes expressed during
differentiation. One encodes a calcineurin B-like protein; the other and
undefined calcium-binding protein whose gene sequence is related to flagellar
calmodulin DNA but which is expressed earlier in differentiation. The goals of
this research are to find the calmodulin-2 gene and to dissect these multiple
calmodulin-like proteins in Naegleria, while continuing to seek DNA-mediated
transformation in this remarkable organism. The unicellular eukaryote, Naegleria
gruberi reproduces as amoebae. If conditions are suitable, the amoebae undergo a
rapid, dramatic differentiation into lively, swimming flagellates with a fixed,
streamlined body contour. The flagellates are temporary, do not reproduce, and
eventually revert back to amoebae. The long-term goal of this research is to
elucidate the sequence of events (from environmental trigger, through programmed
changes in gene expression, to localization of differentiation-specific gene
products) that underlie these differentiation events. The current goals of this
project are to identify and characterize genes for proteins involved in the
regulation of cellular functions by calcium. Since the genes for these
regulatory molecules are expressed differently at different stages of the
differentiation process in different parts of the organism, it is likely that
they represent an important link in this chain of events.