* 9005330
* Molecular Characterization of Vacuolar H+-Translocating     Inorganic Pyrophosphatase
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1994
* Philip Rea, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Robert Uffen
* 01/31/1994
* USD 240,000.00

The primacy of ATP for the energization of primary ion transport is universally
accepted. Cation-translocating ATPases, capable of pumping H+, Na+, K+ and Ca2+,
have been found in virtually all living cells and are recognized to be of
paramount importance for cellular function. One notable exception, however, is
the H+- translocating inorganic pyrophosphatase (H+-PPase) of higher plant
vacuolar membrane (tonoplast) which utilizes inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi),
instead of ATP, as energy source. This enzyme, the first example of a PPi-
dependent H+ pump in any "non- energy coupling" membrane, is a major vacuolar
membrane component and capable of generating a H+-electrochemical potential
difference of +200mV. The tonoplast PPase is therefore quantitatively
significant at both the protein and functional levels and amenable to molecular
characterization. This research provides for (i) the determination of the amino
acid sequence of the Mr64,000 substrate-binding subunit of the enzyme, and (ii)
the enumeration of the components constituting the functionally integral pump
and elucidation of their respective roles. Objective (i) provides insights into
the evolutionary origins of this novel translocase and facilitate the modeling
of its organization on the membrane. Objective (ii), on the other hand, provides
an independent test of the models derived from the sequence data and facilitate
identification of the structural elements responsible for mediating both
substrate hydrolysis and H+-translocation. The ubiquity of the tonoplast PPase
in plant cells and the unique status of PPi as the limiting case of a high
energy phosphate will make the results obtained of broad bioenergetic
significance. The vacuolar membrane (tonoplast) of higher plant cells contains
an enzyme called a H+-translocating inorganic pyrophosphatase. This enzyme is
ubiquitous in higher plants and contributes to the establishment and maintenance
of a transmembrane electrochemical potential difference. This electrochemical
potential difference, in turn, is necessary for the transport of other solutes.
Since little is known about this important enzyme, studies are being carried out
to obtain knowlegde of its evolutionary origins, organization and physiological
functions.