* 9005164
* Molecular Analysis of the ETR Locus: a Gene Involved in     Ethylene Responses in Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1993
* Anthony Bleecker, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1993
* USD 285,000.00

The plant hormone, ethylene, regulates a wide range of physiological and
developmental processes in higher plants. While a significant amount of progress
has recently been made in the elucidation of the ethylene biosynthetic pathway
and in the molecular bases for a number of ethylene regulated processes,
virtually nothing is known about the receptor and associated signal transduction
pathways in plants. The goal of this proposal is the molecular cloning and
characterization of the ETR locus in Arabidopsis thalina. Mutations in the ETR
locus have been isolated which cause insensitivity to a number of ethylene
responses in the plant. Physiological evidence indicates that the mutations
directly effect the ethylene receptor. From a chromosome walk, an 18 kb region
of cloned genomic DNA has been obtained which appears to carry the ETR gene. The
investigators intend to identify the specify sequences in this region that
represent the ETR gene and to obtain full length cDNA clones of the mutant and
wild type genes. The cDNA clones will also be used to manipulate the level of
expression of the wild type and mutant gene products in transgenic Arabidopsis
and in a number of other plant species. Engineered mutations in the gene will
allow an exploration of the dominant nature of the etr phenotype.