* 9005933
* Proposal to Extend the Linear Algebra Library LAPACK for    High-Performance Computers
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/1990,08/31/1994
* James Demmel, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Robert G. Voigt
* 08/31/1994
* USD 940,000.00

LAPACK is a linear algebra library for high-performance computers. The first
release, targeted at shared memory machines, will be available at the end of
1990, and is already attracting significant interest both from the potential
user community and from manufacturers. This research is concerned with extending
still further the usefulness of LAPACK by increasing the functionality through
additional linear algebra capability, and by increasing the user community
through targeting a wider range of high-performance architectures, providing
additional language versions, and exploiting clean computer arithmetic. The
extensions include new subroutines useful in systems and control theory such as
solving Sylvester equations and generalized singular value decomposition, new
algorithms for certain eigenproblems which are much more accurate than any
algorithms in EISPACK, accommodating distributed-memory architectures, versions
of several subroutines to exploit special properties of some computer
arithmetics (especially IEEE arithmetic), and Fortran 8X and C language versions
of some of the most important subroutines. LAPACK includes a comprehensive set
of testing and timing routines. These will be used as a basis for the design and
development of a systematic performance analysis package for the common
algorithms of linear algebra. This library will ease code development, make
codes more portable among machines of different architectures, increase
efficiency, provide tools for evaluating computer performance.