* 9005176
* Endogenous Electrical Current and Neural Crest Cell           Migration in Chick Embryos
* BIO,IOS
* 10/15/1990,09/30/1994
* Kenneth Robinson, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 09/30/1994
* USD 240,000.00

The aim of the work described in this proposal is to test directly the
hypothesis that an endogenous electrical field in the chick embryo acts to guide
lumbo-sacral neural crest cells to their targets in the hind gut. Dr. Robinson
will do this by manipulating the endogenous field during the period of crest
cell migration. This field, which is the result of a large current that leaves
the posterior intestinal portal, will be altered by shunting the current which
generates it through wounds created in the integument, or by voltage clamping
the embryonic transepithelial potential, thus eliminating or reversing the
endogenous field. The fluorescent dye DiI will be used to trace the neural crest
cells during their migration. Dr. Robinson will also do a light and electron
microscopy study of tail gut degeneration in the chick in order to establish
that this process is responsible for the currents he detects leaving the
posterior intestinal portal. The in vitro effects of an applied electrical field
on the proposed endogenous field target cells will also be examined. He will
extend his vibrating probe observations to mouse embryos, particularly some of
the mutants that are available, in order to determine if changes in any of the
endogenous current parameters are indicative of specific abnormalities. The
information gained from these experiments will add substantially to our
knowledge of how migratory cells are guided during development.