* 9005922
* SuperQuest
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1991
* Malvin Kalos, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Hirsh
* 02/28/1991
* USD 157,000.00

This award supports the second SuperQuest program at the Cornell National
Supercomputing Facility (CNSF). The CNSF is an NSF supported facility providing
access time, education, training and user consulting services to scientific
researchers. The first SuperQuest program was held in 1989 and was co-funded by
NSF and IBM. The SuperQuest program is intended to encourage computational
science and engineering at the high school level. Teams of teachers and students
from schools around the nation will compete to participate in a comprehensive
training/education program. Four schools will be chosen. The centerpiece of the
program is a three-week institute at Cornell. The teachers and their teams of
students will be introduced to the Cornell supercomputing environment, and
receive in-depth training in FORTRAN (the primary scientific computer language),
optimization of scientific computer codes, the use of parallel computing, and
the use of computer graphics to visualize results. In addition, well-known
computational scientists and engineers will lecture at the institute. At the end
of the institute, the schools represented by the teams will each receive a
configuration of IBM workstations with communication links through NSFnet to the
CNSF. After the students and teachers have returned to their home schools,
Cornell staff persons will visit each school at least twice over the next year
to conduct follow-up training. A Cornell staff person will be assigned as a
designated consultant for each school, and each school will be given an
allocation of supercomputing resources at Cornell for continued use over the
coming year. The SuperQuest program is intended to stimulate the integration of
computational science and its tools into high school science and in the long-run
have far-reaching effects in enhancing and extending the educational goals of
American students.