* 9005344
* Environments of Sedimentation and Controls on Diagenesis of the Creede Fm., Colorado
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Laura Crossey, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1992
* USD 77,228.00

The sedimentary and volcaniclastic rocks of the Oligocene Creede Formation will
be investigated in order to assess the range and evolution of intracaldera
sedimentary environments, and the controls on diagenesis and alteration in an
intracaldera setting. The Creede Formation was chosen for this study because of
the extensive exposures of relatively underformed intracaldera sedimentary rocks
associated with a large resurgent caldera, the well known volcanic stratigraphy
and chronology of the Creede area, and the opportunity to test and contribute to
the well-studied Creede hydrothermal model. In contrast to previous studies of
intracaldera sedimentary rocks, this study will focus on evaluating the basin-
wide field relationships among sedimentary, primary pyroclastic, and
hydrothermal rocks, as well as authigenic mineral chemistry and distribution.
These data will be used to: 1) develop an understanding of depositional
processes and sediment distribution patterns occurring in an intracaldera basin;
and 2) assess the relative controls of the depositional environment,
hydrothermal activity, organic carbon distribution, and basin hydrology on the
diagenesis of the volcaniclastic rocks. The results of this project will provide
a working model for sedimentary deposition and diagenesis in an intracaldera
setting, as well as allow an assessment of the role the Creede Formation
sediments may have played in the evolution of the Creed hydrothermal system. In
general, the results will contribute to our understanding of caldera evolution
and hydrothermal systems associated with calderas, and provide valuable baseline
data for evaluation of other intracaldera sedimentary sequences.