* 9005861
* Natural and Anthropogenic Disturbances Along Environmental  Gradients in the Southern Andes
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1994
* Thomas Veblen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 07/31/1994
* USD 80,000.00

Relatively little is known about how disturbance regimes vary along major
environmental gradients and how that variation contributes to coarse-scale
vegetation patterns. The proposed research will focus on variation i disturbance
regimes along a west-to-east trans-Andean transect from Andean montane
rainforests to the ecotone with the Patagonian steppe at c. 40 S latitude. The
major disturbance are fie windthrow mass movements, logging, and the effects of
introduced browsing animals. The research is multi-scale in approach and
includes the qualification of vegetation and disturbance patterns at a landscape
scale as well as the analysis of mechanisms responsible for those patterns at
stand scales. The will map vegetation and disturbances from a series of aerial
photographs of different ages, date disturbance events with tree-ring
techniques, and quantitatively analyze tree population structure to examine
responses to disturbances. The expected results will be significant
contributions to both the theory of landscape ecology and to the methodology for
quantification of the spatial and temporal characteristics of disturbances along
an extensive environmental gradient. It will also provide an understanding of
how spatial heterogeneity in the vegetation results from both the variation in
the physical environment and variation in disturbance regimes as modified by
human activities. //