* 9005232
* 238U and 232Th Series Studies of Arc-related Magmas
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Mark Reagan, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 12/31/1992
* USD 55,700.00

This is study of magmatic processes occurring at crust and mantle levels in
volcanic arcs using 238U and 232Th decay series systematics. Part of the funding
will be used to complete ongoing projects that focus on the processes and
lengths of time required to generate and accumulate rhyolite in Cascade arc
volcanoes. The volcanoes that are being studied (medicine Lake and Crater Lake)
have erupted silicic magmas in the Holocene, and are well-known geologically and
geochemically through the work of U.S.G.S. collaborators. Approximately 6-9
months will be necessary to complete the analyses of whole rocks and contained
mineral phases for nuclide activities, to determine magma residence times with
open-system modeling techniques, and to write up the results. The remainder of
the 2-year study period will be used to investigate the origin of mafic magmas
that are the geochemical and thermal parents of Central American arc magma
systems. We will analyze 20-25 rocks from the Central American arc and sediments
from the Cocos Plate for 238U-230Th-226Ra-232Th activities. These same rocks are
being analyzed by other scientists for 10Be/Be ratios, Sr, Nd, and Pb isotopic
ratios, and B, trace element, and major element concentrations. The goal is to
delineate the nature of the subducting slab component in Central American arc
magmas, the way it becomes involved in arc magma genesis, and the time scales
required for magma generation and transport.