* 9005379
* Function and Regulation of a Ripening-Induced Cytochrome P-450 from Plants
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1994
* Rolf Christoffersen, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 07/31/1994
* USD 234,720.00

The long range goal of this research is to elucidate the molecular and cellular
mechanisms by which the phytohormone ethylene regulates development in higher
plants, specifically the activation of genes during ethylene-induced ripening of
fruit. A number of ripening-induced genes including a cytochrome P-450 oxidase
have been identified. This ripening-induced P-450 is the first plant P-450 to be
characterized at the molecular level and is designated cyp71A1. The functional
role of the cytochrome P- 450 in ripening fruit is unknown and is one of the
primary objectives of the research proposed. In addition, cellular and genetic
regulatory elements responsible for P-450 gene activation during ripening are
being identified. The specific objectives are: (1) characterize the substrate
specificity of the cyp71A1 gene product in a heterologous expression system, (2)
identify the cis-acting elements that confer ethylene regulation on the cyp71A1
gene through transient expression assays of modified promoter/reporter
constructs, and (3) characterize potential trans-acting factors which
specifically bind to the upstream elements of the cyp71A1 gene. This research
begins to unravel the series of biochemical events leading to ripening in
avocado. Ripening is a poorly understood process of enormous economic importance
in agriculture, as well as an excellent model system for how hormones affect
genes espression.