* 9005618
* Studies of Structure and Conformation Using NMR Spectroscopyand X-Ray Crystallography
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/1990,03/31/1994
* Eric Noe, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 03/31/1994
* USD 250,000.00

The proposed research consists of four parts, as follows: (1) NMR studies of
cyclopropyl conjugation, for comparing the - donating abilities of the three-
membered ring, double bond, and phenyl group; also studies expected to show that
negatively-charged divalent phosphorus can be an effective -electron donor; (2)
2-D NMR studies of structure and dynamics for thioureas aimed at elucidating
conformational equilibria and associative phenomena; (3) Synthesis and X-ray
structural determination of novel organometallic compounds having two metal
atoms joined by a ligand attached to one metal as a -arene ligand, and attached
to the second ligand by a lone pair of electrons; (4) Formation of metal-carbon
bonds on group 6 elements containing metal-oxo groups; the newly synthesized
complexes are expected to show an interaction between the oxo and alkyl groups
and a possibility exists of a transfer reaction of oxygen to an alkyl ligand.
The four projects will make extensive use of NMR spectroscopy and X-ray
crystallography. Multinuclear variable temperature one- and two-dimensional NMR
experiments will allow analysis of exchange, structure and conformations of
organic and organometallic compounds. In addition, the structure of the
organometallic complexes synthesized will be determined by X-ray
crystallography. The projects will provide minority students with experience in
using both methods of assigning structure and conformation and in the study of
chemical and magnetization exchange.//