* 9005833
* Mathematical Sciences: Group Project in Probability,        Statistics and Computational Molecular Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1996
* Michael Waterman, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/1996
* USD 2,222,850.00

This group of investigators will be supported under the Mathematical Sciences
Research Group mode of funding. The group is involved in the formulation and
solution of analytical problems in molecular biology and genetics. In
particular, the group will emphasize the development and application of
mathematical, statistical and computational methods for the analysis of DNA, RNA
and protein sequences. The research is organized into four main areas. (1) In
the development of mathematical tools for molecular biology, the investigators
will study protein sequence analysis, physical mapping, and statistical tests
for pattern analysis. (2) Computational algorithms will be developed for
database searches, sequence alignment, and sequence assembly. (3) Ongoing work
in mathematical population genetics includes studies of genealogical trees, the
finite sites models and genealogy and selection. The group will also analyze
some statistical problems in molecular evolution. (4) The group will continue to
study the stochastic properties of optimal sequence comparisons. This work is
closely related to the Chen-Stein method of Poisson approximation, which has
application to many probabilistic problems. Other work focusses on random
permutations an change point problems. This Mathematical Sciences Research Group
will investigate problems at the interface of molecular biology and genetics,
statistics and probability, and computation. The investigators on this grant
interact with each other and with many biologists. The problems investigated by
this group are directly motivated by biological considerations, and mathematical
and computational solutions of these problems will impact all the fields
involved.