* 9005211
* Developmental and Molecular Analysis of a Drosophila        Neuroblastoma Oncogene
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1994
* Theodore Wright, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 07/31/1994
* USD 229,500.00

A complete developmental and molecular analysis of the 1(2)Cf (Cf) gene in
Drosophila melanogaster will be carried out. Cf mutations produce brain
hemispheres 5-10x the normal size in late 3rd instar larvae without affecting
the ventral ganglion. Cf brain tissue when transplanted into wild type adult
hosts becomes tumorous and malignant. The cloned gene is located within 46kb of
the dopa decarboxylase gene and is part of the Ddc gene cluster which is
involved in catecholamine metabolism and scleroticizaton of the cuticle. Cf
mutations also produce a weakened cuticle phenotype in pharate adults and are
cell lethals in adult epidermis. Sequencing of the cloned gene will be completed
and the derived amino acid sequence examined to determine the nature of the
protein and its possible function. Homology to vertebrate genes, some of which
may be potential tumor suppressor genes, will be sought. To investigate Cf's
role in development, the distribution of its mRNA and protein in tissue sections
will be examined. Definitive answers will be sought by studying two aspects of
neurogenesis, cell proliferation and differentiation, in mutant and control
flies in vivo. The Cf+ gene product may be involved in a specific step in
catecholamine metabolism which would implicate a catecholamine derivative not
only as a factor in scleroticization of the cuticle but also as a specific
neural cell growth regulator in the CNS. To investigate this possibility a
survey of biogenic amine pools throughout development and in specific tissue of
Cf and wild type will be completed.