* 9005080
* Mathematical Theory of Control, International Conference,   Bombay, India, Dec 10-14, 1990, Group Travel Award in Indianand U.S. Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1991
* A Balakrishnan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/1991
* USD 27,250.00

Description: This project supports travel of ten U.S. scientists to the
Internatrional Conference on the Mathematical Theory of Control, planned for
December 10-14, 1990 in Bombay, India. The objectives of the meeting are: to
make a comprehensive in-depth presentation of the current status of the
mathematical theory of control, to discuss its potential in theory and
application; and to discusss Indian scientists' participation in this area.
Topics to be included are: Pontryagin Maximum principle; Time-optimal control;
Linear quadratic feedback control; Robot control dynamics; Control of large
space structures; Stochastic control; Frequency domain theory; Infinite
dimensional systems; Differential games; Adaptive control; Riccati equations;
Controlability and observability; Computational techniques in optimal control;
Nonlinear systems. Scope: This project supports participation of U.S. scientists
in an international meeting where they and other participants from Europe and
from India will exchange information on advances in the area of control. This is
an area of increasing importance to industrialized countries as well as
developing countries. The exchange of information is likely to benefit the U.S.
participants by identifying potential collaborators from India. It is clearly of
benefit to India since the exposure to leaders in the field should stimulate
research in the field.