* 9005353
* RUI:  Pancreatic and Intestinal Insulin Secretion in the    Turtle:  Anatomic and Functional Studies
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1993
* David Gapp, Hamilton College
* Continuing grant
* Elvira Doman
* 12/31/1993
* USD 257,971.00

Pancreas and intestine from the painted turtle (Chrysemys picta) will serve as
models for investigating insulin secretion in two diffuse endocrine systems.
Chrysemys lacks the compact, highly ordered islet common to most other
vertebrates and exhibits (as do other turtles) a substantial population of
intestinal insulin cells a condition which is virtually unique among
vertebrates. Constituent pancreatic endocrine cell population will be determined
morphometrically to assess relationships among cell types with respect to sex,
season and distribution within the pancreas. The Chrysemys pancreas also will be
examined at the ultrastructural level to further characterize the endocrine cell
types using conventional electron microscopy and EM immunocytochemistry. The
morphological basis for peptidergic regulation of insulin secretion will be
determined immunocytochemically at the light and EM level. Perifused trypsin-
dispersed intestinal mucosa cells enriched for B cells will be used for
characterizing intestinal cell secretory function. Attempts will be made to
determine in regulation on intestinal insulin secretions in vivo and the
proportional contribution made by the pancreas and intestine to circulating
insulin. Results from these studies will provide important basic information on
insulin secretion from the endocrine pancreas and gut of Chrysemys, two diffuse
endocrine systems which are atypical among vertebrates. Moreover, these
investigations may provide important insights into the evolution of the
vertebrate gastro-entero pancreatic endocrine systems and into the importance of
local (paracrine) regulation of endocrine function.