* 9005148
* Inorganic Suspensions Using Well-Defined Copolymeric        Stabilizers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1994
* Judy Riffle, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 01/31/1994
* USD 307,000.00

This research concerns a fundamental study of the effect of low levels of
copolymers on the properties of aqueous colloidal suspensions. Systematically
designed, novel, block and graft copolymers with narrow molecular-weight
distributions of each block will be synthesized and mixed with selected
colloidal particles having narrow-size distributions. The effect of the adsorbed
copolymers on the stability and properties of the suspensions will be measured
by techniques including rheology and light scattering. The particle
concentrations will range from dilute to highly concentrated in order to study
the critical effect of particle concentration on suspension microstructure.
Steric stability is provided by a water-soluble tail segment on the copolymer
that is anchored to the particle by an adsorbed hydrophobic head block. The
effectiveness of the water-insoluble block as an anchor will be studied as a
function of chemical structure. It is anticipated that specific interactions
between the particle surface and the adsorbed copolymer will be of particular
importance in aqueous, hydrogen-bonding media. In addition to the steric
stabilization mechanism, electrostatic stabilization is also important for the
case of charged tail segments. The particles to be studied will be well-
characterized inorganic materials, primarily SiO2, Al2O3, SiC, and Si3N4.