* 9005374
* Activation of Phospholipase A2
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1993
* Gordon Rule, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Arthur Kowalsky
* 08/31/1993
* USD 300,000.00

The long term objective of this proposal is to provide a precise definition of
phospholipase A2 activation in thermodynamic, kinetic, and structural terms.
This definition is important in developing an understanding of the functioning
and regulation of the enzyme and the nature of catalysis at membrane interfaces.
The proposed work will focus on understanding the putative structural changes
leading to full activation. This work will include definition of the interfacial
regions and enzyme- substrate interaction locus and the evaluation of specific
sites of interaction in thermodynamic, kinetic and structural terms. An
important aspect of the proposed work will be thermodynamic characterization of
protein-protein interaction and calcium binding in aqueous solution. Such
characterization is necessary to design and interpret kinetic experiments aimed
at defining the temporal sequence of events of the activation process. This
project will initially focus on the properties of three naturally occurring
enzymes, phospholipase A2 from porcine pancreas, from a rattlesnake, and from
the water moccasin. The principle technique to obtain structural information
about phospholipases will be nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Reaction
microcalorimetry, differential scanning calorimetry, pH stat techniques,
fluorescence spectroscopy, and high pressure liquid chromatography will also be
extensively used to characterize these systems. In addition, site specific
mutagenesis of synthetic phospholipase genes will be used perturb protein
interaction sites.