* 9005774
* The NPA Receptor and the Regulation of Auxin Transport
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1992
* Mark Jacobs, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/1992
* USD 29,781.00

The naphthylphthalamic acid receptor (NPAR) is a plant cell plasma membrane
protein that plays a pivotal role in the regulation of the movement of the plant
hormone auxin. NPAR is being isolated from zucchini using a combination of
immunoaffinity and chromatographic techniques. Flavenoids are shown to be NPAR
ligands in vitro but the natural ligands are not known. Several specific
flavenoids are being studied to determine the in vivo ligand. Auxin movement in
plants is particularly important to their growth and development. The polar
transport of auxin from its multiple sites of synthesis in the shoot apex and
young leaves downward to the tissues in which it acts allows for a coordination
of growth and development in disparate plant parts and helps maintain the
developmental polarity of the plant body. The more local movement of auxin in
and out of plant cells affects levels of free auxin in individual cellular
compartments containing receptors for auxin's actions. The regulation of auxin
movement is a major control point in plant development. Understanding how the
NPA receptor works to control movement of auxin in plants would be a major
contribution to our understanding of the way that auxin plays its pattern-
generating and coordinating role in plant development and will advance our
ability to manipulate plant growth for agricultural purposes.