* 9005179
* Late Quaternary Dynamics of the Labrador/Foxe Sectors of theLaurentide Ice Sheet and Ice-Sheet/Ocean Interaction in the North Atlantic
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1995
* Darrell Kaufman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1995
* USD 255,000.00

The demonstration of a major advance from a Labradorean dispersal center flowing
essentially at right angles to regional topographic features, and that
overtopped Loks Land despite an unconstrained margin facing the open ocean to
the SE, provides strong evidence that the flux of ice during this advance must
have been great. The cross-sectional area for that portion of the ice facing the
Labrador Sea is ca. 300 km2. Assuming a velocity between that of Jacobshavn
Glacier, an outlet glacier draining the Greenland Ice Sheet (8 km a-1), and the
Ross Ice Shelf, Antarctica (1 km a-1) yields an annual flux of 300 to 2400 km3
a-1. This is about the same fresh-water flux entering the North Atlantic when
the St Lawrence outlet was opened by the retreating Laurentide Ice Sheet 11,000
years ago (30,000 m3 sec-1 or 1000 km3 a-1; Teller, 1988). Recognizing the
importance of ice-sheet/ocean interactions in the global climate system, we are
proposing a research campaign to include a new field effort to define more
precisely the spatial limits of this newly recognized advance, and the timing of
its onset and retreat, and to model the ice dynamics based on the field
evidence. Specifically, we intend to address five objectives: 1) Defining the
maximum limits of the Labradorean advance; 2) Deciphering the interaction
between the Foxe outlet glacier the flowed out Frobisher Bay and the Labradorean
ice sheet backfilling the bay; 3) Determining whether all of Meta Incognita
Peninsula was over-ridden by Labradorean ice; 4) Defining the temporal limits of
these advances; and using the field evidence on the limits and timing of ice
sheet advance and retreat as input to glaciological models to provide realistic
ice limits, and ice velocities. Accurate reconstructions of the overall
configuration of the Laurentide Ice Sheet and the pattern of its flow are
necessary to understand the climate and general circulation during a glaciation,
the response of the earth's crust to loading, and contribute to our
understanding of ice dynamics.