* 9005932
* Mathematical Sciences: Physical Regularizations of the      Motion of a Vortex Sheet
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1993
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/1993
* USD 100,000.00

This award provides for the continued support of research on the behavior of
fluids in thin shear layers in the limit of large Reynolds numbers. The
classical treatment of these phenomena regards the thin layer as an idealized
vortex sheet and only includes the dissipative effects of viscosity (internal
friction) in an ad hoc fashion that never comes to grips with the true nature of
viscous forces. In contrast the research in this award centers around analytical
and computational methods for approximating solutions of the actual viscous
equations in the limit of vanishing viscosity. Specific problems for study
include the description of how viscous effects influence the tendency for vortex
sheets to develop curvature singularities. Many fluid dynamical phenomena in
nature are operative in the idealized limit of zero viscosity or zero surface
tension. For example, the motion of bodies in air at speeds well below the speed
of sound can be studied under the approximation that the air is inviscid. Of
course, this is a fiction since air does have a small, nonzero viscosity, but
the neglect of viscous effects is justified when calculating a host of
aerodynamical coefficients, since the small effect of viscosity is not nearly as
important as a larger effect, such as a pressure drop. However there are many
fluid dynamical phenomena whose very existence depends upon the presence of a
formally small force like viscosity, and it is just such phenomena that are the
objects of study in this proposal. In particular, this research will study how
viscous effects influence the roll-up of vortices inside of thin layers of
fluids.