* 9005756
* The 49th Symposium for the Society for Developmental BiologyCell-Cell Interactions in Early Development:                June 28-30, 1990; Georgetown University, Washington, DC
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/1990,04/30/1991
* John Gerhart, Society For Developmental Biol
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 04/30/1991
* USD 6,000.00

Dr. Gerhart is requesting funds for the travel of speakers invited to the 49th
annual symposium of the Society for Developmental Biology, which will be held
June 28-30, 1990 at Georgetown University in Washington D.C. The subject of the
symposium is "Cell-cell interactions in early development". Speakers will
describe developmentally important interactions in a variety of embryos
(Drosophila, C. elegans, sea urchins, vertebrates), in slime molds
(Dictyostelium), and in plants, as analyzed by molecular, genetic, and
embryological methods. Other speakers will discuss cell biological and molecular
aspects of receptor function (for growth factors) and signal transduction as
studied in cell culture model systems, which are likely to have relevance to
embryological studies. The meeting is usually of medium size (300-400
registrants) with a single platform session held at a time (25-30 speakers), and
with 60-80 posters. It is attended by graduate students, postdoctoral fellows,
and senior researchers. Most speakers have agreed to prepare summaries of their
presentations for publication in the annual symposium volume. %%% Progress in
the area of cell-cell interactions in early development have been substantial in
the last few years and it is therefore valuable to hold such a symposium to
discuss and disseminate information on the status of the field.