* 9005562
* Assessment of the Effects of Ultraviolet Radiation on       Phytoplankton in Antarctic Waters
* O/D,OPP
* 04/01/1990,12/27/1990
* Robert Bidigare, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 12/27/1990
* USD 26,687.00

The Antarctic is currently experiencing a thirty to fifty percent springtime
loss of its stratospheric ozone layer, resulting in a least a several-fold
increase in UVB (280-320nm) radiation reaching the surface of the Southern
Ocean. In spite of low solar elevation and persistent cloud cover, the magnitude
of ultraviolet radiation fluence rates now experienced in polar regions roughly
approaches that routinely measured in tropical latitudes. Perhaps more
importantly, biologically damaging UVB radiation has increased in the Antarctic
while both UVA (320- 400nm) and photosynthetically available radiation (PAR,
400- 700nm) have remained unchanged. This collaborative project will use
recently developed improvements in atmospheric modeling and in-water UV and
visible spectroradiometers to conduct a field study during austral spring 1990.
The day-to-day variations in the magnitude and ratio of UVB:UVA:PAR irradiance
incident on and penetrating the euphotic zone of marginal ice edge Antarctic
waters will be qualified. The impact of this increase of UV radiation on
abundance, composition and vitality of the phytoplankton community during the
ice-edge spring bloom will be documented. During this time, strong vertical
stratification restricts the phytoplankton to the upper water column, thus
creating favorable conditions for increased UVB susceptibility. Special emphasis
will be placed on defining biological restraints imposed by enhanced UVB
radiation and altered UVB:UVA:PAR ratios on the balance of UVB photodamage to
photorepair, photoprotective and photosynthetic mechanisms operating in the
water column. The overall aim is an objective test of the hypothesis that
phytoplankton in Antarctic waters are adversely unfluenced by ozone depletion.