* 9005305
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research (Geology):  Geological Studyof the Tonghai-Jianshui-Kunming Area, Yunnan
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1994
* B. Clark Burchfiel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 01/31/1994
* USD 25,686.00

This is a two year collaborative research project between B. Clark Burchfiel of
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Chen Jichen of the Yunnan Institute of
Geological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences. The project is sponsored
jointly by NSF and the Chinese Academy of Sciences. This is the first phase of a
projected four year study on Cenozoic and active deformation in the
Tonghai.Jianshui.Kunming region of Yunnan Province. The immediate goal is to
document the Cenozoic deformation history of an area adjacent to the eastern
margin of the Tibetan plateau, which is related to the tectonic development of
the plateau and surrounding regions of China. The broadest aim of the project is
to develop a better understanding of the nature of intracontinental deformation
in Tibet, China and southeast Asia. Tibet is the most spectacular example of
active continental collision on earth, and deformation within Tibet is commonly
assumed to provide a model for convergent intracontinental deformation. However,
there is little field data available for Tibet and a wide range of hypotheses
have been proposed to explain its Cenozoic deformation. These various hypotheses
have different .. and testable .. implications for deformation along and
adjacent to the eastern margin of Tibet, so that they may perhaps be most
efficiently tested by geological studies along the eastern margin of the
plateau. The proposed study of the Tonghai region should provide a major
addition to the sparse observational data that document the Cenozoic and active
deformation of Tibet and its environs. The PI's will test their hypothesis that
the thickened crust beneath the Tibetan plateau is the result of distributed
north.south to northeast crustal shortening within the plateau.