* 9005155
* Research Initiation Award:  Formation of Porous             Polymeric Materials Via Micro-Phase Separation in a         Supercritical Solution
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1990,11/30/1992
* Eric Beckman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 11/30/1992
* USD 59,521.00

This research will focus upon porous polymeric materials exhibiting a uniform
sub-micron cell size which show great promise in applications such as membranes,
catalyst supports, artificial skin, etc. Current liquid-based phase separation
technologies for producing these materials are limited be difficulties in
solvent removal and structural heterogeneity introduced by thermal gradients. It
is proposed to generate uniform, cellular polymeric materials via a micro-phase
separation induced in a polymer network swollen by a supericrtical fluid. By
taking advantage of the strong dependence of solvent power on pressure, a unique
characteristic of supercritical fluids, one can assume finer control over the
microstructure in porous materials than is presently available using
conventional liquid solvents. The research program will be divided into two
phases. In the first, the equilibrium swelling composition and the relaxation
behavior of a polymer network exposed to supercritical CO2 will be measured
using a quartz spring microbalance and dielectric spectrometer, respectively.
These will be the first such measurements on a network/supercritical fluid
system. In the second phase, microporous materials will be generated via a phase
separation in a supercritical fluid- swollen network. Porosity will be measured
using conventional techniques and correlated with the fundamental thermodynamic
information compiled during the initial program phase.