* 9005316
* Regulation of Hepatic Carbohydrate Metabolism
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1992
* Gene Cottam, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/1992
* USD 135,000.00

The hypothesis that lipopolysaccharide interacts with liver nonparenchymal cells
producing an intercellular chemical mediator(s) which can interact with liver
parenchymal cells increasing their fructose-2,6-bisphosphate (Fru 2,6-P2)
concentration and phosphofructokinase activity is strongly supported by
preliminary data and published investigations. The presence of these
intercellular chemical mediator(s) is being established by determining whether
addition of lipopolysaccharide to isolated rat liver Kupffer cells (macrophages)
produces a factor(s) in the medium that mediates Fru 2,6-P2 concentration and
phosphfructokinase activity in cultures of rat liver parenchymal cells. To test
the possibility that the intercellular mediator formed by the nonparenchymal
cells is a lipid, inhibitors of cyclooxygenase, lipoxygenase, and arachidonate
released from membrane phospholipids are being used. The possibility that the
factor secreted into the conditioned medium is a cytokine is also being tested
by removing individual cytokines from the conditioned medium with specific
antibodies. The effects of specific lipids and cytokines in the conditioned
medium on parenchymal cell responses is being confirmed by direct testing using
authentic compounds. Intercellular mediators formed as a result of incubation of
lipopolysaccharide with Kupffer cells are being identified and any unique
factor(s) which affect regulation of parenchymal cell Fru 2,6-P2 concentration
and phosphofructokinase activity will be isolated and the chemical structure
identified. Liver parenchymal cells (hepatocytes) comprise over 90% of the liver
by mass and are the site of principal metabolic functions associated with the
liver. The liver also contains non- parenchymal cells which comprise
approximately 35% of the liver by cell number. In response to a variety of
stimuli, these non- parenchymal cells synthesize and secrete biologically active
lipids and peptides. The importance of these locally released peptide and lipid
factors as intracellular communicators which regulate and amplify specific
physiological processes has been suggested for many years. Recent studies have
now implicated intra-organ communication between parenchymal and non-parenchymal
cells. Evidence suggests that non-parenchymal cell mediate regulation of
parenchymal cell carbohydrate metabolism. This research examines this phenomenon
with the intent of increasing our understanding of how liver carbohydrate
metabolism (an essential life function) is regulated.