* 9005944
* Mathematical Sciences: Orthogonal Polynomials
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1993
* Jeffrey Geronimo, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 01/31/1993
* USD 35,400.00

Work on this project will continue investigations into the nature of orthogonal
polynomials defined on subsets of the real and complex numbers. The
orthogonality is defined with regard to some measure (density) and, depending on
the nature of that measure, one encounters radically different sets of
polynomials. The polynomials may arise in different contexts - as solutions of
differential equations or as the result of recurrence relations. But the measure
always exists in the background. Particular emphasis will be placed on
understanding polynomials orthogonal to measures supported on several disjoint
intervals. Asymptotic formulas for polynomials have been developed in terms of
integral representations when measures are supported on a single interval.
Efforts will be made to carry over this work to the case of support on several
intervals.Another line of investigation will consider polynomials orthogonal
with respect to measures supported on Julia sets in the complex plane. Two goals
are set forth. The first is to show that in general the Jacobi matrix with these
polynomials is limitperiodic when the Julia set is a Cantor set. A second goal
is to determine the moments of the orthogonality measure via the recurrence
formulas. A new line of investigation uses ergodic theory to study properties of
orthogonal polynomials on the unit circle. When the recurrence relation is
generated by a stochastic process, there is a Lyaponov exponent. When the
exponent is zero, there is evidence that the measure has an absolutely
continuous part. Efforts will be made to verify this.