* 9005253
* Mechanism of Transcriptional Enchancers
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1994
* Marietta Dunaway, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1994
* USD 309,000.00

Transcriptional enhancers are a crucial element in eukaryotic gene expression,
yet their mechanism of action is largely unknown. The Xenopus rRNA enhancer is
an excellent system in which to probe enhancer mechanism because it can be
easily assayed by injection into oocytes and appears to require only a small
number of proteins for its activity. When the rRNA enhancer and promoter are
located in trans on the opposite rings of a multiply-intertwined dimeric
catenane, the enhancer augments transcription. This result strongly suggests
that enhancers work by looping, and this approach can be used to further test
enhancer mechanism and to better understand transcription mechanisms. To test
the importance of catenane structure in trans activation, gyrase network of the
promoter and enhancer, which consist of single interlinks in essentially all
combinations, will be prepared and assayed for enhancer activity. The importance
of enhancer topology will be tested by linearizing the enhancer after
transcriptional activation. The kinetics of transcription complex formation will
be examined by oocyte injection. Oligonucleotide-directed triple helix formation
will be tested for its usefulness as a tool in dissecting transcriptional
mechanisms. The mechanisms of enhancer action and transcription of RNA
polymerase II genes in Xenopus oocytes and embryos will be investigated by
defining the regulatory sequences of oocyte-specific genes and testing trans
activation of an embryonic enhancer. In a complementary approach, the
interaction of the transcription factor THIS with both the promoter and enhancer
will be characterized in more detail. The DNasel footprint of THIS suggests that
the DNA wraps around the protein. This hypothesis will be tested by determining
whether a change in the linking number of a plasmid containing THIS binding site
in the circular permutation assay. Enhancer mutants that have changes either in
spacing between sites or promoter THIS binding sites substitution for enhancer
sites will be assayed for transcription. The importance of primary sequences and
DNA structure in THIS binding and bending will be explored by combining DMS
protection and interference, ethylation interference and bending studies with
site directed mutagenesis of the THIS binding sites. the polypeptides
copurifying with THIS activity will be characterized in more detail.