* 9005388
* Characterization of Avirulence Genes from Pseudomonas       syringae pv. tomato
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1993
* Noel Keen, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1993
* USD 285,000.00

This laboratory has cloned and characterized several avirulence genes from
bacterial pathogens in the Pseudomonas syringae group that are responsible for
defensive surveillance by soybean plants. One of these genes, avrD from P.
syringae pv. tomato, causes bacterial hosts to elaborate an extracellular
elicitor compound. The isolated elicitor causes the hypersensitive response (HR)
only on soybean cultivars containing thecomplementary disease resistance gene,
Rpg4. AvrD also has several other interesting features such as its occurrence,
along with four other linked genes, on an indigenous bacterial plasmid and its
100-fold induction when bacteria are grown in soybean leaves as compared to
culture media. The interaction of bacteria carrying avrD with plant hosts
therefore involves reciprocal signalling mechanisms that initiate precise
developmentalprograms in both organisms. This proposal requests support to
further study avrD and its role in initiating plant disease resistance by 1)
characterizing the avrD elicitor; 2) elucidating the nature of plant induction
of avrD; 3) studying the indigenous plasmid on which avrD occurs and 4)
comparing avrD withhomologous genes that occur in other P. syringae pathovars.
The proposed research should contribute significantly to our understanding of
plant-microbe signalling mechanisms and disease resistance in plants.