* 9005061
* Development of Immunological Recognition
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1994
* Edwin Cooper, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/1994
* USD 235,000.00

Past studies have demonstrated substantial physiological similarities between
invertebrate and vertebrate immunity. However, such functional similarities
might also reflect the convergent evolution of otherwise unrelated systems. Only
detailed molecular comparisons will confirm true homology. The long term goal of
identifying and characterizing invertebrate recognition molecules is
specifically designed to provide such molecular comparisons. Urochordates
represent the closest extant ancestor of the chordates, and so have a
substantial chance of yielding identifiable molecular homologies with vetebrate
immune- related molecules. Monoclonal antibodies directed against urocordate
cell surface antigens will be obtained and screened for their capacity to
inhibit immunological reactivity in in vitro assays of cytotoxicity and cell
proliferation. Inhibitory monoclonal antibodies will be used to purify putative
recognition molecules. Unlike previous, unsuccessful investigations, this
protocol does not assume that invertebrate recognition structures share
similarity with their vertebrate equivalents. i.e. It does not rely on the
capacity of anti-vertebrate molecular probes to cross-react with invertebrate
determinants, but should identify urochordate recognition structures in the
context of their native functions. This project aims to identify and
characterize molecules that mediate immunological recognition among
invertebrates. Previous analyses suggest that specific immunological recognition
is not solely a vertebrate trait. Many invertebrates exhibit adaptive
histocompatibility responses that bear considerable similarity to vertebrate
immune reactions. Indeed, it is postulated that the adaptive immune systems of
higher (vertebrate) animals evolved directly from more primitive systems of
recognition that are still expressed among advanced invertebrates. If this
hypothesis proves to be true, invertebrates may assume an important role as
model systems for the analysis of fundamental imunological mechanisms that
remain disguised by the complexity of vertebrate systems. However, before such
invertebrate models can be applied to the rationalization of complex problems,
the evolutionary homology of vertebrate and invertebrate immunorecognition must
be examined. The results of this research on the immunorecognition structures in
tunicates should make a substantial contribution toward this goal.