* 9005959
* Inorganic Carbon Uptake and Nitrogen Fixation in the Marine Cyanobacterium Synechococcus sp.
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1993
* Hart Spiller, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Uffen
* 07/31/1993
* USD 75,879.00

The focus of this project is on the interrelationship between photosynthetic
carbon assimilation and nitrogen fixation in a cyanobacterium, Synechococcus.
Dr. Spiller plans to examine the uptake and kinetics of carbon assimilation in
the organisms and the effect of carbonic-anhydrase inhibitors on bicarbonate
utilization. It is also planned to examine the mechanism of oxygen exchange,
using glucose in light and dark, and bicarbonate under photosynthetic
conditions. The use and availability of glucose as compared to carbon dioxide to
support nitrogen fixation will be examined. Experiments are also planned in
which use is made of energy-transfer inhibitors in order to examine the role
played by the electrochemical potential of protons in dark:light transients of
N-fixing Synechococcus cells. The cyanobacteria are structurally simple
organisms, often unicellular and often free-living, which have a remarkable
ability to make use of the nitrogen gas in the environment in a manner that
higher animals and plants cannot do. These bacteria, like most plants, are
capable of harnessing radiant energy in the form of sunlight and producing
organic carbon-containing compounds by photosynthesis. Inorganic carbon is taken
in and chemically manipulated to provide appropriate carbon compounds that can
combine with newly fixed nitrogen. The photosynthetic process involves high
rates of oxygen production, and this is a potential problem for the
cyanobacteria because the enzymes that fix nitrogen are highly sensitive to
oxygen. Dr. Spiller's project makes use of a simple cyanobacterium that is well
suited for attempting to understand in detail how carbon metabolism and nitrogen
metabolism are united in a successful partnership in this organism.