* 9005436
* Mathematical Sciences: Research in Interpolation Theory and Harmonic Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1992
* Yoram Sagher, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 07/31/1992
* USD 27,000.00

Work on this project focuses on two general areas of harmonic analysis. The
first concerns stability of Fredholm properties in interpolation scales. It is
motivated by a recurring theme inthe theory of partial differential equations
defined in domainswith relatively irregular boundaries (Lipschitz domains).
Namely, when the operators which associate boundary values with solutions are
known to be bounded in a certain Lebesgue p-norm say the quadratic - then they
turn out to be bounded across alarger range of values of p. The work to be done
involves extensions of 'stability range' to larger classes of operators on
Banach spaces. Goals include finding upper bounds for the length of the range
and reducing assumptions currently in force regarding the dimension of the null
space of the operators. The second line of investigation relates to efforts
extending classical results on Rademacher and Walsh series, especially in the
context of series with large gaps. It is known that in such circumstances, the
quadratic norm the coefficients of a series is bounded by the maximum norm of
the sum of the series. If the series involved are trigonometric, then the
maximum norm must be replaced by p-norms. Recent results have extended the
classical comparisons to include the bounded mean oscillation norm. Work will
now be done to obtain more general BMO estimates for the same type of problem
where the series are restricted to measurable sets rather than intervals. The
first hurdle to be overcome is that of drafting a proper definition of BMO for
sets of functions defined on other than intervals. Support for this project will
be restricted to graduate student stipends and travel allowance.