* 9005854
* International Meeting on Oxygen Transport to Tissue;        Townsville, Australia, 1990
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1990
* Ian Longmuir, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 11/30/1990
* USD 20,000.00

The International Society on Oxygen Transport to Tissue (ISOTT) is dedicated to
the pursuit of knowledge concerning metabolism and anabolite and metabolite
transport in tissue. ISOTT emphasizes a dual scientific and engineering
approach, utilizing interdisciplinary, theoretical, and experimental methodology
to unravel the secrets of tissue maintenance, repair, growth, and replacement.
The Society was established to involve international scientists and engineers in
the development and application of forefront techniques to allow a more basic
understanding of the important physical/chemical/ biochemical phenomena that are
necessary for normal tissue functioning. The Society has made contributions in
advancing the gross analysis techniques of the past to the synergistic studies
of tissue micro areas by the sophisticated mathematical and experimental means
of today. Efforts have been directed towards the acquisition of knowledge at the
regional tissue level, both in vitro and in vivo, and are now moving rapidly to
the examination of fundamental biochemical reactions at the cellular level. This
work necessitates the use of today's most powerful computing machinery and the
use of state-of-the art experimental methodology, such as polarographic, auto
radiographic, cytometric, and nuclear magnetic resonance techniques. ISOTT's
mission is to enhance the understanding of mechanisms that lead to tissue
pathology, to overcome pathologic trends, and to repair and replace
nonfunctioning tissue. The meeting results will be published as a proceedings
(usually by Plenum Press in its Advances in Medicine and Biology series), which
will be used as a reference throughout the world.