* 9005543
* Control of Microtubule Assembly in the Mitotic Appartus
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1994
* Robert Silver, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 08/31/1994
* USD 306,121.00

The cell's mechanism for regulating microtubule assembly in the cytoskeleton and
mitotic apparatus during mitosis remains undefined. This laboratory has
demonstrated that control of intracellular calcium is essential for mitotic
regulation, and has isolated and reconstituted the mitotic apparatus calcium
pump and a putative mitotic apparatus calcium channel. In collaboration with
Drs. Shinya Inoue and Osamu Shimomura, Dr. Silver has succeeded in quantitative
imaging of calcium with the photoprotein aequorin and single photon video
imaging. The next goals of this project are to continue the enzymatic and
biochemical characterization of the mitotic apparatus endomembrane calcium pump
and calcium channel, to elucidate the temporal limits imposed upon regulation
and coordination of pathways required for mitosis that are managed through the
cell cycle clock, to elucidate the role of phospholipase activity and specific
products of phospholipid metabolism in regulating intracellular calcium during
mitosis, and to continue quantitative two-dimensional imaging and computational
analysis of the spatially and temproally regulated transicent calcium signals
that control mitosis using the photoprotein aequorin and single photon digital
video light microscopy. Cell division involves the ordered remodeling of
microtubule, microfilament, intermediate filament, and endomembrane arrays
within the cell. The cellular mechanisms initiating and carrying out cell
division (mitosis) are, as yet, not understood, but a considerable body of
evidence suggests that transient elevations of intracellular free calcium are
essential in signaling specific mitotic events. The goal of this research is to
understand how and where in the dividing cell changes in calcium levels take
place. A detailed understanding of the regulation of intracellular calcium
within the mitotic apparatus will provide deeper insight into the mechanisms
controlling cell division.