* 9005081
* Control of Breeding Cycles:  Integration of Environmental   Cues
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1995
* John Wingfield, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 01/31/1995
* USD 360,000.00

Vertebrates have diverse reproductive cycles spanning continua from brief to
prolonged breeding seasons, and from precisely timed to opportunistic
reproductive periods. Variations in the timing of gonadal maturation and onset
of breeding require that individuals of a population or species adjust secretion
of reproductive hormones in response to environmental signals. Dr. Wingfield
proposes to develop a mathematical model to describe the type of breeding cycle
for a given population. Of particular interest are the degrees of constancy and
contingency within a particular breeding cycle. The more constancy within a
cycle (e.g. the environment is in a state conducive to breeding most of the
time), then less environmental information is required to regulate secretion of
reproductive hormones and thus optimize breeding. As contingency in the cycle
increases (e.g. the environment shows major changes in suitability for breeding
within a year), more environmental cues are required to time onset of breeding.
The PI has chosen several avian species, with varying degrees of constancy and
contingency in their reproductive cycles, as tests of this model. The responses
of each species to environmental signals known to influence reproductive
function (e.g. annual change in daylength, temperature, availability of food)
will be tested. Their effects on gonadal development, and secretion of
reproductive hormones will be measured. Ultimately, the effects of these
environmental cues on gene expression for hormones within the brain, that act as
a link between the environmental and internal processes, will also be
determined. The proposed research is designed to explore the possibility of a
unifying theory that can be used to predict how all vertebrates (and perhaps all
organisms) integrate signals from the environment in order to optimize
reproduction. It may also be possible to use this model for processes other than
reproduction (e.g. migration, growth etc.) The research will provide new insight
into the mechanisms by which environmental signals are transduced into internal
processes (such as hormone secretion) that regulate reproductive function. This
may have considerable impact on our knowledge of reproduction in general, and
could provide a firm base for approaching problems of how to breed and protect
endangered species and populations.