* 9005299
* Effect of Phospholipids on the Function of Membrane Bound   Enzymes
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1992
* David Zakim, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College of Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/1992
* USD 189,997.00

It has been shown previously that the functional state of UDP-
glucuronosyltransferase (GT) is determined in part by the lipid environment.
Evidence obtained in the last grant period suggests that GT is an oligomer
regulated by protein- protein interactions, which are modulated in turn by the
lipids at the annulus. Moreover, it appears that the organization of protein-
protein interactions as well as the distribution of lipids in untreated
microsomes, which constrain the maximal activity of GT, is not the
thermodynamically most stable state of microsomes. This metastable organization
and associated constraint on the activity of microsomal enzymes seem to be
general properties of microsomal enzymes in that two other enzymes studied
behave like GT. This study establishes the validity of the above ideas via
detailed studies of GT, glucose-6-Pase, and acylCoA ligase in microsomes and in
pure, reconstituted systems. If current studies establish that pure GT is an
oligomer the conditions under which it dissociates will be determined to
establish the factors that account for constaint and organization in intact
microsomes. Independent of these results ongoing studies are being conducted on
the influence of the lipid environment on the functional state and stability of
GT. This research is fundamental to our understanding of the organization and
function of membrane proteins as well as the role of lipids in modulating the
behavior of these proteins. Progress in this area will have an impact on basic
cellular biology, biochemistry and pathobiology.***//