* 9005940
* Molecular Analyses of Historical and Contemporary Gene Flow in Marine Species
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1991,12/31/1994
* John Avise, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Therese A. Markow
* 12/31/1994
* USD 255,000.00

Molecular methods of DNA analysis will be employed to examine the genetic
relatedness among populations of several marine species that have global
distributions. Special attention will be devoted to marine turtles, where
longstanding questions exist concerning the historical times of rookery
colonization, whether females return to their natal sites to nest, and the
degree of genetic contact among rookeries involving both males and females. This
molecular appraisal of the life history of marine turtles will offer evidence on
the degree of demographic independence among turtle colonies that should be
critical in the development of populaton management strategies for these
endangered species. Similar molecular genetic assays will also be conducted on
globally-distributed oceanic birds, which may prove to exhibit life history and
migrational patterns somewhat analogous to those of the marine turtles. Assays
of DNA from both the nuclear and mitochondrial genes in these and other marine
species will provide knowledge of migratory patterns in organisms that are
difficult to observe directly. The data will also contribute to development of a
history in which the degree of concordance among the genealogies of independent
genes is proposed as an indicator of the historical magnitudes of population
separations.