* 9005901
* A Study of the Altered Nitrogen-Carbon Economy in Selected  Oat Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/1990,11/30/1993
* Thomas J. Knight, University of Southern Maine
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 11/30/1993
* USD 125,000.00

Oat plants (Avena sativa 1. lodi) selected for tolerance to rhizosphere
infestation by the tobacco leaf pathogen Pseudomonas syringae pv. tabaci
experience a spacial alteration of ammonia assimilatory capabilities between
different plant organs due to selective inactivation of isoforms of the enzyme
glutamine synthetase(GS) by tabtoxinine-beta-lactam (TBL). Enhanced growth is
the net outcome of selective GS inactivation. How alteration of ammonia
assimilatory potentials in these plants result in increased growth is not fully
understood. It is hypothesized that selective GS inactivation alters the
nitrogen-carbon economy of the plant by partitioning fixed carbon flow away from
sucrose/starch synthesis and into amino acid biosynthesis, and this partitioning
leads to increased total carbon fixation rates. This research determines 1) how
provision of GS substrates is being met in these tolerant oats, 2) how increased
demand for 2-oxoglutarate influences pathways responsible for maintaining
tricarboxylic acid cycle integrity, and 3) how elevated leaf GS levels affect
total carbon fixation rates. Tabtoxinine-beta-lactam (TEL) is a toxin produced
by a tobacco leaf pathogen. It is proving to be a valuable tool for studying
plant nitrogen metabolism because it irreversibly inhibits a key enzyme for the
assimilation of ammonia into organic nitrogen. The value of TBL lies with the
toxin's ability to selectively inactivate certain forms of the enzyme. The net
outcome of this selective inactivation is a dramatic enhancement of vegetative
growth. This research provides an explanation of how selective inactivation of
the enzyme results in enhanced growth. //