* 9005536
* An Experimental Study of the Stability Relations, Na-K      Exchange, and Isotope Exchange Properties of Jarosite at    200oC and Above
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1992
* Roger Stoffregen, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 11/30/1992
* USD 65,000.00

In this study, experiments will be conducted to determine the position of the
jarosite and natrojarosite stability fields as functions of the H2SO4-K2SO4 and
H2SO4-Na2SO4 Concentration in the coexisting aqueous phase. Experimental
Temperatures will range from 200oC to the upper stability limit of jarosite and
natrojarosite, which is expected to be below 450oC. In addition, the
partitioning of sodium and potassium between jarosite and aqueous sulfate
solutions, the D fractionation between the hydroxyl sites of jarosite and water,
and 18O fractionation between the jarosite hydroxyl and sulfate sites and water
will be measured. These experiments, which will be conducted in standard cold-
seal hydrothermal vessels at a pressure of 500 bars, are an extension of work in
progress on alunite to a ferric-iron bearing system. They should improve our
ability to interpret isotope data on acid-sulfate alteration, which frequently
includes both alunite and jarosite. In addition, they will help to constrain the
chemical and isotope systematics of jarosite at lower temperatures, and thus
complement ongoing studies of jarosite at 25oC. A better understanding of the
properties of jarosite at surficial conditions will be important in the study of
acid-mine drainage, and also in the interpretation of natural weathering and
oxidation of pyritic ore deposits.