* 9005590
* Biosynthesis of Xyloglucan by Plant Golgi Membranes
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1990,07/31/1994
* Alan White, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 07/31/1994
* USD 272,555.00

Xyloglucans are plant cell wall matrix polysaccharides that are synthesized by
enzymes in the membranes of the Golgi apparatus. Xyloglucan plays a central role
in both cell wall structure and function. In addition, it may have a regulatory
function in the process of controlling plant growth and development. It is a
complex polysaccharide, yet compared to some it is relatively simple. This
proposal describes a program of research designed to clarify the activities of
xyloglucan synthase enzymes and the products they make. The overall objective of
this project is to refine the xyloglucan biosynthesis system for use as a model
for the study of both plant cell wall polysaccharide biosynthesis and the
structure and functional organization of the plant Golgi apparatus. These two
research topics are closely related and completion of this research will
significantly increase our understanding of both. Golgi membranes isolated from
suspension- cultured Acer pseudoplatanus (sycamore maple) cells are being
subfractionated and these partially purified membrane fractions are being used
as a source of xyloglucan synthases. Combinations of glycosyl composition
analysis, methylation linkage analysis, and radiogas proportional counting are
being used to determine identities of incorporated radiolabeled residues and the
linkages between them. The glycosyl transferases involved with xyloglucan
synthesis is being purified so that eventual subcellular localization and
compartment mapping of plant Golgi are possible. Successful completion of this
study will result in a greater understanding of the process of plant cell wall
synthesis as well as the structure and function of the plant apparatus. There
are many unanswered fundamental questions in plant biology. What influence cell
wall biogenesis has on plant growth and development is one such question. This
research offers an opportunity for progress in this area. Xyloglucans are an
important component of plant cell walls both structurally and functionally. They
allow the cell wall to maintain a degree of flexibility and are implicated in
auxin-stimulated elongation during growth. This research is an in-depth study of
the biosynthesis of these important cell wall sugars and provides a better
understanding of the Golgi apparatus which produces the enzymes responsible for
their synthesis.