* 9005414
* ROW: Composition and Evolution of the Lower Crust and       Crust-Mantle Boundary of the Basin and Range-to-Colorado    Plateau Transition Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1993
* Anne McGuire, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 05/31/1993
* USD 64,900.00

Modeling of continental crustal evolution requires improved understanding of
lower crustal rock types, compositions, and structure. Recent geophysical
transects in the Basin and Range and the Basin and Range-to-Colorado Plateau
(BR-CP) transition zone have raised questions about the nature and development
of the lower crust and the crust-mantle boundary in this region. Flat Moho
topography beneath the Basin and Range, and multiple, sub-horizontal Moho
reflectors beneath the Basin and Range and the BR-CP transition zone have lead
to suggestions that basaltic underplating played an important role in the
development of the Basin and Range lower crust and crust-mantle boundary during
Cenozoic extension. Xenoliths from Wikieup, Arizona provide actual rock samples
from the crust-mantle boundary beneath the BR-CP transition zone. This xenolith
suite includes abundant composite nodules of upper mantle peridotite in contact
with lower crustal gabbro and granulite. Complete petrographic and compositional
analysis (minerals, whole rock major, trace, and rare elements, isotopes) will
be used to determine the petrogenesis of lower crustal rock types. Xenolith
thermobarometry will provide estimates of the thermal state of the lower crust
in this region. Integration of complete petrologic data with existing
geophysical data will allow evaluation of the role of processes such as basaltic
underplating in the evolution of the Basin and Range lower crust and the
development of the crust-mantle boundary.