* 9005883
* Prehispanic Chiefdoms in the Valle de la Plata, Colombia
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1991
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1991
* USD 25,232.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Robert Drennan has
conducted wide-scale archaeological site survey and limited test excavations in
the Valle de la Plata which is located in the Alto Magdalena region of Colombia.
This area is particularly famous for the remarkable corpus of sculpture
attributed to the "San Agustin culture." These characteristically are associated
with stone tombs and include grinning human faces with feline fangs and larger
than life-size human figures. Because these materials were usually recovered
through looting, their original context is often unknown. In the course of his
research, Dr. Drennan has traced the rise of San Agustin culture from the first
millennium B.C., through ca. 700 A.D. when production of statues and tombs
reaches a peak, and into a later period when variation in burial custom
indicates marked status variation. Through this process he is able to trace the
rise of social differentiation and the development of a large-scale chiefly
society. In his current project, Dr. Drennan will continue this work. He will
analyze ceramics collected, expand a soil study to determine agricultural
potential, analyze the relationship between settlement distribution and
agricultural resources, date radiocarbon samples, and identify carbonized plant
remains. Through this work he will gain increased insight into chronology as
well as the settlement and subsistence practices of this prehistoric group. This
research is important for several reasons. Archaeologists who work in Middle and
South America are extremely interested in the data which Dr. Drennan will
produce. The results will increase our understanding of how social complexity
develops and chiefdom level societies arise and are maintained. Finally, because
it includes graduate students, this research will aid in the training of young
scientists.