* 9005969
* The Economic Foundation for Neural Computing Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/1990,02/28/1991
* Andrew Whinston, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Rosenblum
* 02/28/1991
* USD 18,602.00

This is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research which uses the framework of
mathematical economics to model the coordination of amultitude of computational
units engaged in large-scale problem solving. The authors are working on
developing a detailed formalism of a massively parallel computing system that
lends itself to a representation as an economic resource allocation problem. A
computation will be regarded as a production process that yields a specific
output and requires certain inputs. Just as production of commodities are
organized into parallel and serial stages with intermediate goods, a
computational problem will be organized into parallel and serial steps with
intermediate outputs. Inputs and outputs will be priced, and profits will be
defined for each computational unit. Entry and exit of individual units based on
rofitability can be interpreted as a form of adaptive learning. Mathematical
economic will allow the characterization of optimal prices that will achieve the
system objective efficiently. The authors will study the existence, optimality,
and stability of equilibrium prices and allocations, the practical
implementation of this economic solution, and the potential learning behavior
driven by profitability. The research is significant in that it explores the way
in which knowledge from economic science and knowledge fromcomputer science can
be integrated to produce new knowledge.