* 9005333
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  The Tectonomagmatic and Event-     Stratigraphic Significance of Lower Paleozoic K-Bentonites  in the Iapetus Region of N. American and NW Europe
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1990,05/31/1992
* Dennis Kolata, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Felicia Fauntleroy
* 05/31/1992
* USD 94,000.00

PIs will investigate the tectonic setting, magmatic originand stratigraphic
significance of altered volcanic ash beds (K.bentonites) in the Middle and Upper
Ordovician strata ofBaltoscandia and to compare these data with similar data
fromNorth America. Preliminary studies strongly suggest these K.bentonite beds
on both sides of lapetus had a common source and acommon tectonic setting. If
this indication proves correct, themost widespread of these beds will have
profound event.stratigraphic implications for the Ordovician, and
ourunderstanding of Laurentia and Baltica plate positions during theTaconian
orogeny will be substantially improved. Similarly, theabundance of Silurian
K.bentonites throughout Baltoscandia andthe UK indicates ongoing plate.margin
volcanism from Llandoverythrough Ludlow time. PIs will collect samples of the
mostextensive beds from cores and outcrops in Estonia, Sweden andNorway. They
will add to existing information on thebiostratigraphic position of these beds
and use chemicalfingerprinting of both bulk samples and selected phenocrysts
tomake accurate correlations with North American beds. These willbe compared
with trans.Atlantic stratigraphic relations of K.bentonites suggested by
traditional biostratigraphy and bygraphic correlation using conodonts. We will
also obtain high.resolution Ar age spectra and U.Pb dates from biotite and
zirconseparates from biostratigraphically well.constrained K.bentonitesthat will
add key ages to the Ordovician time scale. Traceelement data will be plotted on
discrimination diagrams tointerpret the tectonic and magmatic settings of these
beds.