* 9005054
* Miocene Phosphogenesis and Depositional History of the      Florida Platform:  Implications for Changes in the Carbon   Isotopic Composition of Seawater
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1990,10/30/1993
* John Compton, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 10/30/1993
* USD 148,642.00

Previous studies of the Miocene Hawthorn Group of the Florida Platform indicate
that phosphogenesis occurred primarily during the early to early middle Miocene.
The timing of Phosphogenesis appears to be synchronous with a global positive
excursion of the carbon isotopic composition (delta13C) of seawater. Preliminary
examination of the Hawthorn in northeastern Florida shows that these sediments
are rich in phosphorite, dolomite, silica and other minerals indicative of
intense upwelling, but contain little organic carbon or pyrite. Burial of
isotopically light carbon by deposition of organic-rich, continental margin
sequences in the SE U.S. during the early Miocene likely resulted in a global
increase in the delta C of seawater. Multiple reworking and supergene weathering
from subaerial exposure after the middle middle Miocene oxidized and removed
most of the organic carbon and diagenetic pyrite. Rapid oxidation of the buried
organic carbon resulted in the delta C of seawater returning to its pre-
excursion value. We will test this hypothesis by determining the mechanism and
timing of phosphogenesis, the timing of sediment oxidation, and the relationship
of these events on the Florida Platform to global sea-level changes and
variations in the delta C and delta O of seawater during the Miocene. The
research program relies on integrating the seismic sequence stratigraphy,
sediment mineralogy and texture, and elemental and isotopic composition of the
phosphorite and associate minerals. The Sr isotope stratigraphy of the Hawthorn
sections will be compared to the delta C, delta O, and Sr isotope stratigraphy
of the Miocene sediments from the southwest Pacific (DSDP Site 588).