* 9005196
* Steric-Stereoregular Polymers and Optically Active Helical  Polymers/Achiral Reagent Complexes
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1994
* Ishrat Khan, Clark Atlanta University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1994
* USD 180,000.00

The first objective of this work is to develop regenerable polymeric reagents
for asymmetric reductions. The reagents will be complexes of optically active
(chiral) helical polymers and borane. These polymers are conveniently
synthesized by living anionic polymerization techniques using chiral initiators.
An example of such an optically active polymer is poly (phenyl-2-pyridyl-o-
tolylmethylmethacrylate). The presence of the 2-pyridyl groups in the polymer
should allow for the preparation of the optically active polymer/borane
complexes similar to poly (2-vinylpyridine)/borane complexes. The optically
active reducing reagents will be used to reduce prochiral carbonyl
functionalities. The second objective of the project is to synthesize a class of
isotactic polymers which will exhibit specific secondary structures i.e. helix.
This goal will be accomplished by first developing an understanding of the
relationship between the structure of the monomer and the tendency to isotactic
specific polymerization. The starting point of this project will be the
synthesis and stereochemical characterization of poly (4-vinylquinoline) and
poly (2-vinylnaphthalene). It is expected that such isotactic polymers with
specific secondary structures or "steric-stereoregular" polymers will have
potential applications in molecular biology, synthetic enzymes and regenerable
asymmetric reagents.//