* 9006589
* Phenotypic, Genotypic, and Ecological Determinants of       Reproductive Success in Natural Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1993
* Peter Smouse, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 02/28/1993
* USD 103,000.00

The genetic history and current structure of any population can be represented
in terms of its genealogy. Genealogical analysis has become an increasingly
important component of studies of mating behavior and genetic dispersal in
natural populations and in the management of captive animal reproductive
performance of different genotypes, in examining the impact of parental
imprinting on foraging behavior, or in measuring the effects of interactions
among relatives on the inclusive fitness of individuals. Most such efforts to
date have maternal descent through chloroplast and mitochondria genomes, an
approach that ignores paternal descent, a substantial part of the overall
pedigree. The investigators have developed an alternative approach that uses
nuclear markers to make statistical inferences about both maternal and paternal
lineages. Their strategy is to employ enough genetic markers to exclude all but
one make from consideration for each offspring. Previous work has shown,
however, that a very large number of polymorphic markers is required to assign
paternity categorically for each and every offspring. A strictly exclusionary
solution to the problem of parentage assessment is not attainable in many
interesting applications. The objective is to develop statistical/genetic
estimation procedures and then to use them to analyze male reproductive
contributions for Chamaelirium luteum and Silene alba. More interesting than the
parentage spectrum are the phenotypic, genotypic, and ecological determinants of
reproductive contributions. The investigators will develop statistical methods
to elucidate such factors.