* 9006059
* Data Structures for Sorting, Searching, Hashing,            Computational Geometry and Nonprocedural Databases
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/1991,02/28/1994
* Dan Willard, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Dana S. Richards
* 02/28/1994
* USD 75,773.00

Data structures to accommodate fast retrieval are perhaps the oldest and
certainly one of the most fundamental topics in computer science. This project
addresses several open problems of both pragmatic and theoretical interest. The
first group of open questions concerns worst-case algorithms that outperform the
information theoretical lower bound. Recently an O(log N/log log N) worst-case
time algorithm for dynamic tree operations and an accompanying O(N log N/log log
N) worst-case time sorting algorithm have been designed. Both algorithms run on
essentially all digital computers and on all possible data inputs. The new
approach to sorting and searching rests on utilizing the power of a digital
computer's arithmetic and bitwise logical operations. Numerous open questions
arise about what upper and lower bounds for sorting, searching, balance tree
operations, and hashing can be demonstrated in this modified mathematical model.
A second research area focuses on computational geometry. Many geometric
problems, such as Voronoi diagram construction, have been thought to require at
least N log N time because of their reduction to sorting procedures, but all
such theoretical lower bounds need to be reconsidered in light of the recent
results for sorting and searching. There are also several open questions raised
by earlier research into range query theory. One particular question concerns
developing lower bounds that take into account the presence of subtraction, and
a second concerns the time-space tradeoff for especially reporting queries.
Range query algorithms for batch queries, especially procedures for executing
relational calculus and SETL-like expressions, will also be studied.