* 9006253
* The Role and Mechanism of Gene 12 Product in the T4 Phage   Infection Process
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1994
* Edward Goldberg, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 02/28/1994
* USD 219,765.00

The objective of this US/USSR collaborative research project is to clarify the
structure and function of the short baseplate fiber, P12, of T4 bacteriophage.
P12 is the organelle by which phage T4 irreversibly attaches to its host, E.
coli. P12 will be studied both in isolation and as an organelle on the phage
particle. An assay will be developed and gp12 monomer as well as the P12 trimer
unit will be purified, and a combination of physiological, bioenergetic,
structural and genetic studies will be undertaken. This proposal for a US/USSR
collaborative research project will combine the technical strengths of three
investigators: E. Goldberg, of Tufts University, the US scientist, is an expert
in the physiology and genetics of bacterophage host recognition, attachment, and
injection. Two investigators from the USSR will participate. V. Mesyanzhinov, of
the Ivanovsky Institute of Virology, Moscow, whose expertise is biochemistry has
subcloned and sequenced gp12 and the genes surrounding it, and has developed a
method for purification of the gp12 monomer and the P12 trimer. L. Grinius, of
Vilnius University, an expert in bioenergetics, has recently worked on the
depolarizaton of the host bacterium during phage attachment. His laboratory has
developed a specific electrode form membrane potential measurements which can
accurately measure changes in real time. This collaboration will provide the
combination of approaches necessary to characterize the composition, assembly,
physiological role and mechanism of action of P12. This US/USSR collaborative
project should lead to a better understanding of the structure and mechanism(s)
of action of a fibrous protein responsible for the attachment of the bacterial
virus, "T4", to its host bacterium, E. coli. During attachment of this protein
to the bacterium the protein changes its configuration and promotes changes in
the permeability of the bacterial membrane. The isolated protein also has the
ability to kill the bacteria. The results of this project will contribute to
basic knowledge of some of the most fundamental problems of biology: recognition
at the molecular level, the mechanism of formation and structure of channels
controlling the permeability of membranes, and the mechanism of bacterial
killing by a virus.