* 9006552
* Structural Organization of Proteins on the Oxidizing Side   of Photosystem II
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1994
* Terry Bricker, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 01/31/1994
* USD 263,000.00

This project describes the production and preliminary characterization of
mutants bearing lesions in the extrinsic loop region of CPal in the
cyanobacterium Synechocystis 6803. CPal (encoded by the psbB gene) is an
intrinsic membrane protein which is an integral component of the photosynthetic
apparatus of cyanobacteria and higher plants and appears to be required for
photosynthetic oxygen evolution in Photosystem II. The goal of this project is
to determine the function of the large and unusual extrinsic loop region of this
protein. This region appears to interact with the extrinsic 33 kDa protein and
possibly the inorganic cofactors manganese, chloride, or calcium, of all of
which are required for oxygen evolution. Additionally, CPal appears to act as a
chlorophyll-a antenna for Photosystem II. The extrinsic loop region may interact
with other antennae proteins and/or the Photosystem II reaction center. In vitro
mutagenesis (saturation and oligonucleotide-mediated site- directed) will be
used to produce mutations in the extrinsic loop region. These mutations will be
re-introduced into Synechocystis (along with a closely linked antibiotic
resistance marker), and mutants will be isolated by a combination of screening
for antibiotic resistance and loss of photoautotrophic growth. Additionally,
screening for antibiotic resistance and loss of photoautotrophic growth.
Additionally, screening for temperature sensitive mutations will be performed.
These mutations will then be characterized by examination of their electron
transport activity 77oK fluorescence emission spectra, manganese and calcium
content of Photosystem II-enriched preparations, photosynthetic membrane protein
composition, and their chloride requirements for the stabilization of manganese.