* 9006258
* "The Role of the Oxide Support in Supported Vanadium Oxide  Catalyst"
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/1990,04/30/1994
* Israel Wachs, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 04/30/1994
* USD 264,000.00

The objective of this project is to determine the origin of the support effect
for supported vanadium oxide catalysts. Deposition of a two-dimensional
vanadium-oxide overlayer on various oxide supports dramatically affects the
reducibility, catalytic activity, and selectivity of the resultant surface
phases. The cause of this is not understood; possibilities include structural
changes in the surface overlayer and electronic effects of the oxide support
ligands. Molecular structures of the surface vanadium-oxide overlayers are
determined with a combination of laser Raman spectroscopy and solid-state
vanadium-51 nuclear magnetic resonance. Oxide supports chosen for this work are
silica, niobia, zirconia, and magnesia; these display a wide range of
acidity/basicity, electronegativity, and potential for ligand effects. The
reactivity of the catalysts is probed by temperature- programmed reduction and
the structure-sensitive methanol oxidation reaction. The improved understanding
of this system should lead to better control and design of vanadia catalysts and
of reactor systems employing such catalysts, or in which they may be formed
inadvertently. Such systems are receiving great attention as the method of
choice for removal of nitrogen oxides (precursors of acid rain) from stationary
sources. Other relevant processes include production of monomers for
condensation polymers (polyesters, polyamides, etc.) synthetic sugars, and
cracking and hydrotreating of petroleum.