* 9006484
* Reinforcement in a Zone of Overlap and Hybridization
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1994
* Daniel Howard, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* B. Jane Harrington
* 01/31/1994
* USD 225,000.00

The research proposed by Daniel Howard and John Doherty addresses some of the
most difficult problems in biology; namely, how does reproductive isolation (the
absence of interbreeding between individuals of different species) develop as
one species splits into two and, in particular, what is the role of selection
against hybridization in the evolution of reproductive barriers? Answers to
these questions are central to an understanding to the development and
conservation of biological diversity on earth. The questions will be approached
by studying ground crickets that are in the process of splitting to form new
species. Answers obtained from the study will be relevant to all sexually
reproducing organisms. Research over the past three years has identified male
calling song differences as a potential reproductive barrier between the newly
forming species, Allonemobius fasciatus and A. socius. The identification of
this potential barrier during a critical stage of species formation provides a
rare opportunity to study the evolution of reproductive isolation during a
speciation event. During the next three years, the hypothesis of reinforcement
will be tested. This hypothesis states that the calling song displacement
exhibited by A. fasciatus in areas where it occurs with A. socius represents a
reproductive barrier that has evolved as a consequence of selection against
hybridization. The work will include investigations of : (1) geographic
variation in male calling song, (2) female response to song, (3) the genetics of
song differences, (4) the cost of a hybrid mating, and (5) sperm competition.
The proposed studies will not only provide a rigorous test of the hypothesis of
reinforcement, but they will provide fundamental information on a trait
potentially responsible for reproductive isolation. Only by combining studies of
the genetics, behavioral ecology, and developmental biology of specific traits
serving as reproductive barriers with analyses of geographic distribution
patterns, will biologists arrive at an understanding of the process of
speciation. The proposed research should lead into even more rigorous studies of
the acquisition of reproductive isolation between A. fasciatus and socius. These
species are rapidly becoming a model system for the study of biological
processes. From an applied perspective, the family Gryllidae (crickets) includes
some very serious agricultural pests. The proposed research will provide badly
needed information on the reproductive biology of crickets - information that
can be used to help develop biological control programs.