* 9006644
* Ecological Studies of Root Architecture in the Herbaceous   Perennial Cryptantha Flava
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1992
* Brenda Casper, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 07/31/1992
* USD 15,000.00

Research will focus on variation that occurs within a species in three-
dimensional branching structure of root architecture and determine the extent to
which the variation is genetically controlled or results from environmental
factors. In the future, the relationship between root architectural traits and
root function will be explored to determine the importance of particular root
structure to the overall performance of the plant. The study species is the
herbaceous perennial Cryptantha flava (Boraginaceae) which occurs in very sandy
soils throughout semi-desert regions of eastern Utah and parts of adjacent
states. Because of the inherent difficulty of extracting roots from soil,
quantitative descriptions of root architecture and studies of the relationship
between the branching architecture of roots and root function are virtually
undeveloped. Such information is basic to understanding how plants capture soil
nutrients and water. Root structure should have particularly important
consequences in desert systems where soil resources, rather than available
sunlight, limit plant growth. The species selected is amenable for these studies
because the basic branching pattern of its roots is easily quantified and
because nearly entire roots can be extracted from the sandy soil. Results of the
study could (1) help explain the distribution and performance of plant species
across different soil types and (2) contribute information important to the
development of crops--particularly those tolerant to drought or low nutrient
soils.