* 9006368
* Species Diversity and Distribution of Trichomycete Gut Fungi in Their Arthropod Hosts
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1992
* Robert Lichtwardt, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1992
* USD 95,000.00

Trichomycetes are fungi that live obligately within the guts of many kinds of
arthropods such as crustaceans, millipedes, and insects. The nature of the
relationship with their hosts is not known in most cases although there is
evidence that some of these fungi can kill their hosts whereas others may
benefit them by synthesizing sterol nutrients required by the host. Dr. Robert
Lichtwardt of the University of Kansas is one of the few specialists in the
world working on the taxonomy and biology of these commensalistic fungi, and it
is his efforts over the years that have led to the present stage of knowledge
about them. In continuing studies of Trichomycetes, Dr. Lichtwardt is surveying
their occurrence in aquatic hosts in two widely separated regions, Australia and
New Zealand and in Costa Rica. Preliminary work by him has indicated that new
species of fungi, and possibly new genera, occur in both regions, and with
varying levels of specificity toward their hosts. Efforts to culture the fungi
under controlled laboratory conditions will continue, along with studies to
determine their complete life history, including processes by which fungal
spores are dispersed and come to infect appropriate host arthropods. Dr.
Lichtwardt's studies also contribute to the inventory of microbial organisms in
the world, especially of tropical regions, an inventory at present very
incomplete.