* 9006353
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant: Advanced Gas          Chromatography System with Multidimensional Capabilities
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1991
* Nicholas Cernansky, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* MILTON J LINEVSKY
* 11/30/1991
* USD 8,600.00

The complex analytical problems of separating the intermediates and products
from the oxidation of fuel-like hydrocarbons require sophisticated
chromatographic techniques. Two complementary methodologies to provide these
capabilities are capillary columns and computer controlled, programmed valve
switching, also called multi-dimensional or "heart cutting" analysis. While
capillary columns by themselves provide increased resolution over packed
columns, they have not been sufficient to separate very complicated mixtures of
alkanes, olefins, and oxygenates. Therefore to achieve separation, it is often
necessary to use multiple columns which are switched into and out of the carrier
flow during an analysis. Further separation is often achieved by holding
selected fractions of the gas sample in a column and backflushing this partial
sample into a second analytical column. This technique is called "multi-
dimensional" gas chromatography. The system specified will allow implementation
of sophisticated separation techniques, which are required for several ongoing
research projects of the Combustion and Fuels Research Group. An enhanced gas
chromatography identification/analysis system is requested to replace and
upgrade existing capabilities for conducting research in the combustion
processes and engine and fuels technology areas. The proposed system allows
multi- dimensional analysis capabilities, which are essential in the analysis of
more fuel-like hydrocarbons which have carbon numbers greater than or equal to
five.