* 9006452
* Effects of Predation on Behavior and Life History of Tree   Hole Mosquitoes
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1994
* Steven Juliano, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/1994
* USD 184,440.00

By killing their prey, predators have an obvious direct affect on prey
populations. Predators also have important indirect effects on prey, and these
indirect effects are less well understood than are the direct effects. Predation
can effect prey behavior by selectively killing individuals that engage in
activities that increase the chance of capture. Prey individuals may also modify
their behavior by adopting low-risk behaviors when predators are nearby. Prey
such as insects that go through distinct larval and adult stages can also alter
their exposure to predation by altering the time and body size at which they
transform from larva to adult. Although all of these indirect effects of
predation are possible, the integration of all of these behavioral and life
history responses to predation is not well understood. The proposed research
tests for fixed (always expressed) and flexible and flexible (expressed only
when predators are nearby) behavioral and life history responses to predation in
larvae of a tree-hole dwelling mosquito. Populations known to differ in exposure
to predation, behavior, and vulnerability to predation are compared. The results
of this study will show how fixed and flexible behavioral and life history
traits are integrated into an overall life style, and how this life style is
related to predation. These experiments will provide an explicit test of the
predictions of a mathematical model for the evolution of life history in
response to predation. Because the bite of this mosquito sometimes transmits
LaCrosse encephalitis, understanding how this species responds to predation, and
how these responses affect populations of adult mosquitoes, may also be
important for understanding the medical impact of this species.