* 9006770
* RUI:  Implications of Taste and Size Selective              Feeding by Zooplankton
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1993
* William DeMott, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jethro Moorefield
* 06/30/1993
* USD 82,163.00

Recent studies have made progress in determining how, when, and to what extent
zooplankton, especially calanoid copepods, use taste to discriminate between
food particles which differ in nutritional quality. The first goal of this
proposal is to develop mechanistic models of algal consumption which integrate
the effects of taste and size selective feeding. The second goal is to use
Diaptomus and Daphnia as models for testing the implications of contrasting
feeding modes for grazer- phytoplankton interactions and zooplankton
competition. These basic problems will be attacked using field and laboratory
experiments representing a range of time scales and degrees of experimental
control. Food selection experiments will focus on a new question: concentration-
variable selection and ingestion of large, difficult-to-handle phytoplankton by
behaviorally flexible grazers. Both short and long-term grazer manipulation will
be used to compare and contrast the impacts of grazing by Diaptomus and Daphnia
on natural phytoplankton assemblages. The possibility of positive interactions
through complementary feeding niches ("indirect mutualism"), a potentially
important stabilizing factor in zooplankton communities, will be tested for the
first time through growth and competition experiments with Diaptomus and
Daphnia.//