* 9006989
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant: Electrochemical       Profiler/Photovoltage Spectroscopy
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1992
* Thomas Brown, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 01/31/1992
* USD 50,000.00

The requested electrochemical profiler/photovoltage spectroscopy unit brings new
capabilities to the recently established optoelectronics facility at the
Institute of Optics, for epitaxial growth, characterization and fabrication of
III-V heterstructure optoelectronics devices. The profile/photovoltage
instrumentation is required for many aspects of an extensive research program
that includes the investigation of quantum well lasers and modulators grown on
(111) substrates (for low threshold and higher modulation frequency lasers, and
larger electro-optic effect), quantum well lasers with doped active regions (for
higher gain), novel circularly symmetric surface emitting laser structures,
pseudomorphic GaInAs quantum well lasers (for lasing in the wavelength range of
860 to 110 nm., a region previously inaccessible to high efficiency diode
lasers), quantum well lasers structures with dry etched facets (to enable
integration of diode lasers), fast electro-optic modulators (for high speed
phase and intensity modulation of light), an innovative approach to the
disordering of superlattices by impurity diffusions (using applied electric
fields during annealing) and the use of such selectively disordered structures
in planar optical structures (lasers, waveguides, gratings electro-optic
modulators). These research programs compliment the ongoing effort in indirect
bandgap semiconductors (isoelectronic impurity complexes in indirect bandgap
semiconductors, low noise avalanche photodiodes and nonlinear optical
interactions in silicon on insulator structures), also at the Institute of
Optics. The facility for growth, characterization and device fabrication of
optoelectronic III-V semiconductors presently includes a molecular beam epitaxy
machine, Raman, photoluminescence and excitation spectroscopy, photolithography,
chemically assisted ion beam etching and rapid thermal annealing. The
electrochemical profiler and photovoltage spectroscopy unit will be used to
measure carrier concentration and bandgap profiles in III-V and Si state of the
art optoelectronic materials and devices.