* 9006643
* Evolutionary Ecology of Black Pineleaf Scale Infestations   on Ponderosa Pine
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1990,11/30/1993
* Donald Alstad, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 11/30/1993
* USD 305,000.00

The black pineleaf scale insect (Nuculaspis californica Coleman) is a parasite
of western yellow pine (Pinus ponderosa Lawson. The insects are shortlived
relative to their host and largely sedentary, and their populations are
subdivided and genetically differentiated over extraordinarily short distances
in association with both individual host trees, and different branches within a
single pine (Alstad and Corbin, in press). Three different kinds of evidence
resulting from recent research (Alstad and Edmunds 1989, Alstad and Corbin in
press, and Alstad unpublished) compromise our earlier view (Edmunds and Alstad
1978, 1981; Alstad and Edmunds 1983a, 1983b) that scale population structure
reflects adaptation of the scale demes to intrinsic, genotypic characteristics
of individual host trees. The proposed research will test a new hypothesis about
the mechanistic causes of local differentiation in black pineleaf scale insects
infesting ponderosa pine: that scale adaptation results from selection related
to extrinsic phenotypic traits which (a) are the product of interactions between
the pine genotype and its environment, and (b) vary both within and between
trees. These opposing hypotheses represent major themes in the literature of
plant/herbivore interactions; they are of basic interest to evolutionary
ecologists and have clear and important implications for forest management.