* 9006502
* Multicultural Comparative Study of Social Control after     the California Earthquake
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1990,07/31/1991
* Anna Kuhl, Eastern Kentucky University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 07/31/1991
* USD 4,896.00

Every year earthquakes, hurricanes, and other forms of natural disaster strike
communities with often devastating impact and without regard to national
boundaries or socioeconomic capacity. Media accounts on television, radio, or in
print make vivid the extent of physical damage and the most evident consequences
to life and limb. While word spreads with dispatch both nationally and
internationally, lead stories change with almost as much dispatch. Often there
is mention of crime, altered patterns of victimization, or looting, but the
impact of such events on the social fabric of a community is little understood.
Dr. Kuhl seeks to respond to this gap in our knowledge by a timely, sustained,
and systematic study of social control in three communities affected by the
California earthquake. The research focuses on crime, victimization, social
service, and social control both prior and subsequent to the earthquake in
communities that differ in terms of cultural, economic, and social conditions.
Specifically, the study focuses on the hardest hit communities in San Francisco
(primarily upper-middle class, Caucasian areas), Oakland (black, lower-class
areas), and Watsonville (lower class areas with migrant and illegal migrant
Hispanic residents). Multiple methods will be used in the research including
agency records, periodicals, crime reports, and in-depth interviews with private
individuals as well as with community leaders, agency workers, and public
officials. This project will create a unique data set that should be invaluable
to understanding how social control systems operate and how patterns of crime
and victimization evolve in crisis situations.