* 9006537
* Molecular and Genetic Studies on Maize Elements
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/1990,08/31/1995
* Drew Schwartz, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 08/31/1995
* USD 170,000.00

The functioning of the Ac transposable element in maize is controlled by its own
product, transposase, that acts as a transactivating protein resulting in a
steady state condition. Activation of Ac is associated with the demethylation of
the promoter region. Structurally altered, defective Ac elements that differ in
the demethylation of their promoter by transposase will be employed in a study
designed to determine the molecular basis for the promoter demethylation. The
second part of this project involves an analysis of the long range cis
interaction between elements of the Ac-Ds system. When an Ac and a Ds element
are coupled on the same chromosome arms, the distal element becomes methylated
and is not digested by methylase-sensitive restriction enzymes. This effect is
limited to elements coupled on the same chromosome arm, but they may be as far
apart as 50 map units. Many different double and triple combinations of Ac, Ds
and other marker genes will be constructed to study the nature of this long
range cis interaction. During a period of previous NSF support, the author of
this proposal has discovered that one gene can influence the behavior of another
gene on the same, chromosome over much greater distances than previously
imagined. He now proposes to pursue this discovery, and attempt to elucidate the
mechanism by which such long-range interactions among genes occur.