* 9006591
* Action of Hormones in Plant Development: Hormonal Regulationof Gene Expression in Barley Aleurone Layers
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1994
* Tuan-hua Ho, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 06/30/1994
* USD 302,238.00

Gibberellic acid (GA), a plant hormone, regulates several important
physiological and developmental processes such as seed germination, post-
germination growth, stem elongation and flower induction. Together with another
hormone, abscisic acid (ABA), GA is known to regulate the synthesis and
secretion of several enzymes which are responsible for the utilization of
nutrients stored in the seed. The enzymes are essential for post-germination
growth of many cereal grains. The most abundant of these enzymes is alpha-
amylase, which degrades starch. As part of a long term effort to elucidate the
mode of action of GA and ABA this research will focus on gene expression in the
aleurone layers of germinating barley seeds. Previous research has revealed that
hormone-mediated regulation of enzyme expression in the barley-aleurone system
is mainly at the level of gene transcription. The proposed research will
investigate specific interactions between specific protein factors with
regulatory regions (promoters) of hormone-regulated genes in the barley-aleurone
system. Goal for this research include: (1) determination of specific DNA
sequences in the alpha-amylase promoters that interact with protein factors, (2)
investigation of the effect of hormonal treatments on the activity of the
protein factors, (3) determination of the importance of promoter sequences
inside the aleurone cells and (4) investigation of the activity of these factors
in genetic mutants with altered sensitivities to GA and ABA. Results from this
research should improve our understanding of the primary action of GA and ABA,
thus revealing new insights into the signal transduction pathway governing
hormonal regulation of gene expression in plants.