* 9006396
* The Processing and Properties of Hardware Description       Mechanisms
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/1991,12/31/1993
* Daniel Rosenkrantz, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 12/31/1993
* USD 108,703.00

Several hardware description mechanisms and computational problems involved in
the analysis and design of digital circuits are investigated. The goals are to
obtain a deeper, theoretical understanding of how the description mechanism
affects these computational problems, and to devise more efficient algorithms
for specific problems of interest. New models are being formulated where
appropriate, the effects of varying the form of certain description mechanisms
are being clarified, new algorithms and construction schemes are being
developed, and the complexity of many problems is studied. There is a focus on
hierarchical descriptions, with attention paid to which problems can be solved
more efficiently than is possible when the flattened circuit specified by the
given hierarchical description is constructed. Issues associated with the tree
corresponding to a given hierarchical description, and attributed values on this
tree are being addressed. The effect of algebraic specification and the effect
of the underlying algebraic system are also studied. Problems considered include
analysis, simulation, testing, and synthesis. The construction and analysis of
test schemes for algorithm-based fault tolerance is studied. Certain hardware
synthesis problems are investigated, from the perspective of exploitability of
algebraic or hierarchical specifications.