* 9006001
* Systematics of the 'Glabristyled' Robinieae (Leguminosae):  Molecular and Traditional Data
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1992
* Matthew Lavin, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 06/30/1992
* USD 52,624.00

Dr. Matt Lavin of Montana State University is beginning morphological and
molecular studies of woody tropical legumes of the Robinieae group, starting
with field collecting in the West Indies to amass herbarium specimens and
materials for laboratory analyses of chloroplast DNA mutations. Species
boundaries and relationships are poorly known in this group, and the integration
of traditional morphological characters from herbarium studies with new
molecular markers from restriction enzyme analyses promises to improve taxonomic
ordering and help determine phylogenetic linkages among the taxa. In turn, these
systematic insights will allow tests of various hypotheses proposed for the
geological history of the islands of the West Indies and for theories of plant
migrations in the region. Dr. Lavin is a young investigator with an impressive
record of taxonomic research on legumes from his doctoral and postdoctoral
periods. The techniques of restriction enzyme analysis of chloroplast DNA are
powerful ones, uncovering mutational differences between species that reflect
evolutionary divergence since their most recent common ancestor. The legumes he
is studying include some which are used for intercropping in cocoa and coffee
plantations, whose wood is used for local construction and furniture, and
herbage used for domestic animals. Improved taxonomic knowledge of the species
and their geographic distributions should aid in long-range management and
conservation of these natural plant resources.