* 9006788
* Taxonomy and Biogeography of Polar Sea Ice Bacteria
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1990,03/31/1995
* James Staley, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 03/31/1995
* USD 110,000.00

During the winter the temperature becomes sufficiently low for sea water to
freeze in high latitude polar regions. The layer of ice on the sea may thicken
to over two yards in depth. As the following spring approaches, microorganisms
begin growing in the lower foot of the sea ice. This community of sea ice
microorganisms is dominated by sea ice algae that grow to sufficient density to
impart a red to brown color to the lower layer. Bacteria derive nutrients from
the ice algae and grow with them in the layer. Although considerable work has
been performed on the sea ice algae, little is yet known about the kinds of
bacteria that grow in this cold environment. Dr. James Staley of the University
of Washington has collected sea ice bacteria from both antarctic and arctic
zones and has discovered novel forms, some with specialized gas vacuoles in
their cells. Using standard bacteriological tests as well as newer molecular
methods of DNA analysis, including ribosomal gene sequencing, Dr. Staley is
characterizing the various bacterial strains collected from polar sea ice. One
objective is to determine whether the same species of bacteria occur in both the
north and south polar ice communities. Another objective is to assay the range
of taxonomic diversity present in the two geographically separate regions.
Knowledge about true cold-adapted bacteria would have eventual implications for
decomposition and waste disposal in polar regions and cold marine waters.