* 9006825
* Population Dynamics and Community Organization of Voles:    Experimental Tests of Multifactorial Hypotheses
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1994
* George Batzli, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 07/31/1994
* USD 304,960.00

The research proposed seeks to demonstrate the feasibility of testing complex,
multifactorial hypotheses regarding the population dynamics and community
organization of small mammals. The approach is to conduct a series of fully
factorial experiments in the field using penned populations. The proposed
experiments will determine if the results from earlier work, in which food and
predation had equal and additive effects on the density of prairie voles, apply
to meadow voles (a closely related species found in the same grassy habitats in
central Illinois). In addition, a third major environmental factor
(interspecific competition) will be manipulated to see if factor interaction
medicated by behavior influences the outcome of competition. To accomplish these
objectives and to test related hypotheses, replicated experiments will be
conducted during each of three growing seasons. Each replication will consist of
a set of eight different combinations of treatments from the following three
factors: food (normal or rabbit chow added), predation (normal or protected from
predators) and interspecific competitors (prairie voles alone, meadow voles
alone, both prairie voles and meadow voles). If successful, this approach should
dramatically improve our ability to understand the effects of simultaneously
operating multiple factors on natural populations, which may have implications
for many endangered populations worldwide.