* 9006453
* Mathematical Sciences: Increasing Minority Participation in Mathematics at the Collegiate Level and Beyond
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/1990,10/31/1992
* Leon Henkin, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 10/31/1992
* USD 156,000.00

An expansion of an extensive effort at the University of California Berkeley to
attract, encourage and increase minority participation in the mathematical
sciences will be supported by this award. The genesis of the project lies in the
Professional Development Program at the university. This program was begun in
1974 to enrich the mathematics-based professions with minorities and women who
could perform at levels of leadership. Focus up to 1989 was on transforming the
accomplishments of minority students in freshman calculus from failure to
success. The success of the effort has enabled significant numbers to graduate
with majors in engineering, science and mathematics. This success has led to
similar programs at other institutions such as the Universities of Illinois and
Texas. This award is directed toward raising the sights of the PDP to that of
directing promising minority undergraduates into science careers. At this point,
few pursue upper-division mathematics courses far enough to experience the
deductive emphasis which gives these courses such a different character from the
computationally-oriented lower-division mathematics courses. The program funded
by the award has three parts. First, is a six week residential research summer
school designed to inspire and help prepare minority undergraduates who have
excelled in lower division work. The activity is designed to motivate them to
continue their studies and eventually complete a Ph.D. degree in either
mathematics or a closely-related field. A long-range research program will be
conducted by the PDP staff aimed at better understanding the factors that lead
students to enroll in pivotal mathematics courses, understanding why they
continue to study mathematics and why they enter mathematics-related fields.
Finally, work will be done to increase the number of faculty actively working on
improving minority student performance and persistence in mathematics at all
levels. A special focus will be developing a cadre of research mathematicians
who can serve as effective mentors and graduate dissertation advisors to alumni
of the summer school experiences. Students will be selected nationally through
advertisements in major professional journals, personal contacts, direct mailing
to department heads and announcements at national mathematics and education
conferences. Seminars held during the term of the summer school will be led by
active mathematicians carefully selected for their strong interest in working
with minority students. Special colloquium talks will be scheduled regularly. In
addition, the strongest student participants will be brought to the national
meeting of the Mathematical Association of America/American Mathematical Society
in San Francisco in January, 1991.