* 9006067
* Evolution of Androdioecy
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1992
* Thomas Elias, Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 07/31/1992
* USD 65,005.00

The maintenance of male plants and plants possessing both male and female
reproductive organs in a single species has been termed androdioecy. However,
several plant scientists have suggested that it is theoretically very difficult
for this reproductive system to exist in nature. In fact, not one androdioecious
species had been documented prior to current work. Dr. Rieseberg and his
colleagues have recently demonstrated that the plant species Datisca glomerata
is androdioecious and propose the determine how this reproductive system
originated and how it is being maintained. Because Datisca glomerata is the only
plant species known to be androdioecious, it will provide a model system for
studies in the field of plant biology. Basic scientific questions can be
addressed using this model system: 1) how do different reproductive systems in
plants evolve and how are they maintained? 2) how can one reproductive system be
changed to another? and 3) what is the genetic or environmental basis for this
change? These questions are important for basic plant ecologists, but are also
relevant to breeders trying to improve existing crop plants or trying to develop
new agriculturally important plants. For example, a species that has both male
and female plants is quite inefficient as a crop plant because only 50% of the
plants will bear fruit. Understanding reproductive system evolution is also
important for the maintenance of biodiversity. Changes in reproductive system
can alter species stability and potentially lead to their extinction.