* 9006882
* The Effect of Differential Photosynthetic Capacity on Fitness
* NONE,NONE
* 10/15/1990,03/31/1993
* Keith Garbutt, West Virginia University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 03/31/1993
* USD 59,912.00

The herbicide atrazine kills plants by disrupting the "light" reactions in the
photosynthetic pathway. It works by blocking the action of a critical protein
(QB) in the electron transport chain of photosystem II. The resistance takes the
form of a modification of the QB protein of photosystem II which prevents
atrazine binding to the QB protein. An additional effect of this modification of
the QB protein is to reduce photosynthetic capacity. This gives us biotypes with
high photosynthetic capacity (atrazine resistant) and low photosynthetic
capacity (atrazine susceptible). This project examines the link between
photosynthetic capacity and fitness, using atrazine resistant and susceptible
biotypes of Abutilon theophrasti, a common invader of agricultural fields in
Eastern North America. Atrazine resistance is confered by a single nuclear gene
in this species. It has classically been assumed that a reduction of
photosynthetic capacity will translate directly into a decrease in plant
fitness; however, this assumption has rarely been tested. The fitness
consequences of this reduction in photosynthetic capacity will be investigated
in three experiments, all conducted in the absence of atrazine. The first will
compare resistant and susceptible biotypes of A. theophrasti grown as well
spaced individuals, the second will be an intra- specific competition experiment
in which A. theophrasti will be competed with other commonly occurring weedy
annual species. In all three experiment, demographic growth analysis, a non-
destructive indirect method of growth analysis, will be performed in order to
provide a mechanistic interpretation of the link between physiology and fitness.