* 9006352
* Fiber Diffraction from Macromolecular Assemblies
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1993
* Lee Makowski, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Arthur Kowalsky
* 12/31/1993
* USD 345,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop new strategies for determining the
structures of macromolecular assemblies not amenable to conventional
crystallographic analyses. The focus will be on assemblies made up of many
identical subunits arranged into helical or planar arrays. Most of the subunits
making up these assemblies cannot be made to form three dimensional crystals nor
can the assemblies themselves be crystallized. Diffraction from the non-
crystalline specimens that they do form has intrinsic limitations that make
extraction of structural information more difficult than for crystallographic
studies. In this project Dr. Makowski will develop methods to exploit new
sources of phase information, methods for integrating structural information
from other experimental techniques, and continue development of fundamental
techniques needed for successful use of fiber diffraction. Specific objectives
include; (1) use of multiwavelength anomalous scattering for phasing fiber
diffraction patterns; (2) development of a method for refining structural models
directly against film data; (3) use of simulated annealing for refinement of
structural models against fiber diffraction data; (4) development of methods for
integrating other structural information as restraints into the refinement of a
structural model; (5) development of quantitative methods for assessment of
structural models; (6) exploration of new methods of specimen preparation. These
methods will be tested on a variety of macromolecular assemblies. The objective
of the work is an integrated set of methods applicable to a very broad range of
macromolecular assemblies.