* 9006622
* Support of International Activities
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1990,09/30/1993
* Catherine Ailes, Strategic Studies Center
* Contract
* William Blanpied
* 09/30/1993
* USD 930,233.00

During the past decade, science and technology have come to be regarded as
integral to the formulation of international political and economic policy. In
the Federal Government, the National Science Foundation plays a significant role
in the support of such policies by planning and implementing international
cooperation in science and technology through the promotion of activities
designed to achieve the highest possible scientific and engineering benefits for
U.S. science and engineering. Within NSF, the Division of Inter- national
Programs (INT) is the principal focal point for facilitating and supporting the
agency's international science and technology initiatives. Important changes
occurring in the world suggest that the development and implementation of
effective international science and technology programs based on strategic
information and careful policy analysis will be increasingly important in the
1990s. Examples of pertinent changes include: the movement toward economic
integration in Western Europe, the opening of Eastern Europe, the increasing
dynamism and economic cohesion in the Pacific Basin, and the growing aspirations
and science and engineering capabilities of several major Latin American
economies. Thus, NSF will face multiple challenges that will require it to
design and assess the efficacy of new initiatives, as well as evaluate the
impacts of on-going programs in the international area. Planning for these
activities will often require special meetings and conferences with selected
U.S. and foreign experts in specific science and engineering disciplines, in
addition to science policy specialists. It will also require special studies on
topics such as foreign capabilities in selected disciplines, or R&D expenditures
and personnel estimates of foreign countries. In order to carry out its
responsibilities in the international area and to develop new program and policy
initiatives to respond to the challenges occasioned by the worldwide changes,
INT requires external analytical and logistical support from a contractor who
can draw on a range of substantive expertise about the global context for
science and engineering, and who is also knowledgeable about NSF and INT's
specific mission and operating constraints. The objective of this contract is to
provide for that support on a continuing basis.