* 9006763
* ROA:  Evolutionary Dynamics of Speciation by Polploidy in   Treefrogs
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1995
* Richard Sage, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1995
* USD 117,388.00

Polyploidy in higher animals is generally rare, but more than fifteen species
of five different families of frogs and toads have been discovered. The subjects
of this research are two widely ranging North American gray treefrogs - the
polyploid species Hyla versicolor, a tetraploid (2 times normal chromosome
number) and its diploid counterpart, h. chrysoscelis. The main goal is to learn
if H. versicolor arose more than once from H. chrysoscelis or as a hybrid
between ancestral h. chrysoscelis and another diploid, h. avivoca. The multiple-
origin hypotheses will be tested by comparing the nucleotide sequences of
mitochondrial DNA from frogs of all three species from widespread areas through
their distribution. The hypothesis of multiple- origin will be supported if in
an evolutionary tree based on sequence data, different populations of H.
versicolor occupy different branches. In other words, the two species in the
same area of the range would be more similar to each other than individuals of
the same species from different parts of the range. A second goal is to compare
differences in the acoustic properties of the mating calls of H. versicolor and
H. chrysoscelis in areas where they occur together (sympatry) with differences
between areas where only one species occurs (allopatry). Because the frogs use
mating calls alone to identify correct mates, and because mismatings lead to
sterile, triploid hybrids, the working hypothesis is that differences within
sympatry will be greater than differences between allopatric populations.