* 9006348
* Object Clustering Heuristics and Algorithms in Next         Generation Database Management Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/1990,02/28/1993
* Roger King, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Ashany
* 02/28/1993
* USD 175,000.00

Traditional (e.g., relational) database systems cluster data on disks in order
to minimize the cost of accessing information; such mechanisms are simplistic
and are designed before the system is put into use - and are never changed. But
new applications are making bigger demands on database systems. An example is
aircraft engineering, where multiple designers simultaneously perform ever-
changing manipulations on complex integrations of electronic and mechanical
engineering components. This is in contrast to data processing, where highly-
predictable data manipulations are typically performed. This has caused data
clustering to emerge as a critical area demanding newer and more powerful
algorithmic results. The goal of the self-adaptive clustering project is to
consider the wide variety of factors that come into play when one considers
clustering algorithms which are not constructed in advance and can adapt
themselves to changing, unusual database access patterns. This will lead to the
development of a theory of self-adaptive clustering, which will be of great
significance to a wide variety of database users, in particular CAD/CAM,
software, printed circuit board, and VLSI designers. This will provide a
spectrum of software algorithms which will transform overly-expensive
applications into cost-effective systems.