* 9006621
* Resource Islands:  Their Role in the Stability of           Desert Ecosystems
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1990,11/30/1993
* Ross Virginia, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing grant
* None
* 11/30/1993
* USD 363,756.00

This proposal addresses the role of resource islands in the desertification of
the Jornada basin of southern New Mexico. Resource islands represent small-scale
patches or "hot spots" of biological activity distributed across a heterogeneous
desert landscape. They can be characterized by the functional and structural
properties of the shrubs that occupy and form the island, along with the
interactions of the shrubs with their immediate abiotic and biotic environment.
The significance of these islands to the function and persistence of desert
ecosystems in response to disturbances and environmental change is poorly
understood. This project, conducted by Drs. Virginia and Reynolds, seeks to
understand how desert shrubs acquire resources to form these islands. The
investigators are also interested in understanding how the degree of island
formation is related to the stability of individual islands, and the role of
resource island formation in determining the stability of desert grasslands and
shrublands. These tasks will be accomplished by an integrated field and modeling
research effort that will: 1) examine the degree of resource island formation
associated with the two most successful shrubs (Prosopis glandulosa ?mesquite!,
Larrea tridentata ?creosotebush!) in the recently desertified Jornada landscape;
2) determine if structural changes accompanying island formation (e.g. plant
architecture) result in a positive feedback system of island self-augmentation;
3) determine if the magnitude and pattern of response of Larrea and Prosopis to
an extreme environmental change (e.g. induced summer drought) is a function of
the degree of island formation; and 4) develop landscape models that can
increase our understanding of the stability of grassland-shrubland systems in a
changing environment. Drs. Virginia and Reynolds are leading ecosystem
ecologists and have outstanding institutional support for this research.