* 9006783
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant: Solid State NMR       Spectrometer
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1992
* Mark Petrich, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* HUSEYIN A. SEHITOGLU
* 07/31/1992
* USD 79,500.00

Solid state Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) reveals quantitative information
about local bonding configuations and molecular motions in solids. NMR of liquid
samples is a well developed technology, and is used on a routine basis in
chemical laboratories. NMR of solid samples is a much newer technique. Because
or its fairly recent emergence, a great number of problems have yet to be
addressed with solid state NMR. Because of its unique capabilities, NMR holds
enormous promise to help answer these problems. Funds are requested to construct
an NMR spectrometer. The system and its subcomponents are a dual channel,
spectrometer double heterodyne system, with a wide bore (100mm) 4.7 Tesla
magnet. The hydrogen nucleus resonance frequency is 200 MHz. Finally, the cost
of rf components increases with frequency. Constructing a spectrometer with a
maximum frequency of 200 MHz decreases the cost relative to higher magnetic
field systems without hindering the experiments we wish to perform. In-situ NMR
spectroscopy of chemical processing, hydrogen diffusion, and heat treatment of
materials will require the construction of a special probe, which will contain
gas tubing, heating elements, and thermocouples. An instrument will be built for
less than one-half of the cost of a commercial instrument of comparable
specifications.