* 9006920
* Conference Support:  Organization of Conference on          Integrated Optics to be held in Monterey, CA, July 30-August1, 1990.
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1991
* Robert Wangemann, Institute of Electrical & Electronics Engineers, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 12/31/1991
* USD 10,000.00

This grant supports Organization of the topical meeting on Integrated Optics,
Monterey, CA, July 30 - Aug. 1, 1990. This topical meeting will highlight the
area of Optoelectronic Integrated Circuits (OEICs), which are circuits that
monolithically integrate optical and electronic components on a single
semiconductor chip. OEICs represent a device technology which has the potential
to make a major impact in future telecommunications and computing systems
requirements. There are major challenges in materials growth and device
fabrication that are presented by the integration of very different devices on a
single chip. The Japanese have made significant advances in this technology,
particulary because of the strengths of their leading industrial firms active in
optoelectronics, whereas in the United States the efforts have been very
fragmented. The goal of this topical meeting is to bring together researchers
and students working on OEICs, from industry, government labs, and academia, to
discuss the latest developments in the field, to assess the potential of the
technology and the problems related to fabrication, and to stimulate the
creation of collaborative efforts. The meeting will focus on materials and
fabrication issues as well as systems applications.