* 9006077
* Efficient Computer Algorithms for Symbolic Mathematics
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1994
* Erich Kaltofen, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 08/31/1994
* USD 196,899.00

Several problems on the subject of efficient sequential and parallel algorithm
design and development for computer algebra and symbolic mathematics are
considered. The design of a processor-efficient parallel algorithm for solving
general and special linear systems over an abstract, possibly modular, domain
will be investigated, as well as the design of an efficient sequential algorithm
for computing the characteristic polynomial of an implicitly given square matrix
by a function that computes the product of this matrix with a vector. A computer
implementation of the Goldwasser-Kilian/Atkin Las Vegas integer primality test
will be enhanced by improving several auxiliary number theoretical algorithms
used in the test. An algorithm for factoring multivariate polynomials that are
given by black box programs for their evaluation will also be implemented on a
network of workstations. Furthermore, a search for more effective versions of
Hilbert irreducibility-type theorems will continue. Research on two new topics
that are related to emerging applications of symbolic computation is suggested.
Motivated by geometric design, an algorithm for computing the irreducible
components of an algebraic curve or surface given by its polynomial defining
implicit equation with floating point coefficients will be developed. Attacked
by computer algebra methods, the problem is to compute the approximate
factorization of a rational bivariate polynomial. Finally, branching out of
algebraic arithmetic, the usage of special function, such as squareroots,
exponentials, or logarithms, in the straight-line program will be investigated.
In particular, a model of an analytic straight- line program will be formulated,
and a transformation theory for this model will be investigated.