* 9006523
* Pliocene to Pleistocene Fauna of Central America:  The      Isthmus as a Biogeographic Barrier
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1990,08/01/1991
* Anthony Coates, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 08/01/1991
* USD 156,237.00

The Isthmus of Panama emerged about 2.8-3.2 million years ago. It formed a
major marine barrier splitting the American tropical ocean into two new realms
with profoundly different ocean circulation, salinity, temperature and
nutrients. It also connected two hitherto separate and different terrestrial
faunas and floras. It was perhaps the single most important oceanic, climatic
and biogeographic event in the last 60 million years. This project will locate
and describe the sedimentary strata on each side of the isthmus dating from
about 6 million years to the present. Using micro and macro fossils Dr. Coates
and his colleagues will date the sequence of sediments and attempt to establish
the precise time of final closure of the isthmus. The project entails 1)
collecting and section measuring field expeditions, 2) large-scale sample
processing to extract specimens, 3) identifying and describing species, 4)
assigning ages and paleoenvironments to the strata and fossils, 5) entering all
this information into a specially designed computer database. The database
generated will be unique in its potential to address some fundamental questions
in biology, such as the causes and patterns of origination and extinction of
species in a variety of marine animals and plants, related to a specific major
environmental event.