* 9006705
* Chemistry of Diamond Nucleation and Growth: Kinetic         Measurement, Modeling, and Film Characterization via REMP/MSand Solid State NMR
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1994
* Jack Howard, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/1994
* USD 555,000.00

Diamond thin films have numerous potential technological applications due to
their extraordinary physical properties. Improvements in film quality,
deposition rate, and uniformity are keys to the realization of this potential,
requiring understanding and control of diamond nucleation and growth. In
particular, heteroepitaxial diamond thin films for semiconductor devices have
yet to be achieved. A multifaceted approach involving both experimental
measurements and theoretical predictions of species impinging upon the growing
surface, coupled with characterization and modeling is essential for unlocking
the complexities of diamond deposition chemistry. The PIs plan to develop a
mechanistic understanding of diamond growth which can be used for the design of
equipment and processes for crystalline, high quality diamond thin films. The
kinetic mechanisms of diamond growth will be experimentally probed using a hot-
filament reactor. Using molecular beam sampling to extract the species striking
the heated wafer surface, the precursors for diamond deposition will be measured
using Resonancely Enhanced Multiphoton Ionization Mass Spectrometry (REMPI/MS).
The gas phase concentrations will also be measured using Laser Induced
Fluorescence (LIF) and Coherent, Anti-Stokes Raman Spectroscopy (CARS). Both
chemical and physical transport models will be constructed and tested against
the experimental data in order to identify the main processes or steps that
control the kinetics of diamond nucleation, growth, and defect formation. The
defect structures of diamond films will be measured using Carbon 13 solid state
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) as well as conventional techniques. The NMR
results will be analyzed to identify the type and quantity of defects and will
be correlated to conventional techniques such as Raman scattering to relate
these studies to others in the literature. Selective Carbon 13 isotopic labeling
will be used to gain insight into the kinetics of diamond formation. The
nucleation of diamond growth will be quantified using Scanning Tunneling
Microscopy (STM) to count and measure the nuclei during the initial phases of
growth. Devices will be fabricated and tested, and their characteristics will be
correlated with the diamond growth parameters and film characterization.