* 9006977
* Equipment Grant:  Symbolic Computing Equipment for NonlinearPlasma and Semiconductor Research
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1992
* Barbara Abraham-Shrauner, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/1992
* USD 10,190.00

This Research Equipment Grant will enable acquisition of a Macintosh IIci
computer and the program Mathematica as essential aides in the Principal
Investigator's research activities. The research projects encompass diverse
topics which share two common attributes: the collective motion of charged
particles, chiefly in plasmas, and nonlinear processes. The research is
theoretical with a mixture of analytical and numerical approaches where symbolic
computation will be increasingly important in the analytical portions. The
investigation of ion beams, used in neutral beam heating and sputtering,
attempts to derive analytical expressions for the ion distribution functions,
the electric fields, potentials, etc. with a model for the measured beam density
as the starting point. Finding more realistic and stable distribution functions
is possible. Analytical expressions for the carrier speed in collisional
semiconductors are useful in the investigation of possible spatially periodic
space charge and device applications. The research of the nonlinear Vlasov-
Maxwell equations on integrable systems will become an investigation of the
boundaries of chaotic behavior for time-dependent electric fields. Chaotic
solutions may exist for the carrier speed in semiconductors also. In all
projects nonlinear solutions found by using Lie group symmetries of differential
equations have given results either not known before or found much more
efficiently.