* 9006052
* Crosslinks Between Plant Cell Wall Polymers
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1994
* Andrew Mort, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 01/31/1994
* USD 265,000.00

The structure of plant cell wall is not known in enough detail to explain any of
its biological roles in such processes as growth, disease, resistance, and
maintenance of cell shape. Our lack of structural knowledge is probably due to
both the complexity of the structure and the paucity of researchers working on
detailed structural analysis of cell walls. Dr. Mort is proposing to continue
analysis of the structure of the pectins of cotton suspension culture cell
walls. The goal over the next four years is to fully characterize the primary
structure of these pectins. He will characterize the rhamnogalacturonan I (RGI)
region with respect to the structure of its sidechains, the distribution of
acetylation in its backbone, and to what polymers RGI is attached. He will
determine the size of the homogalacturonan regions in cotton pectins, the
distribution of rhamnosyl residues in them, the distribution of methyl
esterification in them, and the type and distribution of sidechains directly
attached to the galacturonic acid residues (if they exist). He will also
determine the nature of the linkage between the homogalacturonan region of
pectin and RGI. When these details of the structure of cell wall pectins are
known it will easier to study the complexities of the biosynthesis of pectins
and the functional significance of the structural complexities of pectins, and
to construct a more detailed model for the structure of dicot cell walls. It
will also be easier to understand the interaction of plant pathogens with cell
walls.