* 9006104
* Theory of Electrical Activity and Insulin Release for the   Pancreatic Beta-Cell
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/1990,05/31/1994
* Joel Keizer, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Peter Arzberger
* 05/31/1994
* USD 364,072.00

The long-term objective of this project is to understand the molecular
mechanisms that control secretion of insulin from the pancreatic B-cell. These
mechanisms are complex, and quantitative theoretical methods, including the
kinetic-molecular theory of nonequilibrium thermodynamics, will be used to
formulate the appropriate mathematical description. Our approach is based on
experimental schemes of molecular processes involved in insulin granule
formation, Ca2+ handling, phosphorylation, and insulin granule exocytosis.
Translating these schemes into elementary processes, and thence into rate
equations, we will explore the effect of the following mechanisms on rate of
insulin release: 1) Complex electrical activity of the plasma membrane related
to Ca2+ and pH; 2) electrical coupling between B-cells in islets; 3) Ca2+
handling mechanisms; 4) phospholipid-based biochemical mechanisms involved in
the control of insulin secretion. These mechanisms will be explored using
mathematical analysis and computer simulations of the corresponding ordinary
differential equations. Sufficient experimental information regarding the rates
of the processes is available to justify these calculations, which will be
interfaced closely with ongoing experimental work. The work will provide insight
into the cellular-molecular mechanisms involved in type II (noninsulin
dependent) diabetes. More generally, this work will help provide a basis for a
theoretical cell biology and cell physiology. The complexity of the cell
requires a good analytical foundation to complement experimental studies in
order to develop a good theoretical basis for understanding the mechanism of
cellular function.