* 9006607
* REU:  Systematics and Phylogeny of Madagascan and African   Dalechampia (Euphorbiaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1993
* W. Scott Armbruster, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/1993
* USD 33,172.00

Dalechampia is a genus of vines of the poinsettia family (Euphorbiaceae) common
throughout the lowland tropics in Asia, Africa, and the Americas. Although much
is now known about the species diversity, phylogenetic relationships, and
pollination biology of the New World species, in large part because of Dr. Scott
Armbruster's studies over the last ten years, relatively little is known about
Old World species. Dalechampia is being employed as a model system for the study
of how tropical plants evolve in response to selective pressures generated by
specialized pollinators. Old World species must be integrated into these studies
to complete a phylogenetic analysis of the entire genus. Furthermore, accurate
floristic inventories (used in making management and conservation decisions) of
tropical regions of the Old World as well as the New depend on reliable
taxonomic information for common species such as Dalechampia. In the Old World,
Dalechampia is most diverse in Madagascar and southern Africa. Dr. Armbruster
will collect herbarium specimens in this region along with liquid-preserved
material, for morphological and biochemical analyses, including analyses of the
unusual resins and fragrance compounds produced by the plants and used by
pollinating bees. Observations of the behavior of pollinating animals will also
be made. Morphological data will be analyzed using cladistic methods to
determine likely phylogenetic trees that show relationships among Old World taxa
and between Old and New World groups. These results will improve the
classification system for Dalechampia, indicate likely migratory pathways in the
evolution of Old and New World species, and determine the origins of the various
pollination mechanisms found in these plants.