* 9006734
* REU:  Dynamics of Tropical Forest Seed Banks: Seed Predatorsas Determinants of Forest Regeneration Patterns and Plant-  frugivore Coevolution
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1992
* Kelvin Murray, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 01/31/1992
* USD 14,605.00

Seed dormancy mechanisms are widespread among tropical plants that colonize
small-scale disturbances (e.g., treefalls),and presumably evolved because
disperses deposit most seeds in inappropriate habitats (i.e., beneath intact
forest canopies). Most colonists indeed arrive before gap formation, but the
typical "residence time" of seeds in the soil before gap information is unknown.
How long seeds persist in the soil is dependent upon the rates at which they are
"removed," both by predators and by exceeding inherent limits of viability.
Rates of removal from the soil have profound consequences for such "pioneer"
plants and the communities in which they occur: species composition in patches
recovering from natural or anthropogenic disturbance is largely determined by
the composition of the seed bank at the time of disturbance. In addition, seed
removal rates mediate the fitness increments associated with different ripening
schedules and with dispersal by different animals. This study will take
advantage of extensive background data on germination requirements, seed
dormancy, and bird-generated seed shadows in Costa Rican pioneer plants to
evaluate these effects. Through several controlled, replicated field
experiments, the P.I. will measure rates if seed input to and removal from the
soil seed bank, and then examine the consequences of seed demography for
community structure and the evolution of ripening phenologies and plant-
disperser relationships. This work will have important implications for analyses
of tropical forest dynamics.