* 9006128
* Conference:  Organization of Conference on Optical Multiple Access Networks to be held in Monterey, CA on July 25-27,   1990.
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/1990,08/31/1991
* Robert Wangemann, Institute of Electrical & Electronics Engineers, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 08/31/1991
* USD 8,000.00

A major objective of this meeting is to bring together the leaders of the more
traditional communications and networking community with the electro-optics and
device community. These two communities have little or no collaborative
tradition but do have a rapidly growing need for each others expertise. This
need was explicitly identified in a recent official report of the National
Science Foundation. That report, entitled "NSF Panel Report on the Interface
Between Optical Devices and Systems," which convened on May 22, 1989, explored
ways and means to enhance the interaction between these two groups. Briefly, the
panel concluded that the split between device fabrication and theoretical system
researchers was too extreme and that team or group efforts and projects by
members of both communities must be fostered and encouraged. The panel report
concludes that the NSF has a crucial role to play in enhancement of the
system/device interface. In summary, the Optical Multiple Access Networks
meeting will provide an excellent opportunity for optical systems and device to
become more familiar with each others discipline, to meet key individuals, to
help identify critical emerging technologies, and to provide the collective
personal, and professional foundation needed to encourage future group and team
efforts.