* 9006563
* Management Training and Public Service Education as         Correlates of Orientations Toward Public Service            Professionalism among State Administrators in 50 States
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/1990,03/31/1994
* Cassie Osborne, Jr., Kentucky State University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 03/31/1994
* USD 249,411.00

The research proposed in this document is a study of the professional
socialization of state public administrators. Preliminary findings of NSF
(1987-1990) supported research on Kentucky State administrators has suggested
that state government sponsored management training programs constitute an
important correlate of the professional development of the state administrators
in Kentucky. Considering the diverse program variations in the management
training programs sponsored by various state governments, these preliminary
findings on a single-state study suggest the need for a comprehensive national
study. A theorical model was proposed in the earlier study which has been
refined in this proposed national study. A new construct "state administrative
culture" has been posited in the proposed model. The proposed fifty state study
will focus on the relationships between public service education/state agency
sponsored management training programs and the orientations of a representative
sample of 25,000 state managers in the fifty states toward public service
professionalism. The methodology of data collection will be mail surveys aiming
at 50% response rate generating about 12,500 valid questionnaires for data
analyses. Four specific hypotheses will be tested about the relationships
between the orientations toward public service professionalism and public
service education/management training. The proposed project will involve
Kentucky State University graduate students, faculty, and professional staff of
the Governmental Services Center. Consultants from the Council of State
Governments, and research faculty from the universities of Kentucky and
Louisville will assist the research team. One of the goals of the project is to
strengthen the social science research capability of Kentucky State University,
an historically black higher education institution. This will be the first
national level empirical study of the professional socialization of state
administrators with a comprehensive sample. It is anticipated that the findings
of this study will generate new knowledge about the role of management training
programs as agents of professional socialization of state public administrators.