* 9006320
* REU:  Influence of Nest Placement on Ecology of Coexisting  Species
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/1991,06/30/1993
* Thomas Martin, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 06/30/1993
* USD 99,180.00

This project will expand previous work on nest predation and nest placement as
influences on habitat selection, coexistence of species, and reproductive
investment. Nest placement and nest predation have received relatively little
attention in such topics and, thus, can increase our understanding of these
topics areas. Plus, knowledge of ecological constraints on nesting success in
critical to conservation of species because of the importance of reproductive
success to population maintenance. Data on nesting success and associated
habitat for more than 350 nest will be collected during two additional years
under this renewal. These data will be used to test hypotheses and predictions
on nest patch choice and differences among coexisting species. Artifical nest
will be used to conduct experimental tests of invasibility of communities as a
function of evolved nest placement traits. Researchers will study Hermit
Thrushes nesting in the same substrate in two different habitats to examine
effects of evolved nest placement on local nesting success (e.g.. "source -
sink" effects). Variability in nest placement will be examined within and among
years and relative to nest predation. Effects of nest placement on nest
attendance by females, feeding and guarding of females by males, and feeding
nestlings will be monitored. Finally, differences among the coexisting species
based on their foraging sites versus nesting sites will be compared. Results
will contribute to the basic ecology of avian communities and to conservation
biology of birds. //