* 9006854
* Leaf Virus Infection and Shade-Sun Acclimation
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1994
* Steven Kelley, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Mark Courtney
* 01/31/1994
* USD 262,995.00

Plant pathologists have frequently suggested viruses are parasites of
chloroplasts. The investigators will integrate approaches from plant population
biology, physiological ecology, and pathology to test the hypothesis that virus
infection in leaves of herbaceous plants growing in the shade may limit their
ability to acclimate to, and to occupy bright light habitats. A field study in
which three species from shaded and sunny habitats will be infected with known
viruses has been designed to test the significance of virus interactions with
photosynthesis under natural conditions. The species selected, Solanum
dulcamara, Plantago lanceolata, and Anthoxanthum odoratum, have all been thought
to show ecotypic differentiation with respect to sun and shade, and all are
known to carry many viruses under field conditions. It is possible that symptoms
of terminal photoinhibition (leaf yellowing in the sun) previously associated
with shade ecotypes may reflect the consequences of viral infection. New methods
of chlorophyll fluorescence imaging will be developed which can diagnose
impaired photosynthesis in virus infected leaves prior to symptom expression.
These non-intrusive methods will be used to screen populations of plants for
changes in photosynthesis which will be linked to plant growth, fecundity, and
survival following infection. Such instrumentation may well find application in
horticulture, where virus infection of plants in nursery cultivation is rampant.