* 9006914
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for CoatingsResearch
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/1990,09/30/1996
* Frank Jones, Eastern Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 09/30/1996
* USD 470,000.00

The area of coating is of very high economic importance to this country and the
need to increase the scientific knowledge base through research in this field is
well known. Although coatings technology is evolving from an art to a science,
much of today's coatings development is still done by empirical methods. The
coating technologist relies less on firmly based scientific principles and more
on his/her own judgement and/or data base of information of actual performance
of coatings in the field. The data base may be large and sophisticated, but it
is empirical. Empirical methods have yielded slow, steady progress but
breakthroughs and innovations have been rare. Given the competitiveness of the
world market, and the pressures to find pollution free coatings, a center
directed toward scientific studies of coating is highly desirable. The
establishment of a Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) for
Coatings Research is an ideal part of the solution of the problem. Eastern
Michigan University proposes to form an I/UCRC for Coatings Research to attack
the limits of coating technology. This award initiates an I/UCRC on Coatings
Research at Eastern Michigan University. The initial research will focus in the
areas of VOC reduction, corrosion protection, cross-linking, film mechanical
properties and water-borne coatings. The Coatings Research Center has excellent
research instrumentation and facilities, provided by grants from the State of
Michigan of almost $1,000,000. Eight companies and the State of Michigan have
agreed to provide $30,000 per year to support this research. The Program Manager
recommends that Eastern Michigan be awarded $50,000 per year for a five year
continuing grant. Near the end of each 12 month period the program manager
and/or the Director of the Engineering Centers Division will review the progress
of the center on a number of criteria, including the following: (1) the extent
to which the university-industry interaction and collaboration is developing;
(2) The extent to which the support base is expanding; (3) the extent to which a
robust research program is developing. If the review is satisfactory, the
program manager will recommend support of the next period of this continuing
grant.