* 9006738
* Collaborative Research: New Models of the Functional        Response in Vertebrate Herbivores: The Role of Plant        Availability and Animal Morphology
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1990,11/30/1992
* Bruce Wunder, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 11/30/1992
* USD 118,030.00

The outcome of many high order processes in ecology depends on the way in which
the abundance and distribution of plants affects the eating rate of plants by
animals. However, mechanistic models describing the operation of the functional
response of herbivores have failed to emerge apart from those developed for
predators. The P.I. offer new models describing the effects of spatial and
morphological characteristics of plants on the intake rate of plant tissue by
vertebrate herbivores. Their models depart from the Type II response represented
in Holling's disc equation by assuming that searching for food and processing it
are complementary rather than exclusive activities. Their hypothesize that the
parameters in our models should follow allometric relationships for linear and
surface dimensions of animals. The P.I.'s conduct a randomized complete block
experiment with a factorial layout to test the predictions of our models and to
describe the allometric scaling that governs their behavior. Factors in the
experiment will include animal body size, as well as plant bite size and
biomass. The investigator will observe responses to these treatments in
vertebrate herbivores ranging in mass over five orders of magnitude. The results
will serve as a foundation for future development of a comprehensive model of
feeding behavior in these animals.