* 9006847
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant: Ultrafast Optical     Switching in High Temperature Superconductors
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1992
* Hoi Kwok, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 01/31/1992
* USD 55,000.00

This project involves the study of ultrafast phenomena in high temperature
superconducting thin films. The Research Equipment Grant will enable
construction of an ultrafast electro-optic sampling system to investigate the
generation of nonequilibrium carriers by ultrashort laser pulses. Preliminary
laboratory results by the principal investigator indicate the presence of such
effects have been observed. Such effects should have important applications to
ultrafast optical switching, and to ultrafast electrical pulse generation and
propagation studies. These studies are also relevant to future opto- electronic
integrated circuits applications. In the proposed experiments, high quality
superconducting films as thin s 400 A are generated by the process of plasma-
assisted laser deposition on various dielectric substrates, and patterned into
transmission line structures. Since no post-annealing is necessary in this
sample preparation technique, these lines are smooth with controllable grain
sizes. Femtosecond laser pulses at various wavelengths are then used to measure
the temporal response of these patterned films. Wavelengths from 0.4-4.4 um will
be used. It is expected that the ultimate response time should be less than 1 ps
for the new oxide superconductors. Such studies are also of fundamental interest
to the understanding of nonequilibrium processes in high temperature 2-
dimension superconductors. Other applications include ultrafast and wideband
detection of radiation and ultrafast optical signal processing.