* 9006956
* Atomic-Scale Structure of DX Centers in Gallium-Aluminum-   Arsenide Semiconducting Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1995
* Timothy Hayes, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 03/31/1995
* USD 321,000.00

The goal of the research is to perform a systematic study of the deep level
defects in compound semiconductors known as "DX Centers". The thrust of the
research is to determine the atomic nature of the defects and to obtain
information on the local electronic nature, so as to formulate a detailed
microscopic model. X-ray absorption spectroscopy and Mossbauer effect
spectroscopy are used to study gallium aluminum arsenide doped to various levels
with tin and tellurium so as to produce shallow donor states, neutral "DX
Centers" and ionized "DX Centers". High quality, single crystal gallium aluminum
arsenide are being prepared by metallorganic chemical vapor deposition at the
Laboratory for Solid State Physics and Solar Energy in Valbonne, France. The
electrical behavior of the materials is characterized using Hall effect
measurements. Photoemission, quantitative Auger electron spectroscopy and
secondary ion mass spectroscopy are used to characterize the chemical
composition and doping levels. The development of many promising devices using
gallium aluminum arsenide compound semiconductors has been impeded substantially
by difficulties in producing highly-conductive wide-band gap materials. Dopants
that are commonly used cause deep level "DX Center" defects which are associated
with deleterious properties such as persistent photoluminescence, reduced
minority carrier lifetimes and recombination efficiencies.