* 9006458
* Molecular Evolution and Systematic Applications of PGI      Sequences in Plants
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1992
* Leslie Gottlieb, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 01/31/1992
* USD 65,000.00

The plant genus Clarkia, of annuals native to California, has been investigated
intensively for its morphology and its chromosomes to understand how plant
species originate and how new morphological and cytological patterns evolve.
More recently Dr. Les Gottlieb of the University of California at Davis has
studied biochemical and genomic aspects of these plants to describe the extent
of their overall genetic divergence, to account for the evolution of particular
genes, and to learn how to use this molecular evidence to infer phylogenetic
relationships among species. Many species of Clarkia have duplicated isozymes of
the glycolytic enzyme phosphoglucose isomerase (PGI), which catalyzes an
essential reaction in intermediary metabolism. Dr. Gottlieb recently sequenced
the nuclear genes encoding these isozymes in species with and without the
duplication. Unexpectedly the genes proved to have two different structures, one
with a large number of exons separated by introns of varying lengths and the
other with no introns at all. The genes without introns are hypothesized to be
descended from a "processed" gene that arose when a copy of the primary
messenger RNA transcript of a structured gene was inserted into the genome in a
position and orientation that permitted it to be expressed. Dr. Gottlieb will
continue his analysis of PGI gene structure in order to identify the taxonomic
distribution of the structured and nonstructured PGI genes in Clarkia. In turn,
this will allow determination of the origin(s) of the duplication when compared
with the phylogeny of these species determined from other morphological and
molecular evidence. The studies constitute one of the first analyses of
molecular evolution in nuclear genes in wild (noncultivated) plants and are
directly relevant to the description of the organization and pattern of sequence
variation, the source of evolutionary change.