* 9006195
* Evolution of Copper Resistance in Plant Microbes
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1990,09/30/1993
* Donald Cooksey, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 09/30/1993
* USD 271,000.00

The proposed research is to investigate how plant-associated bacteria adapt to
toxic levels of copper in the environment. Copper is an important bactericide
used frequently for disease control on agricultural plants, and microbes
associated with those plants are therefore exposed periodically to high levels
of this metal. The development of copper resistance in plant pathogenic bacteria
may pose a threat to the future use of copper in plant disease control, and a
better understanding of how this resistance develops will be important for
evaluating this threat. In addition, knowledge of how plant microbes develop
copper resistance may be useful in designing methods for detoxifying copper in
contaminated wastewaters or for genetically modifying plants and beneficial
microbes for increased tolerance to copper in the agricultural environment.
Microbial resistance to toxic metals such as mercury has been studied
extensively, but copper resistance has received much less attention. Unlike many
other heavy meals, copper is required by living organisms as a component of
certain enzymes; at low levels it is beneficial, but at high levels it is toxic.
The evolution of copper resistance in microbial populations must therefore
involve a balance between mechanisms to prevent copper toxicity and the ability
to maintain enough copper for cell growth. Dr. Cooksey isolated copper-resistant
bacteria from an agricultural system where copper compounds are routinely
applied to plants for bacterial disease control. Genes encoding copper
resistance have been cloned and characterized. This proposal concerns the
biochemical function of the cloned genes, their genetic regulation, and their
relationship to homologous genes that have recently been detected in several
bacterial species. Dr. Cooksey has hypothesized that the copper resistance genes
have evolved from genes that produce normal copper-containing proteins. These
proteins may have been modified to bind more copper and prevent the toxic metal
from reaching high concentrations in solution inside the bacterial cell. Since
copper is essential for growth, however, the resistance genes should be
expressed only when toxic levels of copper are present; Dr. Cooksey has shown
that the resistance genes are copper- inducible, and this proposal addresses
basic mechanisms of copper-inducible gene expression.