* 9007760
* Functional Approaches to Kin Recognition
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1990,07/31/1992
* Bruce Waldman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 07/31/1992
* USD 163,800.00

Frogs and toads recognize their close kin, and behaviorally discriminate
between close kin and non-kin. In this study, the investigators will examine the
ecological and evolutionary ramifications of kin discrimination in populations
of tadpoles and adults of the American toad, Bufo americanus. Kin recognition
may enable breeding adults to avoid incest by choosing an unrelated partner for
a mate. Kin discrimination is also evident in the schooling behavior of
tadpoles, which show preferences to aggregate with their siblings. To examine
how these preferences are expressed both in natural and experimental
populations, the investigators will determine the genetic relationships among
individuals by conducting analyses of DNA extracted from the nuclei and
mitochondria using two techniques: restriction fragment length polymorphisms
(RFLP's) and analyses of hypervariable nuclear sequences (DNA "fingerprinting").
Frogs and toads are model organisms for studying questions of how and why
animals recognize their kin. The results should offer new insight into the
ecology and evolution of kin recognition in vertebrates. The results should also
have practical ramifications. Deleterious effects on growth and survivorship are
often attributable to high levels of inbreeding. As endangered populations
decrease in size, inbreeding depression can lead to extinction. Kin-recognition
mechanisms may function to ensure optimal levels of outbreeding. Hence, an
understanding of these mechanisms may be important for the development of
effective plans of conservation. Experimental analyses of the effects of genetic
diversity on growth rates offer the promise of leading to new theoretical
insights that may ultimately improve harvesting yields, both in agricultural and
fisheries projects.