* 9007191
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant:  Equipment for        Macromolecular and Aggregate Research
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1992
* Ruben Carbonell, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 11/30/1992
* USD 35,700.00

The Department of Chemical Engineering at North Carolina State University has a
strong research program in the areas of applied polymer and colloid and
interface science. In order to sustain the momentum of this program and indeed
provide for new and innovative research, upgrade and replacement of existing
equipment is essential. This proposal requests funds to upgrade an aging
differential scanning calorimeter (DSC) with a modern, computer-controlled
expandable unit capable of extending measurements to high pressure and suitable
for expansion to include other polymer and colloid characterization tools. To
justify the acquisition of this equipment, three research projects are
described. These projects involve the use of the new DSC apparatus for probing
thermal transitions in (1) the prototypical equilibrium organic glass amber, (2)
novel phthalate-based polymers, and (3) transitional surfactant liquid
crystalline phases. The phthalate-based polymers exhibit so-called sorbent-
induced plasticization at high pressures and thus a cell for performing high
pressure studies is also requested as part of the new DSC acquisition. With this
new equipment, the interdisciplinary research program in colloid, polymer, and
interface science here in Chemical Engineering at North Carolina State
University should remain strong and vital in the years ahead.