* 9007807
* Interaction of Protein Factor e1F-4E with 5' mRNA Terminal  Cap and Cap Analogs
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1994
* Dixie Goss, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 01/31/1994
* USD 289,000.00

This project is concerned with understanding the mechanism of initiation of mRNA
translation in eucaryotic cells. By understanding the regulation of translation
we will better understand how viral infected cells inhibit normal protein
synthesis and preferentially translate viral RNAs and how growth and development
are regulated. The first part of this project involves describing the molecular
mechanism for initiation factor eIF-4E binding to 5' mRNA terminal cap analogs.
The binding of eIF-4E will be monitored by changes in protein fluorescence, cap
analog fluorescence, and circular dichroism. The effects of pH, ionic strength,
and temperature will be examined. From these data it will be determined if there
is a preferred conformation of the cap that is recognized by iIF-4E, the
structural features of the cap important for binding,and the relative affinity
of various cap derivatives. After characterizing these initial reactions, the
structural features of mRNA necessary for binding will be examined by using
oligonucleotides with defined structural differences. The effects of other
initiation factors and phosphorylation of eIF-4E on cap recognition will be
tested. These interactions will be quantitated by direct determination of
equilbrium constants. Such studies will lead to a more precise description of
the mechanism of initiation of translation. This information may be applicable
to other protein-nucleic acid interactions.