* 9007628
* Dissertation Research: Social Differentiation in the Middle Period in the Valle de la Plata, Colombia
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/1990,10/31/1991
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/1991
* USD 11,780.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Robert Drennan, Mr. Jeffrey Blick, a graduate
student in the University of Pittsburgh Anthropology Department, will collect
data for his doctoral dissertation. For many years Dr. Drennan has conducted
archaeological research in the Valle de la Plata region of Columbia, an area
noted for its impressive prehistoric sculptured stone figures. He has linked
these to the development of complex chiefly societies. Mr. Blick will examine
one stage of this process in detail. Focussing on the Middle Period which dates
from 0-850 A.D., he will examine ceramics from existing surface collections and
conduct soil phosphate testing as well as extensive survey to locate intact
sites. He will then excavate four to six residential areas to recover household
information. These individual households will then be compared to examine
potential differences in wealth and economic stratification. In recent years
many archaeologists have focussed on the question of how complex societies
develop and the role which emerging social inequality plays in this process.
Archaeological data make it clear that differences in prestige existed since
limited numbers of large and impressive burial structures are known to be
associated with this time period and these indicate differences in individual
status. It is not known, however, whether these also reflect variation in
individual wealth, and Mr. Blick's excavation of residential units will provide
relevant data. This research is important for several reasons. First, it will
increase our understanding of how complex societies originally developed.
Second, it will provide information of interest to a large number of
archaeologists who study the culture history of Middle and South America.
Finally, it will assist in the training of an extremely promising young
scientist.