* 9007592
* Dissertation Research: Development of Chiefdom Society:     Settlement Patterns and Social Organization of Kangjia
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1992
* Kwang-chih Chang, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 05/31/1992
* USD 12,000.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Kwang-Chi Chang, Ms. Li Liu will combine
archaeological research in China with laboratory analysis at Harvard University.
The results will form the basis for Ms. Liu's doctoral dissertation. Ms. Liu
will collaborate with Chinese archaeologists and participate in the ongoing
excavation of the site of Kangjia which is located in North China and dates to
the third millennium B.C. This large site - the remains of a village - covers an
area of ca. 190,000 square meters. Ms. Liu will first conduct a surface survey
and map the distribution of features and other material. She will follow this
with excavation in selected areas. Special attention will be focussed on
ceramics and she will conduct stylistic and mineralogical analyses. Stone tools
will be examined to determine function and faunal remains will be studied.
Carbon isotope analysis will be conducted on skeletal remains to provide
information on prehistoric diet. The Neolithic period in China provided the base
from which Chinese civilization emerged. As such, it is interesting both in its
own right and in a comparative context. Working in other parts of the world,
archaeologists have attempted to define the stages and processes which led to
increasing cultural complexity. Because so little of the archaeological work
conducted in China is accessible to non-Chinese, it has not been possible to fit
this important part of the world into the broader pattern. Ms. Liu's research
will help to remedy this defect. This research is important for several reasons.
First, it will provide Western archaeologists with a body of data of great
general interest. Secondly, it will help to build ties with Chinese
archaeologists and introduce them to a variety of valuable methods and
techniques used in the West. Finally, this grant will aid in the training of an
extremely promising scientist.