* 9007800
* On the Political Economy of Income Taxation
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1992
* Marcus Berliant, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 01/31/1992
* USD 22,066.00

This project examines two important aspects of the theory of income taxation
that are likely to have empirical or policy implications: voting over income
taxes and equity in optimal income taxes. First, the project develops a model of
income taxation in which a finite samples of consumers is drawn from a continuum
population that differs in abilities. Work disincentives are present as are
adverse selection and moral hazard problems. Income taxes can be non-linear. The
project explores existence, uniqueness and characterizations of the majority
rule equilibrium, as well as multi-stage voting games in this framework.
Comparative statics are also studied. Second, the project examines optimal
income taxes when a publicly available equity index of post-tax income enters
each of a continuum of consumers' utility function. The first order necessary
conditions and the shape of the optimal schedules are examined and compared with
those resulting from the standard model of income taxation. The theory of
taxation is an important area of study in economics. There is a large normative
literature on tax policy prescriptions. Most of this research abstracts from
political considerations. Past work also is either restricted to considerations
of only linear taxes, or does not consider problems due to information such as
adverse selection and moral hazard. The contribution of this project comes from
developing a theory with both political and economic content. The new theory is
not restricted to linear taxes, explicitly treats imperfect information and
incorporates political theory into models of optimal income taxes. This is
important because it permits the derivation of testable hypotheses and
eventually the use of this theory to explain the types of income taxes adopted
by voters in the real political world.