* 9007186
* Epigeous and Hypogeous Pezizales of Western North America
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1994
* William Denison, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* None
* 07/31/1994
* USD 180,000.00

True and false morels and allied cup-fungi, which generally form spore-
producing structures aboveground, and truffles, which sporulate belowground, are
Ascomycete fungi placed in the class Pezizales. They are only distantly related
evolutionarily to true mushrooms of the order Agaricales, class Basidiomycetes.
True morels and truffles are among the most avidly sought, and expensive, edible
wild "mushrooms." Dr. Nancy Weber and her colleagues at Oregon State University
are studying the patterns of morphological variation and geographical
distribution in this group of fungi throughout the western United States, an
area of high diversity in the group. Studies of freshly collected specimens will
complement studies of museum-preserved samples, in order to determine species
circumscriptions and describe reliable morphological features for
identification. At present there is no comprehensive taxonomic treatment of this
important group of fungi for North America. In addition to their importance as
gourmet foods, members of the order Pezizales play key roles in forest
ecosystems. Some are important as food for squirrels, deer, and other animals.
Some are mycorrhizal symbionts of forest trees. In the absence of appropriate
mycorrhizal fungi, trees take up soil nutrients inefficiently and rarely survive
for more than a year or so. Some Pezizales are saprobes, recycling forest
debris. And some are among the first fungi to sporulate following a fire or
other disturbance. Understanding of the ecological dynamics of western forests
depends in part on accurate identification of these mycorrhizal partners of
forest trees, to be facilitated by this basic taxonomic study.