* 9007928
* Adaptation to Sedentism in Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1990,08/31/1992
* Robert Benfer, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 08/31/1992
* USD 33,396.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Robert Benfer and his colleagues
conducted multi-year excavations at the site of Paloma, located on the desert
coastal plain of Peru. The site dates from the pre-ceramic period and documents
the emergence of the earliest sedentary communities in this region of the world.
The inhabitants, although they relied on hunted and gathered foods, were able to
develop a secure enough subsistence base to maintain what appear to be permanent
settlements. In the course of excavation, Dr. Benfer and colleagues opened large
areas and uncovered both full storage pits and house remains. These proved
extremely rich in both floral and faunal materials. They also uncovered large
numbers of well preserved - often mummified - burials. Because of the extreme
desertic conditions which resulted in this excellent preservation, the Paloma
site provides unique insight not only into the subsistence adaptations of the
inhabitants but also into their biological response. Through excavation at other
sites, the team has also been able to set Paloma into a broader geographic and
chronological context. Dr. Benfer will now conduct analyses and limited
fieldwork to allow final publication of the results. A brief field season will
permit additional - and necessary - stratigraphic correlation. Faunal and floral
samples will be analyzed and radiocarbon dates obtained. This research is
important for several reasons. It will allow the final and definitive
publication of an extremely important archaeological site. It will provide
insight into the process which led to the sedentization of previously mobile
hunting and gathering groups and, thus, shed light on the process which led to
the development of complex societies. Finally, because of graduate student
involvement, it will assist in the training of a young scientist.