* 9007949
* General-Relativistic Plasmas in Cosmological Backgrounds    (Physics): ROW Planning Grant
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/1990,03/31/1992
* Charles Warlick, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Isaacson
* 03/31/1992
* USD 5,840.00

A program of research will be initiated to study plasmas in the early Universe,
when general-relativistic effects due to the expansion of the background are
significant. Plasma dynamics during this epoch could have important
ramifications for the theory of galaxy formation and of the origin of
intergalactic, and possibly also galactic, magnetic fields. The synthesis of
general relativity and plasma physics is a field that is largely untouched, and
the cosmological implications in particular are mostly unexplored. The simple
linear theory of cosmological plasmas has been studied in the single-particle
approximation and in the magnetohydrodynamic limit. A kinetic approach, based on
the general-relativistic Boltzmann equation, will be carried out. In addition,
some nonlinear analysis will be performed. However, for most nonlinear phenomena
to be studied adequately, numerical simulation is necessary. Because the
nonlinear, collective effects are among the most interesting, computer codes are
being developed to investigate such effects. Many applications of these codes
are underway or planned, including, but not limited to, the study of
fluctuations in plasmas in the early Universe, the modeling of shock formation
and heating due to mode interactions or to Alfven waves, and the investigation
of the effect of dynamo and reconnection mechanisms on the origin of galactic
and intergalactic magnetic fields.