* 9007492
* ROW:  Fig/Pollinator Interactions:  Coevolution and         Consequences of Flowering Phenology
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1994
* Judith Bronstein, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 06/30/1994
* USD 149,828.00

Studies of conflicts between mutualists and their evolutionary consequences are
critical for understanding how both mutualisms and antagonisms arise and
persist. However, nearly all studies of mutualisms focus on the interests of one
of the partners only. The proposed study of two sympatric fig/pollinator
mutualisms will investigate the nature and consequences of one pivotal
mutualistic trait within-tree reproductive phenology, from the perspective of
both partners. Using detailed observations and a set of manipulative
experiments. The P.I. will (1) provide the first quantitative description of the
relevant phenological traits for any fig species; (2) define patterns of
phenological variation at the scales of branch, tree, local site, region,
species, and season; (3) measure reproductive consequences of within-tree
phenology for each mutualist partner; and (4) use this information to test a set
of hypotheses for the cause of phenological differences among and within fig
species. The costs and benefits of phenological traits critical for the
maintenance of these interactions as mutualisms will be established for the
first time by this study. More broadly, it will demonstrate the value of a
reciprocal rather than unilateral approach to understanding ecological and
evolutionary dynamics of a mutualism. These results from this study will have
important implications in many natural communities.