* 9007311
* Phylogenetic Relationships and the Evolution of Sexual      Dimorphism in Chaenopsid Blennies
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/1990,10/31/1993
* Philip Hastings, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 10/31/1993
* USD 100,000.00

Scientists have long been interested in the factors responsible for the
evolution of differences in the sexes. Knowledge of such mechanisms of evolution
within species also provides insight into the divergence of species which in
turn contributes to our understanding of the diversification of life. This
project will study the evolution of sex differences in chaenopsid fishes, a
group of tropical marine blennioid fishes. Prior research on the genus
Coralliozetus has revealed that many of the differences in males and females
evolved in a single event in which the development of females became truncated.
Similar changes in the timing of development are known for other organisms, yet
have rarely been implicated in the divergence of the sexes. The precise
developmental mechanisms responsible for this divergence, whether a slowing or
an early cessation of development in females, will be determined by describing
the development in both sexes of these and related species. The role of this
morphological change in the ecology of these fishes will be studied by testing a
hypothesized behavioral shift in habitat use of females. Habitat shifts by one
sex are poorly documented and represent an important, but recently overlooked,
cause for the evolution of sex differences. The generality of these results will
be tested in a similar study on the equally dimorphic chaenopsid genus
Emblemaria. This research is unique in integrating systematics, developmental
biology and behavioral ecology in the study of sex differences.