* 9007063
* Long &amp; Medium Term Research:  X-ray Crystallography Studies of Phycobiliproteins
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1990,02/29/1992
* Michael Becker, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 02/29/1992
* USD 26,250.00

Long &amp; Medium-Term Research: X-Ray Crystallography Studies of
Phycobiliproteins. This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long
&amp; Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence. The program seeks
to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct long-term research abroad at
research institutions of proven excellence. Awards provide opportunities for the
conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or compli- mentary facilities,
expertise and experimental conditions in foreign countries. This award will
support a twelve-month visit by Dr. Michael Becker of the University of
Washington to work with Prof. Dr. Robert Huber of the Max-Planck-Institut f>r
Biochemie in Martinsried bei M>nchen, Germany, on "X-Ray Crystallography Studies
of Phycobiliproteins." Phycobiliproteins of the cryptomonad algae have highly
unusual spectral and morpho- logical characteristics. The principal investigator
proposes to determine the structure of one of these proteins by X-Ray
diffraction techniques. In order to find a phycobiliprotein suitable for X-Ray
diffraction studies, the investigators will first isolate, partially
characterize, and attempt to crystallize phycobiliproteins from several
different species of the cryptomonad algae. Structural studies on these proteins
could yield exciting information in at least two different areas of
biochemistry: photosynthetic energy transfer, and protein folding and
aggregation.