* 9007899
* REU:  Belowground Processes and Nitrogen Availability Across a Dynamic, Nutrient Poor, Barrier Island Landscape
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1993
* Frank Day, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 11/30/1993
* USD 406,500.00

Past studies have suggested that nutrient>.>poor sites have greater nutrient
immobilization in the litter, greater belowground allocation of biomass, and
slower decay; all resulting in more conservative nutrient cycles. Most of these
studies focused on forested ecosystems with minimal emphasis on belowground
dynamics. The primary objectives of this new research project are (1) to
quantify the relationships between C and N availability and belowground dynamics
across a nutrient-poor, dynamic, barrier island landscape; (2) to quantify the
influences of microtopography, successional age and microenvironmental
interfaces (caused by fluctuating groundwater levels) on belowground processes;
and (3) to refine and extend the application of newer techniques for belowground
research. The research will be conducted along an established transect
incommunities 65, 35, 25 and 5 years old on the accreting end of Hog Island on
NSF's Virginia Coast Reserve Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) site. Nitrogen
amended and unamended plots will be used to test the effects of nitrogen
availability on belowground processes. Root production, root decomposition,
nitrogen immobilization rates in root litter, mineralization rates, and root and
soil nitrogen content will be measured in the treatment and control plots.
Reciprocal litter bag transplants will test the degree of control of root
decomposition by external nitrogen supply versus litter quality. All processes
will be evaluated in relation to microenvironmental conditions and successional
age along the transect and vertically within the soil profile. The application
of minirhizotrons in barrier island ecosystems will also be tested. Results from
the project will be of fundamental importance to the basic ecological resolution
of the governance of nutrient dynamics and plant community composition in
nutrient-poor ecosystems. Additionally, the work should produce insights to
assist in better management of barrier islands and beachfronts, areas where the
interests of conservation, recreation and commercial development often collide.
The principal investigator is well qualified, and institutional facilities are
adequate to the task. Integration of this new project with the ongoing research
program of the Virginia Coast Reserve LTER project will result in productive
augmentation of both efforts.