* 9007537
* The Regulation of Nitrate Assimilation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1992
* Reginald Garrett, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 01/31/1992
* USD 50,000.00

Nitrate assimilation is the predominant pathway within the biosphere for
acquisition of inorganic nitrogen. In the lower eukaryotic Neurospora crassa,
nitrate assimilation is an inducible metabolic pathway consisting of two
enzymes, nitrate reductase and nitrite reductase. Biochemical studies reveal
that the expression of both enzymes is induced by nitrate, and both are
repressed by the end product, ammonium, of primary products of ammonium
assimilation such as glutamine. This latter effect, termed nitrogen metabolite
repression, is dominant in that nitrate assimilation is essentially precluded by
ammonium. To date, nine genes are implicated in nitrate assimilation. Two of
them, nit-3 and nit-6, are coordinately controlled, unlinked structural genes
encoding the enzymes, nitrate reductase and nitrite reductase, respectively.
Four genes, nit-1,7, 8 and 9, function in producing the molybdenum cofactor
essential to nitrate reductase. Three genes serve regulatory roles: nit-4 is
required for nitrate induction of the nitrate assimilatory pathway, whereas
nit-2 and nmr-1 have pleiotropic effects controlling many secondary pathways of
nitrogen acquisition, e.g. amino acid oxidation or purine catabolism, which like
nitrate assimilation, provide for nitrogen nutrition in the absence of available
ammonium. Genes nit-2,3 and 4, as well nmr-1, have been cloned. This research
undertakes cloning and analysis of nit-6, the nitrite reductase structural gene,
and comparison of its sequence organization to nit-3, its coordinately regulated
partner. Further, a molecular strategy has revealed additional nitrate regulated
genes for genetic and biochemical characterization.