* 9007634
* U.S. Participant Travel to 8th International Conference     on Computational Methods in Water Resources, June 11-15,1990in Venice, Italy
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/1990,11/30/1991
* George Pinder, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* George K. Lea
* 11/30/1991
* USD 20,000.00

The International Conference on Computational Methods in Water Resources will be
held during June 11-15, 1990 in Venice, Italy. This is a eighth in a series of
meetings on finite elements methods in water resources which is being broadened
starting with this meeting. The problem areas to be covered include; groundwater
flow, flow in lakes and estuaries, remote sensing, environmental systems
analysis and optimization, and salt-water intrusion. Significant effort have
been expended in attracting leading international researchers to complement the
broad focus of this meeting. This is the major conference focusing on the
computational- mathematical-water resources interface and this action provides
partial travel and per-diem support for U.S. invited speakers, organizers, and
student participants. The conference is being hosted by the Dipartimento di
Metodi e Modelli Matematica per le Scienze Applicate, Universita degli Studi
Padova. In addition to the traditional presentations, this conference will
include two forums in which the participants have been invited to solve "
standard problems" in Supercomputing in Water Resources and Wave Propagation in
Shallow Waters. The purpose is to provide a systemic comparison of different
numerical solution methods for problems difficult but important to water
resources applications.