* 9007765
* Precision Measurement of the Infrared Reflectance of High-TcSuperconducting Films
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1990,02/29/1992
* Ernest Cravalho, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 02/29/1992
* USD 56,000.00

There is great current interest in the infrared radiative properties of high-Tc
superconducting films and crystals. This interest stems from both fundamental
considerations and promising applications. One promising application of high-Tc
superconducting films is as infrared radiation detectors. It has also been
proposed to cool superconducting electronics for space applications passively by
thermal radiation. If the high-Tc superconductors are perfect reflectors at
wavelengths greater than that corresponding to the energy gap, then a high-Tc
superconductor radiation shield would show excellent performance if kept at a
temperature of 20 K. Precise knowledge of optical properties, and particularly
the complex refractive indices of high-Tc superconducting films, are required to
evaluate these applications. In this study the monochromatic normal reflectance
of high- quality films of YBaCuO and BiSrCaCuO is being measured with sets of
four identical samples for temperatures between 6 K and room temperature, at
wavelengths from 0.5 um to 30 um. The measurements are performed with a high-
precision grating spectrometer which was especially designed for the measurement
of the low-temperature radiative properties of noble-metal films. This apparatus
does not employ a reference mirror. For the background measurement, the infrared
beam travels through the sample compartment without optical interaction. The
reflectance data are obtained by passing the beam through eight reflections from
four identical samples. This technique avoids both shortcomings associated with
the reference-mirror single-reflection method. Due to the absence of a mirror,
absolute reflectance data are obtained, not values relative to a mirror
reflectance less than unity. The measurements are carried out with films of the
highest quality available, fabricated by Siemens, Erlangen, West Germany, and
the IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights. These films are of
pseudocrystalline nature, with strong c axis upward orientation, such that the
radiative properties of the ab plane of the crystal unit cell are measured.
These measurements are expected to set a new standard for the high- Tc
materials. This standard will help to clarify the applicability of BCS-based
theories to the optical properties of superconducting high-Tc films. The new
precision measurements are also expected to shed light on the problem of the
energy gap as observed by infrared spectra.