* 9007161
* Collaborative Research: Two Major Peat Basins in Boreal     America: Sources, Sinks, or Steady-state Reservoirs in the  Global Carbon Cycle?
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1995
* Paul Glaser, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford N. Dahm
* 06/30/1995
* USD 350,963.00

The large peat basins of North America represent an important reservoir in the
global carbon cycle and a significant source of atmospheric methane. Two target
areas have been selected in these peat basins where peat nearly covers the
regional landscape: 1) the Glacial Lake Agassiz peatlands of Minnesota and 2)
the Albany River peatlands in northern Ontario. These two areas represent
important reference points along major ecologic and climatic gradients. Dr.
Glaser and Siegel will utilize a nested grid of sample points in these systems
to determine 1) rates of carbon storage or loss, 2) rates and mechanisms of
methane flux, and 3) hydrogeologic processes that control the flux of dissolved
gases and solutes through these peat deposits. They will test four models of
peatland development to determine if these peat basins are sources, sinks, or
steady-state reservoirs for carbon. And regional estimates of the flux of
methane and other dissolved solutes in the two study areas will be made with
spatial statistics and hydrogeologic computer models. This project is focused on
an important reservoir of carbon that may be intimately linked with climatic
change. The research program is being conducted by two highly regarded
scientists who have access to excellent facilities. Results from this important
research will improve understanding of the processes that contribute to changes
in the global environment.