* 9007614
* Phylogeny of Saxifragaceae and Relationships in Rosales     Using rbcL Sequence Analysis
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1991,07/31/1994
* Douglas Soltis, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/1994
* USD 200,185.00

Evolutionary or genealogical relationships in flowering plants are often poorly
understood at taxonomic levels above the rank of genus. These difficulties
presumably reflect the more frequent occurrence of convergent or parallel
evolution in morphological characters at higher taxonomic levels. Although
numerous examples of this exist, one of the most problematic is the
Saxifragaceae family, including the gooseberries, hydrangeas, and saxifrages. As
originally defined, this family consists of a diverse array of herbaceous and
woody plants distributed throughout the world and placed into 15-17 subfamilies.
Little agreement exists among plant systematists regarding the circumscription,
taxonomic rank (subfamily, family), or relationships of these various groups.
The taxonomic complexity involved in dealing with the Saxifragaceae also
requires a thorough analysis of the large order Rosales, of which it is a
member. It has become clear in recent years that DNA sequence comparisons can be
particularly helpful in determining evolutionary relationships at higher
taxonomic levels. Dr. Douglas Soltis of Washington State University is studying
nucleotide sequence variation among a large sample of species of Saxifragaceae,
focusing upon the photosynthesis-related gene rbcL. A broad analysis of rbcL
sequence data will help clarify relationships within Saxifragaceae and in
conjunction with data being generated in several other laboratories will
contribute to determination of phylogenetic affinities among the rosalean
dicots. The resulting phylogeny will then provide an evolutionary framework for
interpreting change in morphological and chemical characteristics of these
plants, and for informing their historical biogeography.