* 9007953
* RUI:Equity-Efficiency Trade-Offs
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1993
* Donald Campbell, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 01/31/1993
* USD 55,177.00

A social welfare function is a formula for aggregating conflicting individual
preferences into a social preference scheme to be used for collective decision
making. The formula should satisfy basic demographic values or axioms. K.J.Arrow
received the Noble prize in part for his proof of the Impossibility Theorem,
i.e., that it is impossible to construct a social welfare function consistent
with basic assumptions of equity and economics. The Impossibility Theorem has
survived many attempts to restore consistency by weakening these axioms. Unlike
other treatments of the Impossibility Theorem which simply seek to extend
standard theorems in welfare economics, the investigator has developed methods
for exploiting the algebraic and topological structure of the standard
allocation models to obtain very general insights into public choice. For
example, the investigator proved recently that the social welfare function is
either completely unresponsive to individual preference or there is some
individual who is denied any share in the economy's private goods at every turn.
The project continues to investigate social choice in economic environments
under weaker transitivity assumptions, in models with public and private goods,
under less demanding and more realistic preference revelation desiderata, and in
intergenerational social choice models. The contribution of this project comes
from developing a new way of looking at the question of providing an axiomatic
foundation for public decision making. The investigator has already succeeded in
proving new theorems about the trade-offs between equity and efficiency in the
types of economic settings found in real-world public policy problems. Further
development of this promising approach is warranted because the new methods will
provide useful tools for analyzing collective choice and substantial new
insights into many economic problems.