* 9007698
* Long &amp; Medium Term Research:  Activation and Functionaliza- tion of Chlorocarbons
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1990,02/29/1992
* Derk Wierda, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 02/29/1992
* USD 37,050.00

Long &amp; Medium-Term Research: Activation and Functionalization of
Chlorocarbons This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long &amp;
Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence. The program seeks to
enable U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct long-term research abroad at
research institutions of proven excellence. Awards provide opportunities for the
conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or compli- mentary facilities,
expertise and experimental conditions in foreign countries. This award for a
proposal sponsored by Dr. David A. Hoffman of Harvard University will support a
twelve-month visit to France by Dr. Derk A. Wierda to work with Professeur John
A. Osborn of the Institut Le Bel of the Universit> Louis Pasteur in Strasbourg
on "Activation and Functionalization of Chlorocarbons." Chlorocarbons form a
relatively inert class of compounds with properties which can be useful, such as
solvent, or noxious, such as chlorinated aromatics (PCBs). It has recently been
discovered that a series of complexes of Pd(0) will activate C-Cl bonds under
mild conditions. Such complexes also serve as catalysts for the carbonylation of
CH2Cl2 and C6H5Cl. The original work into chlorocarbon activation will be
extended to other chloro- and polychloro- containing compounds. The researchers
will conduct mechanistic studies to better understand how the process of
chlorocarbon activation occurs. The will perform further research into potential
catalytics reactions involving these systems. One possible reaction of interest
is hydrodechlorination, a process by which chlorocarbons would be transformed
into hydrocarbons. Reaction of CH2Cl2 in the presence of CO, H2, base and
palladium complex catalytically generates ketene, a very reactive organic
molecule. The researchers will investigate this process in the presence of
various ketene traps. They will examine generation of other ketenes in situ.
They shall perform investigations into the possibility of breaking the much
stronger C-F bonds by similar methods. The award recommendation provides funds
to cover, as appropriate, international travel, local travel abroad, stipend,
dependents' allowance if applicable, and a flat administrative allowance of $250
for the U.S. home institution.