* 9007480
* Craniofacial Development in Eutherian and Metatherian       Mammals
* BIO,IOS
* 10/15/1990,12/31/1992
* Kathleen Smith, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Vincent P. Gutschick
* 12/31/1992
* USD 73,000.00

The most significant differences between eutherian (placental) and metatherian
(marsupial) mammals involve their modes of reproduction and development.
Metatherians are born at a premature state relative to eutherians, and complete
development while attached to the teat, nursing. The evolutionary consequences,
advantages and disadvantages of these metatherian and eutherian strategies form
the basis of an extensive literature. Yet, most details on the differences in
morphological development are unknown. The proposed study will examine
development of craniofacial features in metatherians and eutherians and is
intended to form the first part of a long term study of craniofacial development
in mammals. The focus of this specific project is on a detailed comparison of
craniofacial development in two species, Monodelphis domestica (Didelphidae,
Marsupialia), and Meoscricetus auratus (Rodentia). These are hypothesized as
representative taxa for the two groups. Data on rate of development, on sequence
of differentiation, and on coordination of developmental events will be
collected for both species. Focus will be on the bones, muscles and nerves of
the head. These data will then be applied in a preliminary manner in
phylogenetic comparisons in order to assess the generality of patterns observed
in these representative taxa and to form hypotheses on appropriate characters
for further examination of the polarity of developmental events in placental and
marsupial mammals.