* 9007201
* US-UK Cooperative Research:  Collision Induced and TransportProperties in Atomic and Molecular Fluids
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1991
* Glenn Evans, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 11/30/1991
* USD 20,250.00

This award will support collaborative research in physical chemistry between Dr.
Glenn Evans, Oregon State University and two British scientists: Dr. Paul
Madden, Oxford University and Dr. Michael Allen, University of Bristol. Dr.
Evans will carry out research in two closely related areas involving the theory
of structural and dynamic properties of molecular liquids. Molecules in a liquid
phase undergo extremely frequent encounters and collision induced phenomena
arise directly as a consequence of these encounters. In the first part of this
collaborative study, Dr. Evans and Dr. Madden will address what type of
molecular information is learned from the study of collision induced depolarized
light scattering, vibrational energy transfer and infrared spectra. The second
part of the collaborative study with Dr. Allen will deal with the way in which
we envision the collisions to take place in liquids comprised of nonspherical
molecules. The investigators will examine the question of whether the collisions
are correlated or uncorrelated. That is, does a specific pair of molecules
undergo frequent recollisions or does this pair once having collided never
recollide? The answer to and the consequences of this question, which is also
reflected in collision induced scattering, will be determined by the analysis of
liquid properties, such as the viscosity, thermal conductivity, and rates of
molecular rotation and translation. Analytical theory and computer simulation,
together with experimental data, will be employed to interpret the findings. The
project will benefit from the complementary expertise of the three
investigators. Dr. Evans is one of a few world class theoreticians in the
statistical mechanical treatment of fluids. Dr. Madden is an international
leader in the interpretation of collision induced phenomena. Dr. Allen is an
acknowledged expert in the simulation of properties of fluids of nonspherical
bodies.