* 9007498
* Catastrophic Disturbance in a Tropical Rain Forest -        Impact of the Riparian Zone on Nutrient Export
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1992
* William Bowden, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 12/31/1992
* USD 159,834.00

On September 17-18, 1989, Hurricane Hugo almost completely deforested portions
of the Luquillo Experimental Forest in Puerto Rico. Hurricane deforestation
differs substantially from other disturbances that have been studied in tropical
forests (logging, slash and burn agriculture) principally in that an enormous
amount of live biomass instantly enters the surface litter compartment.
Insufficient data exist to predict how this litter input will affect or be
affected by nutrient dynamics in the riparian zone of this tropical forest. Drs.
McDowell, Bowden and Smith have been sampling near- surface ground water and
stream water at two sites in this forest since August 1988. Their work
emphasizes the nutrient and water flux through the riparian zone and assesses
the relative importance of microbial versus vascular plant control of nutrient
flux through this interface. This new project will examine the impact of
deforestation caused by Hurricane Hugo on the ability of riparian zones to
regulate transport of nutrients from terrestrial to aquatic ecosystems. The
investigators hypothesize that the riparian zone plays a crucial role in
regulating losses of nitrogen following this catastrophic disturbance. They
specifically identify two major hypotheses: 1) deforestation associated with
Hurricane Hugo will result in increased fluvial export of nitrogen from the
Bisley watershed, and 2) the magnitude of nitrogen export in stream water will
be lessened significantly by nitrogen retention and transformation. To test
these hypotheses, information from before and after Hurricane Hugo will be
compared at two sites, one disturbed and one undisturbed. The scientists engaged
in this research are experienced, productive researchers who have previous
experience with riparian processes in tropical forests. The program is supported
by excellent institutional facilities.