* 9007642
* Mathematical Sciences: Investigation of Shear-Band FormationUsing High Activation Energy Asymptotics
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/1990,03/31/1993
* David Lasseigne, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alan Izenman
* 03/31/1993
* USD 41,000.00

The principal investigator will demonstrate the plausibility of an approach to
investigating the formation of shear bands in stressed materials that involves
the construction of a model of pure shear using the Arrhenius Law for plasticity
and the method of high energy asymptotics. Previous mathematical analysis of
shear-band formation has included a complete numerical investigation of the
growth of perturbations into shear bands and a stability analysis of the
homogeneous-shear solution. The results of this work have shown reasonably good
agreement with experimental data, but an understanding of this underlying
mechanism of band formation has been missing. The principal investigator will
seek to provide such an understanding by means of the proposed modelling
approach. Many physical processes are at work during the formation of shear
bands in stressed materials. Up to now applied mathematicians and engineers have
relied largely on two approaches to understanding these processes. The first
approach involves performing experiments on actual stressed materials, while the
second approach involves solving numerically the systems of partial differential
equations that govern the material. Each approach has advantages and
disadvantages, but neither one is able to give a satisfactory explanation of the
basic physical mechanisms that govern band formation. The principal investigator
will employ a different approach based upon modelling the materials with a
simpler set of equations and extracting more useful information with the aid of
certain asymptotic methods.