* 9007854
* Chaotic Process Simulation
* ENG,CBET
* 10/15/1990,09/30/1994
* John McLaughlin, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 09/30/1994
* USD 206,660.00

The first step in chemical process design is simulation of the systems, whether
they be individual units (such as reactors, heat exchangers, distillation
columns, etc.), groups of units, or sometimes the whole plant. These simulations
yield equations which are usually nonlinear, and numerical methods of varying
complexity have been devised to solve them. Such methods usually begin with some
initial educated guess of the unknown parameters and then some iterative method
using the equations of the physical system is used to improve these values, such
as direct substitution, accelerated direct substitution, various Newton-like
methods, etc. These are called fixed-point methods. This research is concerned
with building an understanding of: (1) the fundamentals of the chaotic (such as
period doubling, period tripling, strange attractors, etc.) behavior of fixed-
point methods for steady- state process simulation, and (2) the relationship
between the chaotic behavior of fixed-point methods for the steady-state
simulation of processes and the chaotic behavior of processes as nonlinear,
dynamical systems. Specific tasks under these two areas of work are as follows.
To build a better understanding of chaos the PIs will: (a) conduct a numerical
investigation and study of the practical implication of the geometric (or
topological) structure (i.e., basins of attraction, basin boundaries, Julia
sets, the Mandelbrot set, etc.) in the complex domain, (b) study the qualitative
effects of stabilization procedures (i.e., step bounding, trust regions,
continuation) on geometric structure, and auxiliary implications regarding
automatic initialization procedures, and (c) use established and/or develop new
analysis tools (from differential topology and geometry) to build a fundamental
theoretical understanding and classification of routes to chaos that are
relevant to process simulation. To determine if there is an observable
signature(s) of the chaotic evolution of unsteady-state processes that manifests
itself in the steady-state equation solving task they will: (a) conduct parallel
steady- and unsteady-state numerical experiments in the complex domain to
determine if signatures of chaotic process dynamics are present in the
associated steady-state equation-solving task, and if so, determine the
intrinsic properties of those signatures, (b) study the relationship between the
geometric structure (i.e., basins of attraction, basin boundaries, Julia sets,
etc.) associated with the chaotic behavior of fixed- point methods for steady-
state simulation and the geometric structure associated with the chaotic
evolution of unsteady- state chemical processes, and (c) build a fundamental
theoretical understanding of the signature process in an effort to characterize
the chaotic time evolution of chemical processes directly from steady-state
models. All of their calculations will be in the complex domain.