* 9007994
* SGER:  Systematics and Function:  Exploratory Research on   Locomotion in Ray-finned Fishes
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1992
* George Lauder, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 03/31/1992
* USD 41,979.00

Evolutionary studies often conclude that lineages of organisms have acquired
"adaptations" -- novel morphological, behavioral, ecological, or reproductive
features that confer some advantage to individual organisms. Very rarely do
these studies confirm the actual advantage by direct measurement. One example is
the evolution of the symmetrical ("homocercal") fish tail from asymmetric
("heterocercal") precursors. The conclusion has been that the homocercal tail
conferred higher speed, greater maneuverability, and faster acceleration. Dr.
George Lauder proposes to use newly developed micro-accelerometers, mounted on
the tails of fish swimming in flow tanks, to gather performance data to test
this conclusion. The accelerometer data gathering will be coordinated with Dr.
Lauder's high-speed video imaging and electromyography (muscle activity)
monitoring systems. The first performance data will emerge for homocercal and
heterocercal fishes. The proposed research is inherently risky, being the first
application of new sensors to a biological problem. Extensive software
development will be necessary to couple the three data streams. If this Small
Grant for Exploratory Research Project is successful, biologists will have
acquired a powerful new technique for assessing functional capabilities, and a
significant question in fish evolution will have been addressed.