* 9007845
* Flow Regime and the Structure and Productivity of           Macroinvertebrate Communities in Tropical Streams
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1993
* Bernard Sweeney, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1993
* USD 300,000.00

This research focuses on the ecological and evolutionary significance of flow
regime to macroinvertebrate communities in tropical dry forest streams of Costa
Rica. Pristine tropical watersheds are ideal sites for testing the effects of
flow on stream communities because the confounding effects of seasonality in
temperature and photoperiod and high silt and sediment load associated with most
temperate streams are absent, and many pristine small streams with perennial
flow regimes are available for study. The research will quantify
macroinvertebrate community structure and the life history characteristics and
production of all widespread and common species of macroinvertebrates in riffle
habitat of six perennial streams. The study will focus on temporal changes in
these parameters in response to prolonged (6 month) periods of both constant
(dry season) and elevated (wet season) flow as well as to short-term flood flaws
during the wet season. The central hypothesis of the study is that: stream
macroinvertebrate communities are not oversaturated with species (in the absence
of disturbance) and may be capable of withstanding long periods of abiotic
stability without loss of diversity, i.e. there is no "paradox of the stream
benthos". The principal objectives of this research project are to: (1) quantify
seasonal variation in the relative abundance and species composition of
macroinvertebrates and test the utility of flow as a covariate for explaining
this variability; (2) document the extent of seasonality in macroinvertebrate
life histories and evaluate sesonality as an adaptation to flow regime; (3)
evaluate the relative importance of storms in explaining seasonal variability in
macroinvertebrate community structure (4) assess the role of spatial scale (i.e.
patch size) in studies of benthic community succession; and (5) evaluate the
role of disturbance in maintaining the diversity of stream communities.