* 9007288
* RUI: Xylem Embolism in Drought-hardy Shrubs of California
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1990,03/31/1994
* Stephen Davis, Pepperdine University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 03/31/1994
* USD 204,894.00

The survival and growth of woody plants in dryland regions of the United States
depends on their ability to withstand tissue dehydration during drought. It is
particularly important that the cells specialized in transporting water (xylem
vessels) from the soil to leaves remain functional and that the water column not
be disrupted by air bubbles (embolism). In higher plants the introduction of air
bubbles into xylem vessels results in a blockage of water transport and, if
extensive enough, kills the plant. Laboratory experiments indicate that one of
the major cases of xylem embolism is severe water stress during extended periods
of drought. However, very little is known about the occurrence and significance
of embolism in nature. No data are available for dryland plants where tissue
water stress is great and thus where embolism may be the most significant. The
objective of this proposed study is to provide the first information on the role
of xylem embolism in plant growth, productivity, and survival of dryland plants,
specifically chaparral shrubs indigenous to California. This project will shed
light on the dynamics of water relations in chaparral vegetation, especially
during the early phases of recovery after wildfire. This knowledge could
potentially lead to an improved management of chaparral as a water shed, as a
deterrent of soil erosion/landslides as a cove for wild animals and as a browse
for livestock.