* 9007753
* FAUVE:  Specification and Implementation of Delayed         Consistency for Replicated Data in Federated Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/1990,08/31/1993
* Jeffrey Ullman, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Ashany
* 08/31/1993
* USD 145,808.00

Practical distributed database systems operate without rigid centralized
control. Such systems are considered to be federated distributed systems, and
attractive for involving many sites, dispersed authority, and differences in
requirements of level of data abstraction and of all data being-up-to-date. The
interaction via communication networks, the partial limited availability of
network nodes, delays in local data acquisition, and the actual delay and cost
of computations to derive data for remote sites all conspire to defeat simple
approaches to network- wide data consistency. The problems of lack of synchrony
among the nodes have been recognized piecemeal and many methods and heuristics
to manage data in this environment have been proposed. We have a simple model to
permit designers and users to specify the extent to which consistency can be
temporarily relaxed. The FAUVE research classifies existing algorithms and
heuristics, identifies conflicts in assumptions made, and recognizes
complementary approaches. It provides a framework to focus on situations now not
adequately dealt with. This framework provides the users with specifications,
and provides database operations on federated databases with a measure of
success or failure. Such a measure is essential for the scientific progress in
this subtopic of modern computer systems research.