* 9007897
* ROW:  Timing of Nutrient Mineralization from Leaf Litter:   Internal Cycling by Fungi
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1990,10/31/1991
* D. Jean Lodge, University of Puerto Rico
* Standard Grant
* Crystal Blackshear
* 10/31/1991
* USD 17,908.00

The objective of this research project is to test whether leaf- decomposing
fungi short-circuit phosphorus mineralization in a phosphorus-depauperate
tropical rainforest. A microcosm experiment is planned to determine if fungi can
export 32P from partially decomposed leaves into fresh litter. Fungal transport
from old litter could explain previously observed increased in P above 100% of
the initial amount during early stages of leaf decomposition. If mineralization
of phosphorus from litter is bypassed because of internal recycling by
decomposer fungi the availability of P to plant roots may be restricted. In some
phosphorus and nitrogen depauperate ecosystems, nutrients sequestered in fungal
biomass may become available to higher plants when fungal populations crash.
Future objectives will include the determination of timing of nutrient
mineralization from fungal biomass as it may be controlled by wetting and drying
cycles and fungivorous microarthropods. Results of this research should have
implications for the management of tropical forest ecosystems as well as for the
fundamental ecological understanding of those systems. The principal
investigator is well motivated and supported by knowledgeable colleagues.
Institutional facilities and accommodation are adequate to the research.