* 9007549
* Symposium:  Physiological and Developmental Aspects         of Gene Action in Plants: Annual Meeting of the Botanical   Society of America; August 12-16, 1990, Richmond, Virginia
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1990
* Bernard Phinney, Botanical Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 12/31/1990
* USD 3,652.00

The Botanical Society of America has arranged a half day symposium on the
"Physiological and Developmental Aspects of Gene Action in Plants". The
symposium will be held at the annual meeting of the Botanical Society of America
in Richmond, Virginia, between August 12 and August 16, 1990. This symposium
represents part of the Genetics Section's effort to encourage communication on
modern approaches (including molecular genetics) to research in botany. The
speakers are internationally known for their modern approaches to problems in
higher plants. All five are excellent speakers. They are leaders in their
respective disciplines. Each speaker has agreed to participate. each speaker
will be given 45 minutes presentation time plus 15 minutes for discussion. The
organizer (Phinney) will introduce each speaker and also summarize the overall
purpose of the symposium to the audience. The speakers and the titles of their
talks are as follows: 1) Tim Nelson (Yale University) "Patterns of Development
in C4 Leaves"; 2) Ian Sussex (University of Calif., Berkeley) "Gene Expression
During Meristematic Development"; 3) Scott Poethig (University of Pennsylvania)
"Genetic Regulation of Phase Change in Maize"; Tom Guilfoyle (University of
Missouri) "Auxin Regulated Gene Expression"; Judith Verbeke (University of
Arizona) "Cell Determination in Higher Plants". %%% This symposium will be a
valuable opportunity for botanical researchers to have access to some of the
exciting developments in molecular genetic aspects of plant science that could
directly affect their own research.