* 9007072
* Laser-Assisted Growth and Analysis of Crystalline Organic   Semiconductor Multiple Layer Structures for Optoelectronic  Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1990,09/30/1991
* William Steier, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 09/30/1991
* USD 50,000.00

Recently, the investigators have demonstrated that multiple quantum well
structures consisting of very thin (10A) alternating layers of two crystalline
organic semiconductors can be grown by the new ultrahigh vacuum process of
organic molecular beam epitaxy (OMBE). X-ray and birefringence data indicate
that the structures are highly ordered both in the stacking direction, as well
as across the water surface. Thus, the growth is considered to be "quasi-
epitaxial" in that this ordering occurs even though the lattices of the two
organic materials are incommensurate. Control of the crystalline texture is
strongly influenced by the dependence of molecular surface mobility on
temperature. For example, the highest degree of crystalline ordering is observed
for substrates cooled to less than 100 K. In the proposed work, the investigator
will use a laser in conjunction with their OMBE system to locally heat the
cooled substrate during growth, thus creating highly defined regions of both
ordered and disordered growth. This fine control of both layer order, as well as
the already demonstrated ability to grow very thin films, should allow them to
understand, and hence control the growth processes to a high degree. This
control will be utilized to fabricate several optical devices such as gratings
and waveguides. Futhermore, by making structures consisting of very thin (&lt;
10 A), deeply layered (&gt; 100 period) multi-layered stacks, they may be able
to break the centrosymmetry characteristic of crystalline semiconductors. They,
in turn, should lead to a significant second-order non-linear optical response.
Thus, they will grow such structures and probe their linear and non-linear
optical properties using the same laser system employed for the laser- assisted
growth experiments.