* 9007939
* State-To-State Reaction Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/1990,05/31/1991
* Richard Zare, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Francis J. Wodarczyk
* 05/31/1991
* USD 142,900.00

Professor Richard N. Zare is supported by a grant from The Experimental
Physical Chemistry Program to study state-to-state reaction dynamics using a
combination of molecular beam and laser spectroscopic techniques. This research
is of fundamental importance in understanding the physics underlying simple
chemical transformations at the molecular level. The objective of Zare's
research program is to obtain quantum state-specific information on the dynamics
of elementary gas-phase chemical reactions. This is accomplished through the
synthesis of molecular beam and laser spectroscopic methods. Beam techniques
permit the study of isolated molecules and the investigation of reactive
encounters, one collision at a time. Laser techniques permit the preparation of
reagents (state selection) and the interrogation of reaction products (state
detection). Special emphasis is placed on experiments that use a tunable
infrared source or stimulated Raman pumping for preparing reagents in individual
rovibronic states and use tunable UV sources for the quantum-state-specific
detection of molecular and atomic products. State-to-state information gathered
in this manner enables chemists to understand how reactions occur by relating
detailed observations to scattering calculations carried out on realistic
potential energy surfaces that describe the forces experienced by reagents and
products during a chemical transformation.