* 9007437
* Flora of North America North of Mexico--Phase 2
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1994
* Nancy Morin, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Continuing Grant
* Leonard Krishtalka
* 02/28/1994
* USD 634,998.00

The Flora of North America Project is a collaborative endeavor among U.S. and
Canadian museums and universities to produce an authoritative taxonomic
inventory of all species of vascular plants growing without cultivation in North
America north of Mexico. This would include all the ferns, gymnosperms (conifers
and cycads), and flowering plants, estimated at 17,000 to 20,000 species. Twelve
printed volumes and a computerized database are to be prepared, to contain
morphological descriptions, chromosome numbers, geographic range, vernacular
names, and habitat and phenological notes (seasonality of flowering and
fruiting), all arranged within a modern taxonomic system of classification. The
database will be maintained as an ongoing resource and will provide easy access
to the data for a wide range of users. Phase two activity includes editorial
work, preparation and illustration of species-level treatments, workshops for
authors, and management of the database. Groups of plants that will receive
attention during the grant period include Cyperaceae (sedge family), Fabaceae
(bean family), and Rosaceae (rose family). The Flora of North America project
provides a synthesis of up-to-date taxonomic information on the plants of the
North American continent north of Mexico. Such information will be of use to
resource managers, conservationists, those exploring economic and medicinal uses
of plants, and research biologists. The inventory will form the baseline data by
which changes in local and global environmental conditions can be monitored, and
it will furnish a summary of the plant diversity of this continental region.