* 9007816
* Formal Protection Modeling of Computer Security in Parallel and Distributed Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 12/15/1990,11/30/1994
* Ian Akyildiz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 11/30/1994
* USD 253,171.00

This project involves continued research in security of distributed systems and
development of a formal protection model called the Distributed Model (D-Model).
The D-Model defines concurrency conditions which guarantee that a concurrent
system cannot reach a state in which privileges are configured in a non-secure
manner. This work will extend the D-Model to include the security correctness
criteria of trusted subjects. So far the D-Model conditions have been used to
construct a distributed version of the Bell-LaPadula security model. There are
more applications of the D-Model within this project, such as the Clark-Wilson
Model, Minsky's transfer of privilege model, and the Military Message System
Model (MMS) of Landwehr. The second phase of the formal modeling part of this
project will develop a so-called General Purpose Distributed Security Model
(GPDSM). The result of this model will be a set of security models that can be
used to depict all computer systems within the state-of- the-art. The GPDSM must
be formalized in the first step. After the formalization, any model (e.g. the
D-Model, MMS and Non-interference models) can be implemented in GPDSM. Since
synchronization is an important issue for constraining concurrency in
distributed and parallel systems, the D-Model will be ported to a non-
interference model framework (which is the GPDSM) in order to find a solution
for non-interference synchronization problem. The D-Model has currently no
associated covert channel analysis tool. The proposed GPDSM will also serve as
both a model and a covert channel analysis tool.