* 9007117
* The Evolutionary Genetics of a Mate Recognition Cue:  Male  Song in Hawiian Crickets
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1994
* Alan Templeton, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 08/31/1994
* USD 212,000.00

The origin of species has been a central question in evolutionary biology ever
since Darwin. Despite our great advances in knowledge about natural selection
and adaptation within a species, there still remains much controversy over the
meaning of species, the mechanisms by which new species originate, and the
genetic basis of the traits responsible for defining a new species. The
investigators propose to study these issues with male calling song in the
Hawaiian cricket genus Laupala. There are currently 37 recognized species in
this genus. The species tend to look alike, but they differ greatly in the time
interval between sounds in the male calling song. It has been proposed that male
song is used by females to identify potential mates. If true, male song would be
important in defining the species boundaries of these crickets. They will test
this hypothesis by using molecular genetic survey techniques to define
populations of crickets that share similar genes. They will then see if
genetically similar populations also share a common song. With the same
molecular data they will also reconstruct an evolutionary tree of all the
species. This evolutionary tree will allow them to estimate how the songs have
evolved between species. These molecular data will also be used to test the
hypothesis that the rate of DNA evolution is accelerated when a new species
arises on a different island than its ancestor, as has been found for Hawaiian
fruit flies (Drosophila). These data will also be used to test the hypothesis
that differences in song among local populations within a species promote
genetic differentiation. Finally, because they can successfully cross species in
the laboratory, they will study the genetic basis of the song differences
between species using traditional breeding analysis as well as modern molecular
techniques to map and identify genes. This last study will not only allow them
to address the evolutionary question of the types of genetic differences that
arise among a species, but it will also a direct comparison of the traditional
versus molecular approaches to genetic analysis: a comparison that is relevant
to many applications in the health sciences.