* 9007777
* Long &amp; Medium Term Research:  Cyclin Destruction in Meiotic and Early Mitotic Cell Cycles of Xenopus Laevis
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1990,08/31/1991
* Elizabeth Mandley, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 08/31/1991
* USD 4,780.00

Long &amp; Medium-Term Research: Cyclin Destruction in Meiotic and Early Mitotic
Cell Cycles of Xenopus Laevis This award recommendation is made under the
Program for Long &amp; Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence.
The program seeks to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct long-term
research abroad at research institutions of proven excellence. Awards provide
opportunities for the conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or
compli- mentary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in foreign
countries. This award for a proposal sponsored by Dr. Jolinda A. Traugh, will
support a 12-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Elizabeth Mandley to the
United Kingdom to work with Dr. Michael Whitaker of the Department of Physiology
of the University of the City of London, on "Cyclin Destruction in Meiotic and
Early Mitotic Cell Cycles of Sea Urchins (Xenopus)." The investigators propose
to investigate the mechanism of cyclin destruction during the M-phase of the
rapid cell cycles of early sea urchin development. Cyclin is only unstable
during M-phase, and preliminary evidence implicates a regulatory cascade of
protein phosphorylation and desphosphorylation in the process. Some evidence
suggests calcium may be involved in the destruction process. Cyclin destruction
can be triggered in a cell-free system prepared from Xenopus eggs by addition of
active cyclin/p34-cdc2 complex. Destruction requires ATP and the participation
of both soluble and particulate material. This suggests that the high molecular
weight multifunctional protease and hence ubiquitin may be involved. The
investigators will investigate whether cylcin degradation involves ubiquitin by
searching for ubiquitinated intermediates of cyclin, and by fractiona- tion.
They will also investigate the role that calcium plays in the destruction
process. More generally, they will attempt to purify and identify as far as
possible the components of the destruction system. The award recommendation
provides funds to cover, as appropriate, international travel, local travel
abroad, stipend, dependents' allowance if applicable, and a flat administrative
allowance of $250 for the U.S. home institution.