* 9007141
* Molecular Evolution of Talaromyces/Penicillium
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1990,09/30/1994
* John Taylor, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* James E. Rodman
* 09/30/1994
* USD 185,000.00

Classification schemes for living organisms have predictive value when they
reflect evolutionary relatedness based on genetic or genomic features of the
organisms' DNA. Dr. John Taylor of the University of California at Berkeley is
studying the evolutionary or phylogenetic relationships of select groups of
fungi, using DNA analyses to measure mutational differences among species and to
compare these results against morphological data. The work employs the new
method of polymerase chain reaction DNA amplification, which permits analysis of
DNA from as little as a single fungal spore. The information obtained about
fungal DNA allows inference about genealogical relationships, and also provides
the foundation for extremely rapid and accurate identification of fungal
samples. Dr. Taylor is focusing this work on the fungal genus Penicillium,
important both biologically and economically. Some species manufacture food and
some make the beneficial mycotoxin, penicillin. Penicillium species also rot
food and feed. Identification of these fungi and predictions about their
metabolic activities are important to the food, pharmaceutical, agricultural,
and medical industries. Penicillium and its associated sexual forms classified
in the genus Talaromyces present fundamental problems in classification and
phylogeny because persistent morphs in nature may reproduce only asexually.
Morphological features are usually inadequate for associating closely related
sexual and asexual forms into a coherent and natural scheme of lineages. The DNA
methods are powerful tools for resolving this difficulty, because both forms
contain similar genomes amenable to amplification and phylogenetic analysis.