* 9007812
* Workshop Support:  Workshop on Optoelectronics Education
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1991
* W. Thomas Cathey, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 12/31/1991
* USD 17,500.00

The proposal is that a small workshop be held with approximately 40 participants
from universities, colleges, and industry who are interested in optoelectronics
education. The purpose will be to discuss the goals, curricula, and courses in
optoelectronics programs. The objectives are to produce suggestions concerning
the contents of undergraduate and graduate curricula, and suggestions as to what
the general engineering or physics students would need. There are several
related questions. What should be included in an optoelectronics option within
electrical engineering or physics, what should be in an undergraduate degree
program in optoelectronics, what should all electrical engineering and physics
students know about optoelectronics, and what are the essentials in a graduate
program in optoelectronics? Perhaps the most important question is, what optics-
related material should be introduced into the existing undergraduate courses?
For example, photodetectors should go into the existing solid state or
electronics courses. Other questions to be addressed are: how much lens design,
physical optics, quantum effects, sources, detectors, receivers, fibers,
atmospheric properties, and optical system design should be included in the
curricula? Recommendations concerning these questions will not have an impact
unless we also have means of implementing the suggestions. One of the main goals
of the workshop will be to devise means of implementation, such as providing
modules, ideas of demonstrations, video presentations that could be used in
other courses, and solved homework problems to encourage instructors to assign
optoelectronics problems in appropriate courses. The logical next step would be
to organize a symposium on optoelectronics education that would have much
broader attendance with the goal of disseminating and discussing the proposals
that result from our workshop. One of the tasks of the workshop will be to
assemble an organizing committee for that symposium.