* 9007731
* Engineering Research Equipment: A Combusting Flowfield      Imaging System for the Study of One- and Two-Phase Reacting Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1991
* Richard Chang, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* MILTON J LINEVSKY
* 12/31/1991
* USD 80,000.00

A Combusting Flowfield Diagnostic System is to be purchased for probing the
spatial characteristics of one- and two-phase reacting flows. The system
consists of three major components: (1) a Nd:YAG laser capable of high pulse
energies to illuminate the reacting flow under study, (2) a high resolution,
solid-state camera to detect the scattered laser light, and (3) a supercomputer
workstation with hardware dedicated to real time two-and three-dimensional
graphics operations to control the laser and detectors, analyze and display the
measured data, and perform computational tasks currently done at supercomputer
centers. Some specific experiments which will be performed with this equipment
are as follows: (1) measurement of species concentrations and temperatures in
laminar premixed and nonpremixed flames; (2) measurement of the temperature
field and its full three- dimensional gradient at 106 points within a cross
section of a turbulent flame; (3) determination of the species inside a burning
droplet using stimulated Raman scattering or coherent anti-Stokes Raman
scattering; (4) simultaneous spectral and spatial imaging of fuel droplets,
which will allow the determination of size and chemical makeup of several
particles in a single laser pulse; and (5) study of the burning of micron-sized
solid particles in a range or aggregation regimes by electrospray techniques.
The potential impact of laser diagnostic measurements and computational methods
on combustion research is great. By performing measurements in two or three
dimensions, the characteristics of large-scale structures can be determined and
the interaction between the fluid motion and the chemistry studied. The
cooperative experimental and computational effort will benefit both portions of
the research.