* 9007993
* Long &amp; Medium Term Research:  Foraging and Sex Allocation   Behavior of an Autoparasitoid in a Spatially-Structured     Environment
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1991,12/31/1991
* David Pimentel, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 12/31/1991
* USD 23,757.00

Long &amp; Medium-Term Research: Foraging and Sex Allocation Behavior of An
Autoparasitoid in A Spatially-Structured Environment. This award recommendation
is made under the Program for Long &amp; Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers
of Excellence. The program seeks to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to
conduct long-term research abroad at research institutions of proven excellence.
Awards provide opportunities for the conduct of joint research, and the use of
unique or comple. mentary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in
foreign countries. This award for a proposal sponsored by Dr. David Pimentel
will support a six-and-one-half month-post-doctoral research visit to the United
Kingdom by Dr. Martha S. Hunter to work with Dr. H.C.J. Godfray at the Imperial
College at Silwood Park, on "Foraging and Sex Allocation Behavior of An
Autoparasitoid in A Spatially-Structured Host Environment." Parasitic wasps
called "autoparasitoids" offer a unique opportunity to test Fisher's (1930)
theory on the evolution of the sex ratio. Fisher's principle that organisms
should invest equally in each sex generally leads to a 1:1 sex ratio. In
autoparasitoids, however, males and females are laid in different hosts; thus
the "cost" of each sex and the predicted sex ratio varies with the changing host
environment. At high total host densities, wasps should be egg-limited, and
prefer to oviposit in the less abundant host type, thus producing a sex ratio
which is close to 1:1. At low host densities, wasps should be host-limited and
simply oviposit in hosts as they encounter them, thus producing a sex ratio
which reflects the relative abundance of the two host types. The investigator
proposes to test this extension of Fisher's theory with the autoparasitoid
Encarsia tricolor in a spatially structured host environment. In particular, she
will evaluate the effects of the relative availability of the two host types,
total host density, and spatial structure of the host population on sex ratio.
Since sex allocation is central in determining the population dynamics of
autoparasi- toids, this research will help bridge the gap between sex ratio
theory and population dynamics, and will contribute to evaluating autoparasitoid
species as biological control agents. The award recommendation provides funds to
cover, as appropriate, international travel, local travel abroad, stipend,
dependents' allowance if applicable, and a flat administrative allowance of $250
for the U.S. home institution.