* 9007481
* Molecular Genetic Studies of Embryo Maturation in Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1993
* Carol Rivin, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 12/31/1993
* USD 277,019.00

Developing plant embryos have the capacity to germinate or to mature. Dr. Rivin
is investigating how embryo abscisic acid level, hormone sensitivity and
changing water relations modulate the expression of these two developmental
potentials. Her goals are to define, at the molecular level, the developmental
pathways that are modulated by these physiological cues during maize embryo
maturation, and to identify the genetic mechanisms that regulate their
expression. To address this problem she will follow a three part program that
involves both molecular and genetic approaches, focussing on mutants that fail
to develop successfully through maturation phase. The specific objectives are
the following: 1) Identify cDNA clones of mRNAs that are specific to embryo
maturation, using her previous observations about the synthesis of maturation
phase polypeptides in wild type and viviparous mutants as a basis for selection
of co-regulated message sets. 2) Measure the expression of maturation mRNAs
during normal maize embryogenesis and examine how this program is altered when
development is disrupted genetically in viviparous and defective kernel mutants,
or by manipulation of physiological factors in tissue culture. 3) Search for new
transposon tagged embryo lethal mutants to collect additional loci for genetic
dissection of embryo maturation, and to provide a means of cloning genes
essential to embryo development. %%% In flowering plants the developing seed
creates a morphologically complete embryo which goes on eventually to germinate.
Embryo development takes place in two stages, the second of which is termed
maturation. This project is aimed at an understanding of the factors that
control this maturation process.