* 9007371
* Waste Minimization, Treatment, and Disposal Program for     McMurdo Station
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1995
* Douglas Canete, Argonne National Laboratory
* Interagency Agreement
*   name not available
* 03/31/1995
* USD 2,235,310.00

The purpose of the proposed work effort is to provide the unique capabilities of
Argonne National Laboratory (ANL) to assist the National Science Foundation in
the implementation of a comprehensive and well integrated program for reducing
and managing wastes generated by U. S. Antarctic Program activities centered at
McMurdo Station. The project is to be structured into phases and conducted over
a period of five years. The initial phase is designed to provide for data
collection, experimental research, and assessment of pollution prevention and
waste minimization opportunities and waste disposal requirement. The results of
the first phase of the project will provide for identification of waste
minimization opportunities and quantify and qualify the types of waste requiring
retrograding back to the Continental U. S. or to be incinerated. Emphasis will
be placed on approaches for elimination and minimization of the quantity and
toxicity of wastes. Based on the results of the initial phase, wastes that
cannot be eliminated will be identified for further handling and treatment,
probably via incineration. As such, the likely second phase of the project
entails design of the pollution prevention and incineration facilities for
sitting in the Antarctic. A significant portion of this effort is expected to be
dedicated towards required research in materials and equipment designs capable
of handling severe operational conditions and problems concerning various waste
handling requirements, emissions control, and fuel conservation. This portion of
the program will also include provisions to design a disposal system for ash
residue generated by the incinerator, if deemed appropriate. The third phase,
procurement, entails selection of an engineering and manufacturing firm to
construct the pollution prevention, incineration and/or disposal systems that
can be shipped as modules via containerized cargo to McMurdo. The system must be
designed to take full advantage of the capabilities of on-site personnel at
McMurdo, thus minimizing the influx of personnel to the station. The fourth
phase concerns system start-up. It includes shipment of the systems to McMurdo,
final assembly, start-up. and testing of the system. The system is to be a
"turn-key" operation and include any training required for operation of the
system.