* 9007937
* U.S Japan Long Term Visit:  Photon and Reactive Gas AssistedHeteroepitaxy of III-V and II-VI Optoelectronic Films
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1991,07/31/1993
* George Collins, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cassidy
* 07/31/1993
* USD 176,977.00

Under this award Professor George Collins of the Department of Electrical
Engineering, Colorado State University (CSU), will spend twelve months in Japan,
commencing in May 1991, at the Research Laboratory of Engineering Materials,
Tokyo Institute of Technology (TIT), where he will work with Professor Hideomi
Koinuma on developing information relevant to the epitaxial growth of compound
semiconductor films at reduced temperature. The research will employ a near
afterglow H2 plasma source developed at Colorado State University, which will be
placed in an existing Tokyo University OMCVD reactor to achieve epitaxial films
of GaAs on ZnSe and Si, while the ZnSe will be deposited on GaAs. The feedstock
precursors will be limited to only organ metallic gases of methyl and ethyl
compounds. Near afterglow OMVD has hither to been largely unexplored despite its
capability to provide a lower deposition temperature; in-situ H2 plasma cleaning
of substrate prior to growth; in-situ hydride and hydride radical (e.g. AsH2,
AsH, etc.) generation; and lower residual carbon both at interfaces and in bulk
films. The role of the hydrogen will be delineated for both gas phase OMCVD
reactions, formation of AsHx radicals, as well as carbon gasification reactions
via mass spectroscopic deuterium isotope tracer studies. All gas phase studies
will be correlated to deposited film properties material characterization at
Tokyo University will emphasize: photoluminescence, double crystal x- ray
diffraction and SIMS.