* 9007963
* Long &amp; Medium Term Research:  Electronic Band Structures andChemical Bonding in Mixed Organic/Organometallic Charge     Transfer Salts and Phosphate Tungsten Bronzes
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1991,06/30/1992
* James Martin, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 06/30/1992
* USD 31,250.00

Long &amp; Medium-Term Research: Electronic Band Structures and Chemical Bonding
in Mixed Organic/Organometallic Charge Transfer Salts and Phosphate Tungsten
Bronzes This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long &amp;
Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence. The program seeks to
enable US scientists and engineers to conduct long-term research abroad at
research institutions of proven excellence. Awards provide opportunities for the
conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or comple- mentary facilities,
expertise and experimental conditions in foreign countries. This award is for a
proposal sponsored by Dr. Malcolm H. Chisholm to support a 12 month post-
doctoral visit by Dr. James D. Martin to France to work with Dr. Enric Canadell
of the Universit de Paris-Sud on "Electronic Band Structures and Chemical
Bonding in Mixed Organic/Organometallic Charge Transfer Salts and Phosphate
Tungsten Bronzes." The synthesis of new solid state materials with predictable
physical properties is presently a major challenge for chemists. Central to
achieving this goal is an understanding of how electronic structures are related
to specific crystal structures of a material. Dr. Martin proposes to examine the
electronic structures of organic/organometallic charge transfer salts and
phosphate tungsten bronzes. Calculation of the band structures and Fermi
surfaces of the respective solids is expected to provide fundamental
understanding of the relationships between crystal structures and physical
properties. Large and complex unit cells of solids make the consideration of all
orbital interactions quite difficult. For this reason, the perspective of
"molecules in solids" will be used to identify features of the crystal
structures essential for the description of specific electronic properties. The
award recommendation provides funds to cover, as appropriate, international
travel, local travel abroad, stipend, dependents' allowance if applicable, and a
flat administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S. home institution.