* 9007946
* Mathematical Sciences: Regularity Problems for Variational  Integrals and Quasiregular Mappings
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1993
* Tadeusz Iwaniec, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 01/31/1993
* USD 35,000.00

There are two main themes to be followed in this project. One concerns
questions of regularity involving quasi-regular mappings. These are mappings of
the plane or higher dimensional space in which distortion of small sets such as
discs is controlled in a measurable way. The maps are not required to be
univalent (quasi-conformal) and they are characterized as solutions of systems
of elliptic partial differential equations (of degenerate type). One of the
primary concerns in the study of quasi-regular mappings is that of finding
estimates on the growth of such mappings as well as characterizing extremal
mappings subject to given boundary conditions. In two dimensions, one is
eventually led to the complex Hilbert transform. Various regularity results
depend on estimates of the norm of this transform, specifically the p-th power
norm. Work will be done on sharpening estimates for the norm. A second line of
investigation will focus on variational energy integrals of classes of functions
whose stationary points are quasi-conformal. In particular, work will be done in
estimating energy integrals over subsets of a given domain in terms of the
energy integral over the full domain, multiplied by a power of the measure of
the subset. The best value of the power remains to be determined. At this time,
the only known results are in the case where the domain is a solid disc or ball.