* 9007429
* Persistence in a Saltmarsh Insect Community:  Experiments   with Local Extinctions, Dispersal, and Colonization
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1990,07/01/1991
* Peter Stiling, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 07/01/1991
* USD 189,295.00

Local populations of the gall midge Asphondylia borrichiae Rossi and Strong
apparently become extinct and are re-established by immigrants frequently, as
indicated by our work with this new species of fly. Patches of the sole host
plant, sea oxeye daisy (Borrichia frutescens) are all small and discrete. There
are no vast "mainland" patches, and gall-midge populations contributing
colonists to locally extinct populations are about the size of those that have
become extinct. The investigator posit that this is a true "metapopulation"
system (sensu Levins 1970), in which persistence is due to recolonization after
local extintion among roughly even-sized patches. Parasitoids are a major threat
but are spotty in their effects. In excess of 95% parasitism occurs in some sea
oxeye patches, while other patches have much lower rates. Patches with
temporarily low parasitism rates are likely to provide immigrant to extinct
local midge populations. Three sets of experiments will assess metapopulation
dynamics. (1) Forced extinction of midges in natural sea Oxeye patches and (2)
creation of new patches in salt marsh will indicate the role of natural
immigration in persistence. (3) New patches of sea oxeye daisy, created in bayou
areas far inland from natural midge population, will permit comparisons of
persistence, with and without parasitoids, in the absemce of midge immigration.
This investigation will yield critical information regarding scales of
interactions important to many biological system //