* 9007450
* Spatial and Temporal Analysis of Species Abundance and      Distribution
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1992
* Susan Glenn, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jethro Moorefield
* 06/30/1992
* USD 12,513.00

Understanding the distribution and abundance of species both within and between
communities has been one of the primary goals in community ecology. Although
much research has focused on within community patterns, there has been a new
emphasis on factors associated with regional distribution and abundance.
Recently, Hanski (1982) proposed a dynamic regional distribution model based on
island biogeography from which he derived the core-satellite hypothesis. The
core-satellite hypothesis predicts a bimodal frequency distribution in which
species tend to occur at all similar sights in a region (core species) or they
tend towards extinction (satellite species). This model contrasts with others
which predict a unimodal distribution of species in a region. This project will
test the unique aspects of Hanski's model in comparison to other models (Levins
1969, Brown 1984) by analyzing and adding to plant distribution data from the
Konza Prairie Long-term Ecological Research Site. General questions include: is
the regional distribution of plant species bimodal? Do species shift from core
to satellite categories and vice versa? Does grazing effect the pattern of
bimodality in plant communities? Preliminary research indicates that prairie
vegetation is dynamic over the short term, and that species regional and
temporal distributions are bimodal as predicted by the core- satellite model.
This project will provide the first real test of this important model using
spatial and temporal data, in combination with a large-scale field experiment
from a single site. A suite of plant surveys will augment long-term
distributional data on prairie plants, and provide the primary basis for model
testing. Data generated as part of large-scale trails on grazing and fire
disturbance will provide a unique opportunity to validate the model
experimentally and test the role of intermediate levels of disturbance
inustructuring plant communities. Overall, this research has clear implications
for understanding factors affecting the structure, dynamics, and distribution of
plant species within and between grassland communities.