* 9008189
* Long &amp; Medium Term Research:  Development of Stable Si and  Ge Single Crystal Monochromators Under High Heat Loads
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1990,06/30/1992
* Jerome Cohen, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 06/30/1992
* USD 32,150.00

Long &amp; Medium-Term Research: Development of Stable Si and Ge Single Crystal
Monochromators Under High Heat Loads This award recommendation is made under the
Program for Long &amp; Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence.
The program seeks to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct long-term
research abroad at research institutions of proven excellence. Awards provide
opportunities for the conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or
comple- mentary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in foreign
countries. This award for a proposal sponsored by Dr. Jerome B. Cohen will
support a twelve month visit to the United Kingdom by Dr. John P. Quintana to
work with Prof. Michael Hart of the University of Manchester on "Development of
Stable Si and Ge Single Crystal Monochromators Under High Heat Loads."
Synchrotron radiation has become an extremely important tool in material
studies. Insertion devices greatly increase the flux to the point where heat
load induced physical distortions of the optical elements limit the flux and
resolution of the final beam. The heat load problem will be more severe on the
next generation synchrotrons such as the Advanced Photon Source (APS) and the
European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF). Consequently, new optics,
including monochromator designs are necessary to fully exploit the capabilities
of these high brightness sources. The proposed study will develop stable
monochromators for current high brightness synchrotron radiation sources as well
as very high power sources (APS and ESRF). The basic method will be to improve
on the basic thin wall adding the capability to elastically distort the crystal
to counter deformations at high heat loads. The award recommendation provides
funds to cover, as appropriate, international travel, local travel abroad,
stipend, dependents' allowance if applicable, and a flat administrative
allowance of $250 for the U.S. home institution.