* 9008140
* Rational Choice Models of the Supreme Court
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1993
* Pablo Spiller, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kimberley C. Johnson
* 01/31/1993
* USD 73,741.00

The importance of the Supreme Court in shaping public policy has long been
recognized by scholars and public officials alike. Much of the scientific
literature on the Court has focused on voting behavior or on the cases,
disputes, or parties that come before the Court. In contrast, there has been
little emphasis on the way the court actually interacts with other institutions
of the political system. Analyses of the Court have usually examined the Court
decisionmaking process in isolation or in the context of broader social or
economic conditions without embedding it in a more general framework of
political and regulatory institutions. The purpose of this research is to
develop empirical tests of rational choice models of the Supreme Court. The main
thrust of the project is that to understand the movements over time in judicial
statutory interpretation, it is useful to model the Court as an institution
constrained not by traditional legal rules of precedent but rather by the nature
and composition of other political institutions. This rational choice model
posits that the Court interacts strategically with Congress, attempting to
implement its policy preferences without generating any repercussions from the
House or the Senate. The model will be tested in the framework of analyzing the
Court's industrial labor relations decisions. The data will consist of 171 labor
cases decided between 1949 and 1987. This research will advance understanding of
how judges implement their policy preferences within the context of
institutional bargaining and constraints. It will also show the linkages between
Supreme Court decisions and political sentiments in the Congressional and
executive branches. Finally, the results will lead to the further development of
empirically-estimable rational choice models that may have considerable
significance in certain areas of regulation policy.