* 9008437
* ROW:  Native Trees for Reforestation and Soil Restoration   in the Atlantic Region of Bahai (Brazil)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1990,11/30/1991
* Florencia Montagnini, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 11/30/1991
* USD 12,000.00

Mixed tree plantations and tree-crop combinations with native species of
economic value maybe viable alternatives for the preservation of native species
and to contribute to soil fertility restoration in degraded areas. This research
will be conducted at Pau Brasil Ecological Station in Porto Seguro, Bahia,
Brazil (16-23'S, 39-11'W). The station has a 1000 ha reserve of Atlantic rain
forest, an endangered ecosystem suffering strong pressure from agricultural
expansion; an arboretum with approximately 40 species from the forest, all
planted in monospecific stands, with similar age and on the same soils; and
other experimental pure and mixed-tree plantations. Preliminary results (June
1989) showed low soil N availability during early establishment of pure and
mixed-tree stands, possibly with high competition with the soil microflora.
Planning activities will include: a) to examine species/site relationships for
the species in the arboretum; b) to study factors controlling N availability in
existing pure and mixed- tree plantations; c) based on this information, to
design mixed plantations taking into consideration the potential ameliorating
effects of trees on soils, and their nutrient requirements for complementary use
of nutrient resources. This type of research is broadly important to the field
of ecology, and will provide significant information regarding Conservation of
tropical forests.