* 9008108
* Long &amp; Medium Term Research:  Location of Defects and       Reactive Elements in Chromia
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1990,02/29/1992
* Donald Potter, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 02/29/1992
* USD 31,641.00

Long &amp; Medium-Term Research: Defects and Locations of Reactive Elements in
Chromia. This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long &amp;
Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence. The program seeks to
enable U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct long-term research abroad at
research institutions of proven excellence. Awards provide opportunities for the
conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or compli- mentary facilities,
expertise and experimental conditions in foreign countries. This award for a
proposal sponsored by Dr. Donald I. Potter will support a twelve-month
postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Janet M. Hampikian to the CSIRO Division of
Materials Science and Technology in Melbourne, Australia, to work under the
direction of Dr. C. J. Rossouw on "Defects and Locations of Reactive Elements in
Chromia" to shed new light on the mechanisms causing the reduction in oxidation
kinetics of chromia-forming alloys due to reactive element additions. Many high
temperature alloys rely on the formation of a protective layer of chromia. A
decrease in chromia scale growth, corresponding to an increase in part lifetime,
is one of the effects of reactive element additions to these alloys. This
proposal focuses on determining the role that these reactive element dopants
play in the chromia lattice. Specifically, the researchers will establish the
type of point defect that controls diffusion in undoped chromia, as well as the
position of the dopants. To accomplish this, they will channel enhanced
microanalysis and statistical analysis of electron channeling microanalytic
data. The award recommendation provides funds to cover, as appropriate,
international travel, local travel abroad, stipend, dependents' allowance if
applicable, and a flat administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S. home
institution.