* 9008504
* Control of mRNA Stability in Hormone Dependent              Differentiation
* BIO,IOS
* 10/15/1990,03/31/1994
* David Shapiro, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 03/31/1994
* USD 285,000.00

Each of the billions of cell of an animal contains a kind of genetic
encyclopedia of DNA which contains in small stories, or genes, the information
required to make the proteins which compose that cell. What distinguishes one
cell from another is how each cell reads a set of instructions before each of
these information units (called genes), and uses those instructions to decide
whether or not to make copy of the unit of information. These copies provide the
instructions to tell cells to make the proteins which distinguish say a skin
cell from a liver cell. Until our studies it was generally thought that the
lifetime of each copy of an information unit in the cell was fixed. Dr. Shapiro
showed that the hormone estrogen both causes the cells to copy the information
units involved in the production of egg proteins and greatly increases the time
the copies are present in the cell before being scrapped and destroyed. Since
only copies of the information involved in egg protein production are made more
stable by estrogen, a large part of our work is devoted to identifying the
instructions on the copies which tell the cell to make them stable when estrogen
is present. In recent work he developed a system for testing which parts of the
copy are important in making them more stable, and showed that the information
used to make the protein does not control the lifespan of the copy. The present
proposal aims to identify more precisely the instructions in the copy which tell
the cell this copy is subject to stabilization by estrogen. He will also begin
studies aimed at identifying the cell proteins which read this information.
Finally the mechanism by which cells sense the presence of estrogen and
communicate this information to the places in the cell where the copies reside
will be identified. Regulation of the lifespan of copies of genetic information
has emerged as common control mechanism by hormones. Faulty regulation of the
lifespan of copies has also been shown to be important in several common types
of cancer. However, little is known about how the lifespan of copies of genetic
information is controlled. The estrogen- mediated increase in the stability of
copies of genetic information encoding egg proteins provides one of the best
opportunities to learn how this important process is controlled in many systems.