* 9008480
* International Geographic Linkages of Venture Capital
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1991,06/30/1993
* Chris Thompson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/1993
* USD 32,335.00

The dramatic changes that have characterized the world's economic system in
recent decades have been fueled, in part, by significant changes in the flows of
capital across international boundaries. Foreign investment in a number of forms
has increased substantially. One of the most important types of foreign
investment has been the use of venture capital to spur the development of new
high technology- related activities. Geographers and other social scientists
have described the uneven spatial distribution of venture capital flows, and
they have identified many factors that seem to affect the pattern and magnitude
of these flows. This project will provide a more detailed analysis of investment
funds in the United States and the United Kingdom in order to expand knowledge
about the processes, links, flows, and outcomes of international venture capital
activities originating in these two nations. Working collaboratively with a
British geographer, the American investigator will interview fund managers to
identify international investors and obtain more detailed descriptions of their
decision-making processes. Data about venture capital flows also will be
examined using discriminant analysis to highlight underlying influences on
capital flows. This project will provide a comparative test of basic models of
venture capital flows and will add to basic knowledge about the spatial
choreography of international venture-capital activity and the changes to start-
up investment processes that occur when operations move to an international
level. The specific data gathered in this project also will become a basis for
these and other investigators to later test other hypotheses and models about
international capital movements.