* 9008275
* Long &amp; Medium Term Research:  Transport of Fluid and Macro- molecules in Polymeric Gels
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1990,02/29/1992
* Laurence Baxter, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 02/29/1992
* USD 23,050.00

Long &amp; Medium-Term Research: Transport of Fluid and Macro- molecules in
Polymeric Gels. This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long
&amp; Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence. The program seeks
to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct long-term research abroad at
research institutions of proven excellence. Awards provide opportunities for the
conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or comple- mentary facilities,
expertise and experimental conditions in foreign countries. This award will
support a twelve-month visit by Dr. Laurence T. Baxter to India to work with Dr.
Ramesh A. Mashelkar, Director of the National Chemical Laboratory Ä±NCL! at Pune
on "Transport of Fluid and Macromolecules in Polymeric Gels." Recently, the NCL
has developed super-absorbent polymers, i.e., polymers capable of absorbing
several hundred times their own weight of water or other liquids. NCL designed
one such polymer, Jalshakti, to improve the ability of plants to obtain water in
arid climates. NCL's polymers have potential uses in many areas, such as
agriculture, medical and personal hygiene products, controlled-release drug
delivery, and separations. The researchers plan to model the transport of fluid
and macromolecules in polymer gels, incorporating hydrodynamic and steric
effects, as well as the thermodynamic properties of the gel. They will use this
model to predict macroscopic transport properties, such as diffusivity or
hydraulic conductivity, as well as concentration and pressure profiles, from
microscopic properties. Their goal is to relate structure to function, to take
thermodynamic parameters and incorporate them into a framework to analyze
dynamic transport effects. The will test the mathematical model experimentally,
by measuring effective diffusivity, perme- ability, and macromolecular
concentration profiles, through standard techniques available at NCL. The
investigators hope that insight into transport within gels obtained from>a
verifiable model will yield a rational basis for polymer design, and for
optimization of system parameters for effective drug release or water
absorption, or both. The award recommendation provides funds to cover, as
appropriate, international travel, local travel abroad, stipend, dependents'
allowance if applicable, and a flat administrative allowance of $250 for the
U.S. home institution.