* 9008444
* Long & Medium Term Research:  Constraints on the Evolution  of Breeding Date in Birds
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1990,05/31/1992
* David Wiggins, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 05/31/1992
* USD 37,869.00

Long & Medium-Term Research: Constraints on the Evolution of Breeding Date in
Birds. This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long & Medium-
Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence. The program seeks to enable U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct long-term research abroad at research
institutions of proven excellence. Awards provide opportunities for the conduct
of joint research, and the use of unique or compli- mentary facilities,
expertise and experimental conditions in foreign countries. This award will
support a 15-month visit by Dr. David A. Wiggins to Sweden to work with Dr. Lars
Gustafsson of Uppsala University on "Constraints on the Evolution of Breeding
Date in Birds." Most birds exhibit considerable variation in the timing of
clutch initiations within populations. Because breeding date correlates with
several components of fitness (clutch size; the number of young produced; the
number of young recruited to the breeding population in subsequent years),
breeding date is thought to be under considerable directional selection.
However, despite significant heritability estimates for breeding date in natural
populations of birds, several studies have failed to detect significant changes
in breeding date. Recent work has suggested that breeding date fails to respond
to selection due to a large environmental component affecting female nutrition.
The researchers propose to carry out experiments on the timing of breeding in
collared flycatchers (Ficedula albicollis) on the island of Gotland, a
population unique in that a high proportion (25%) of fledged young return to the
island the following summer, thus enabling quantitative genetic estimates from
comparisons of adult and offspring reproductive traits. The researchers propose
to both delay and advance the date of laying by manipulating eggs in a randomly
chosen sample of flycatcher clutches, altering the clutch initiation date by
approximately one week. In this population, differences of breeding date of one
week have significant effects on most reproductive traits. The researchers will
band all offspring from experimental and control nests and then compare the
clutch initiation dates of these offspring in the following year with those of
their mothers. This will allow the researchers to test the current models of the
evolution of breeding date by estimating: 1) the magnitude of the environ-
mental component of breeding date variance; 2) the heritability of breeding
date; and 3) the evolutionary consequences of variance in breeding date.