* 9008172
* Mechanics of a Reversible Cleavage Reaction of RNA
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1994
* George Bruening, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1994
* USD 261,000.00

Both polarities of the repetitive-sequence, multimeric forms of the satellite
RNA of tobacco ringspot virus (sTobRV RNA) cleave autolytically and specifically
to generate 359 nucleotide residue (nt), "monomeric" sTobRV RNA. The negative
polarity sTobRV (-)RNA also spontaneously ligates to perform the cleaved
3'-to-5'ApG phosphodiester. sTobRV (-)RNA does not conform to the well-studied
"hammerhead" structure, which does apply to sTobRV (+)RNA. The cleavage-active
sequences of sTobRV (-)RNA are dispersed in two regions of the molecule, forming
a natural "ribozyme" system. E, an oligoribonucleotide corresponding to one of
these two regions, acted on the other, S, and cleaved it at the ApG
phosphodiester. Two segments of base pairing between E and S previously have
been identified. We propose a systematic mutagenesis of specific regions of the
E-S complex to identify critical nt. The complex also will be subjected to
chemical modification to identify tertiary interactions, and a screen has been
designed to identify mutations which compensate for inactivating mutations.
Novel forms of the self-cleaving sequence have been synthesized, or planned, to
facilitate the proposed investigations. We expect that the information gathered
will allow us to propose a structural model for the cleavage- ligation-complex.
The results will improve our understanding of sTobRV RNA replication and
facilitate "ribozyme" design.