* 9008664
* Frontiers of Polymer Research, International Conference in  New Delhi, India, January 20-25, 1991, Group Travel Award inU.S. and Indian Currencies.
* O/D,OISE
* 11/15/1990,10/31/1992
* Paras Prasad, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 10/31/1992
* USD 33,550.00

Descripton: Under this project, ten U.S. scientists will participate in the
"International Conference on Frontiers of Polymer Research" planned for January
20-25, 1991 in New Delhi, India. The Indian organizer is Dr. Ashok Misra,
professor at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) in New Delhi. Three areas
of polymer research considered to be at the forefront will be covered. These
are: polymers for photonics, where nonlinear optical properties of polymers show
great promise; polymers for electronics, where new conduction mechanisms and
photophysics have generated considerable enthusiasm; and high performance
polymers which exhibit exceptionally high mechanical strength coupled with
lightweight. The conference will include a workshop to identify research
opportunties, especially where collaboration can be effected. The program
committee include scientists from India, the U.S., Japan, FRG, Austria,
Netherlands, Italy and Switzerland, thus a broad international participation is
expected. Conference proceedings is expected to be published as well as
recommendations on research needs. Scope: The topics of the conference are quite
timely, because of recent discovery in the physics and photophysical properties
of new polymers, and the new research approaches to understanding and
synthesizing their materials. The U.S. and India both are conducting extensive
research in academic and industrial laboratories. The two cooperating scientists
are well known and active researchers in the field. The conference is quite
likely to have a positive impact on U.S.-India cooperation in scientific
research in chemistry and polymerscience.