* 9008510
* Long & Medium Term Research:  Evolution and Reactions of NOxPrecursors from Coal Volatiles
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1990,05/31/1992
* John Chen, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 05/31/1992
* USD 35,100.00

Long & Medium-Term Research: The Evolution and Reactions of NOx Precursors from
Coal Volatiles This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long &
Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence. The program seeks to
enable US scientists and engineers to conduct long-term research abroad at
research institutions of proven excellence. Awards provide opportunities for the
conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or compli- mentary facilities,
expertise and experimental conditions in foreign countries. This award will
support a 15 month visit by Dr. John C. Chen to go to Australia to work with Dr.
Peter F. Nelson of CSIRO in North Ryde on "The Evolution and Reactions of NOx
Precursors from Coal Volatiles." Coal combustion generates photochemical smog
and pollutants causing acid rain. Oxides of nitrogen (NOx) are among the most
severe of these pollutants, primarily the result of oxidation of nitrogen bound
in the coal matrix (fuel NOx). This research seeks to clarify several aspects of
NOx formation from coal volatiles. The researchers will study the evolution of
NOx precursors for a range of Australian coals in a three-section reactor: the
first generates the volatiles by rapid coal pyrolysis in a fluidized bed; the
second serves as a heated transport line and contains a sintered quartz frit to
eliminate the char and ash residues from the gaseous product stream; the final
reactor is simply a tubular quartz furnace where the primary coal volatiles are
subjected to secondary reactions at various furnace tempera- tures and residence
times. The NOx precursors and other reaction products will be measured with
FTIR, GC, and GC/MS. The specific goals of the research are: (1) to measure and
relate the rate formation of the precursors to forms of nitrogen in the tar and
the parent coal; (2) to study the interactions of the precursors with other coal
volatiles and with various gas species (including O2) introduced into the
tubular furnace; and (3) to use these data as input to models for NOx formation.
The attainment of these goals will be a significant achievement in understanding
and predicting NOx formation from Australian coals in practical combustion
devices and the results may be extended to coals of any geographic origin. The
award recommendation provides funds to cover, as appropriate, international
travel, local travel abroad, stipend, dependents' allowance if applicable, and a
flat administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S. home institution.