* 9008863
* ROW:Gender Differential Link Between Mathematics Achievementand Self-Concept: Effects of Puberty and School Transition
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1992
* Laura Roberts, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Jean B. Intermaggio
* 01/31/1992
* USD 12,000.00

ABSTRACT Relative to their frequency in the population, women are
underrepresented in occupations that call for expertise in complex mathematics.
Why? The author of this proposal hypothesizes a complex interaction between
developmental differences in the self-concept, differences that occur as a
consequence of pubertal changes, and school context to explain the documented
discontinuities between boys and girls in math ability. This work has the
potential to illuminate the reasons for the apparent superiority of boys in
mathematics, and to show how the social factors responsible for these
differences might be offset. The basic assumption of the work is that math
performance is more crucial to the self-concept of young and adolescent boys
than it is to girls. The discontinuity in perceived importance of math ability
is assumed to accelerate during puberty. Using sophisticated measurements, the
research will assess young students as they move from childhood to adolescence,
to determine if the hypothesized changes in math self-concept occur as a
function of developmental timing. The outcome of this longitudinal study will
have important scientific and social implications. If the hypotheses prove
tenable, we will have a much deeper understanding of the reasons that underlie
the apparent loss of mathematical skill in females, and, perhaps more
importantly, the means of preventing this needless decline.