* 9008641
* Long &amp; Medium Term Research:  Geochronological Applications of Cosmogenic Isotopes
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1991,06/30/1992
* Erik Brown, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 06/30/1992
* USD 31,685.00

Long &amp; Medium-Term Research: Geochronological Applications of Cosmogenic
Isotopes This award recommendation is made under the Program for Long &amp;
Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence. The program seeks to
enable U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct long-term research abroad at
research institutions of proven excellence. Awards provide opportunities for the
conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or comple- mentary facilities,
expertise and experimental conditions in foreign countries. This award will
support a twelve-month visit by Dr. Erik Brown to France to work with Drs
Franoise Yiou and Grant M. Raisbeck at the Centre de Spectrometrie Nuclear et de
Spectrometrie de Masse (C.S.N.S.M.) of the Orsay campus of the University of
Paris on "Geochronological Applications of Cosmogenic Isotopes." Our
understanding of Earth's climatic history is dependent on terrestrial remnants
of past glaciation, and on chemical and biological records preserved in deep-sea
sediments and in polar ice. Information regarding past changes in temperatures,
oceanic circulation patterns, sea level and extent of glaciation has been
derived from these sources, but absolute dating methods with which to tie data
from one area of the globe to those from another have yet to be fully developed.
Many dating techniques involve the use of cosmogenic radioisotopes (e.g.
carbon-14, beryllium-10, aluminum-26) which are products of the spallation of
nuclei of terrestrial material by cosmic rays. The proposed research will focus
on developing two separate geochronological methods using beryllium-10 and
aluminum-26. One of these is the determination of exposure ages of rock surfaces
through the use of cosmogenic isotopes produced in situ within mineral lattices.
This will allow the dating of deposits such as terminal moraines, providing an
important tool for interpreting glacial history. A second provides an absolute
link between sedimentary and ice core records through the use of a pair of
spikes in beryllium-10 concentrations observed in ice cores in snow laid down
35,000 years and 60,000 years ago. If the same anomalies can be found in deep-
sea sediments, they can be used to link the sedimentary and ice core records,
thus correlating oceanic and atmospheric histories.