* 9008269
* Research Initiation Awards: Forced Convection Boiling Vapor Bubble Nucleation, Growth, and Departure: REU Supplement
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1990,12/31/1992
* James Klausner, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 12/31/1992
* USD 76,879.00

The majority of flow boiling heat transfer correlations reported in the
literature utilize pool boiling correlations to model the microconvection
component of heat transfer. However, there appears sufficient evidence that the
physics governing the incipience, growth, and departure of vapor bubbles in flow
boiling differs from that in pool boiling. Under such circumstances, the use of
pool boiling correlations to model the microconvection component of flow boiling
heat transfer would be questionable. The proposed investigation will consist of
experimentally measuring the nucleation site density, vapor bubble growth rate,
and vapor bubble departure diameter in saturated forced convection nucleate
boiling. The manner in which the liquid film thickness, mass flux, gravitational
orientation, wall superheat, thermodynamic properties, and heating surface
characteristics influence these parameters will be thoroughly investigated. The
local vapor volume fraction and liquid film thickness will be measured using a
radiation adsorption technique. The nucleation site density will be determined
photographically in conjection with a liquid crystal visualization technique.
The vapor bubble growth rate and departure diameter will be measured using high
speed cinematography. Using the experimental data to be collected, correlations
for the incipience, growth and departure of vapor bubbles in flow boiling will
be developed.