* 9008495
* Chemical Reaction Network Theory: The Dynamics of Reactors  with Complex Chemistry
* ENG,CBET
* 10/15/1990,09/30/1995
* Martin Feinberg, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 09/30/1995
* USD 205,476.00

Often in real chemical reactors, a large number of distinct species interact
through an intricate network of chemical reactions. Such complex systems can
behave in unexpected ways, causing multiple steady states, instabilities,
runaway reactions, explosions, etc. The goal of this research is the creation of
theory that provides practicing engineers and chemists with readily applicable
analytical tools to be used for: (1) the operation of reactors with complex but
well understood chemistry (the theory would provide an indication of the
stability problems that should be a source of concern), and (2) the study of
reactors with poorly understood chemistry (the theory would provide means for
the sensitive discrimination between rival mechanisms put forward to account for
laboratory observations). The PI's chemical reaction theory is rooted in the
idea that, however vast the territory of chemical reaction engineering might
seem, the systems of differential equations that present themselves for study
have a very special structure. At least when the kinetics is mass action, each
system is determined (up to rate constant values) in a very precise way from the
underlying network of chemical reactions, and so it becomes meaningful to ask
questions about the relationship between reaction network structure and
qualitative properties of the corresponding differential equations. Work under
this grant will consist of three new projects: (1) unification of the PI's
earlier deficiency-oriented theories with newer developments based on his
Species-Complex-Linkage graph (SCL Graph) and application to more complex
systems such as electrochemical reactions; (2) application of existing and newly
developed theory to heterogeneous catalysis with special emphasis on the way in
which the operative catalytic pathway reveals itself in multiple steady state
data by way of a characteristic "mechanistic signature"; and (3) development of
user-oriented personal computer software which would not require knowledge of
the underlying complex mathematical analysis.