* 9008671
* US-Belgium Cooperative Research:  Formation of Gaseous      Hydrocarbons as Influenced by Soil and Sediment Redox       Chemistry Conditions
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1990,02/28/1995
* Ronald DeLaune, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 02/28/1995
* USD 8,650.00

This award will support collaborative research in physiological ecology between
Drs. Ronald D. DeLaune and William H. Patrick, Center for Wetland Resources,
Louisiana State University and Dr. O. Van Cleemput, Faculty of Agricultural
Sciences, University of Ghent, Belgium. The project addresses the formation and
consumption of biogenic gases in soils and seeks to define the conditions under
which specific gases are formed, and the rates and conditions leading to their
consumption. The development of fully or partly anoxic conditions occurs in both
waterlogged and in well drained soil conditions. A combination of high oxygen
consumption through the presence of abundant, readily available carbon and
limited oxygen supply induced by a high water content is the main reason for the
onset of anaerobic conditions. These conditions are responsible not only for
stress to plants, but are also favorable for the formation of gaseous
hydrocarbons, such as methane, ethylene, ethane, propane and butane. These gases
can have adverse effects on plants and can negatively influence the gaseous
environment. The aim of this project is to investigate to what extent soils or
sediments can be a source for gaseous hydrocarbons. Gaseous hydrocarbon
production and evolution will be related to sediment Eh, pH and amendments,
including different types of organic material. The investigations will be
carried out in the laboratory, as well as in the field. The results of this
study are expected to provide a better understanding of the carbon cycle and to
lead to added information on the composition of the gaseous environment in soils
and sediment, including possible source- sink relationships with the atmosphere.
The research will benefit from the combined expertise of the US investigators in
nutrient interactions and of the Belgian investigators in gaseous hydrocarbons
and anaerobic soils.