* 9008251
* Configural Association Theory and Hippocampal Function in   Learning and Memory
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1992
* Jerry Rudy, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 07/31/1992
* USD 20,000.00

The PI seeks support for an investigation of a novel theory to investigate the
role of the hippocampus in learning and memory. Specifically, that the
hippocampal formation provides the neural substrates that enables an animal to
construct a representation of the joint occurance of two or more stimulus
elements. An important point of this theory is that it allows the explanation of
how animals can solve problems that require non-linear solutions. In another
words, it allows animals to solve problems that cannot be solved by a learning
system that simply algebraically sums the associative strengths of the
individual cues that compose a stimulus. This is an interesting proposal by an
innovative and highly productive investigator. The proposed research is a gamble
and there is a minimum of preliminary data to allow an easy judgement. However,
the investigator has made excellent progress and is now at a stage of his
research where a definitive decision on the validity of the configural
association theory can be made. The potential for a significant outcome seems
sufficient to justify the risk. This work has the potential to move behavioral
neuroscience significantly closer to an understanding of the neural systems that
underlie learning and memory.