* 9008059
* Long &amp; Medium Term Research:  Effects of Sorption to        Surfaces on Indoor Concentrations of Organic Vapors
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1991,02/29/1992
* John Borrazzo, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 02/29/1992
* USD 29,450.00

Long &amp; Medium-Term Research: Effects of Sorption to Surfaces on Indoor
Concentrations of Organic Vapors This award recommendation is made under the
Program for Long &amp; Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence.
The program seeks to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct long-term
research abroad at research institutions of proven excellence. Awards provide
opportunities for the conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or
compleme>ntary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in foreign
countries. This award will support an eight-month visit by Dr. John Borrazzo to
Berlin, Germany, to work with Dr. Bernd Seifert at the Institute for Water,
Soil, and Air Hygiene on "Effects of Sorption to Surfaces on Indoor
Concentrations of Organic Vapors." Research during the past decade indicates
that indoor concentrations of organic vapors are unrelated to and often higher
than outdoor concentrations for many compounds. This has important implications
for public health since some of these compounds exhibit carcinogenic or
mutagenic behavior in humans and/or animals. Some of the organic compounds may
also exhibit acute health effects. For these reasons, understanding the
fundamental processes which govern indoor concentrations is necessary. Both the
PI and his host have independently explored the sorption of organic compounds to
indoor surfaces. Few other data are available as this issue has only recently
emerged as an important research question in the indoor air quality research
community. The PI proposes to review the unpublished data of the host, to apply
models for sorption kinetics and equilibrium developed as part of his recent
doctoral studies, and to conduct experiments designed to resolve discrepancies
between theory and the available data. The investigators expect one product of
the research to be a refined sorption model. The collaboration should also
result in broader incorporation of sorption effects in the general indoor air
quality and exposure assessment models currently being developed.