* 9008730
* Women's Labor Force Activity and Child Care in Brazil:      ROW Research Planning Grant
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1992
* Rachel Connelly, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 07/31/1992
* USD 18,000.00

The proposed research focusses on the interrelationships between women's labor
force activity and child care in metropolitan Brazil. In a predominantly rural
economy, women's work and child raising are not generally incompatible. However,
growing industrial and sector services separate the workplace from the home,
with work sites becoming increasingly inappropriate for the care of children.
When employment and child supervision are no longer compatible, they impose
competing demands on women's time. This research explores the simultaneity of
child care and women's labor force participation decisions in Brazil, a country
in which sweeping economic and demographic changes have certainly led to an
increased demand for non-parental child care. The research seeks to place child
care choices in the context of household decisions making with the household
choosing the optimal allocation of the time of all of its members, given the
option of purchasing substitute child care. In the simplest case, focussing only
on the time use of the mother, the outcome of this modelling will be a labor
supply function for all women of child-bearing age and a child care demand
function for women with young children. These relationships will be studies
using data from a 1985 Brazilian survey which includes over 53,000 metropolitan
households and contains extensive information on economic activities of each
household members, as well as a series of questions on child care. The
estimation strategy will take into account the correlation in the error terms
between labor supply and child care demand, and the censoring of the data at
zero hours employed and zero hours of non-parental child care. The resulting
estimates will provide an initial understanding of the factors affecting women's
labor force participation in Brazil and how the presence of young children
influences the decision process. Although it is suspected that women with young
children are less likely to participate in the labor force, the research will
assess the magnitude of the effect and how it differs with households and
individual characteristics. Factors affecting the demand for non-parental child
care are less well understood than those affecting labor force participation,
particularly within the context of a developing country, and the emphasis of
this research on child care is its unique contribution.