* 9008064
* Long &amp; Medium Term Research:  X-ray Analysis of Thin Film   Materials Including Wear Resistant Coatings and SuperlatticeStructures
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1990,03/31/1992
* Carla Shute, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 03/31/1992
* USD 37,270.00

Long &amp; Medium-Term Research: X-ray Analysis of Thin Film Materials Including
Wear Resistant Coatings and Superlattice Structure. This award recommendation is
made under the Program for Long &amp; Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of
Excellence. The program seeks to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct
long-term research abroad at research institutions of proven excellence. Awards
provide opportunities for the conduct of joint research, and the use of unique
or compli- mentary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in foreign
countries. This award for a proposal sponsored by Dr. Jerome Cohen is to support
a 15 month visit by Dr. Carla J. Shute to Sweden to work with Professor Torsten
Ericsson of the Institute of Technology in Link>ping on "X-Ray Analysis of Thin
Film Materials Including Wear Resistant Coatings and Superlattice Structure."
The properties of thin film materials are of considerable interest due to their
enhanced mechanical behavior over bulk specimens of the same material. The
researchers will examine two types of thin film structures: TiN wear resistant
coatings and Mo/V superlattice structures. They will examine the residual
stresses in both of these materials by the sin.theta polycrystalline x-ray
diffraction technique. For the TiN films, the researchers will study the
mechanism of compressive stress generation during growth under low energy ion
bombardment. For the Mo/V superlattices, they will examine the tetragonal strain
distortion theories for the supermodulus effect. The supermodulus effect is a
two-three fold increase in the elastic modulus of thin film modulated structures
observed for a small range of wavelengths of the composition modulation. They
will also make measure- ments of the tetragonal strain, gradient in strain near
the interface, and strength and coherency of the interface as a function of the
wavelength of the modulation to determine if coherency strains can explain this
enhanced mechanical behavior. The award recommendation provides funds to cover,
as appropriate, international travel, local travel abroad, stipend, dependents'
allowance if applicable, and a flat administrative allowance of $250 for the
U.S. home institution.