* 9008099
* Current Topics Symposia in Plant Biochemistry and           Physiology, Columbia, Missouri, 1990, 1991, 1992
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/1990,10/31/1993
* Douglas Randall, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 10/31/1993
* USD 12,000.00

This award provides partial support to continue a symposium series on "Current
Topics in Plant Biochemistry and Physiology". These symposia are sponsored by
the Interdisciplinary Plant Biochemistry and Physiology Group of the University
of Missouri- Columbia. The purpose of the "Current Topics in Plant Biochemistry
and Physiology Symposium" is to promote awareness of advances in research in
interrelated areas of plant biology by providing a forum for the exhange of
scientific information and by catalyzing the generation of new ideas and
interactions. Topics focus on 3 or 4 areas ranging from molecular to whole-
plant studies. The Symposium environment enhances the crucial personal
interaction among students, postdoctorates and researchers from a broad range of
research disciplines. The Proceedings of the Symposia have been and will
continue to be published. This symposium series provides a lively forum for
students to become involved in the development of science. The choice of
multiple topics rather than a single topic enchances the interdisciplinary
nature of the Symposium, facilitates information transfer to a wider audience
and promotes personal interaction between students and researchers of more than
one research area. The meeting is held annually in the spring at the University
of Missouri-Columbia.