* 9008416
* Descriptive and Computational Complexity
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1993
* Neil Immerman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Krishna M. Kavi
* 01/31/1993
* USD 96,500.00

Computational complexity is a modern discipline which analyzes the inherent
difficulty of a given task. A great deal of progress has been made in
classifying the time and space requirements of certain combinatorial problems.
The complexity classes L, NL, P, NP - logarithmic space, nondeterministic
logarithmic space, polynomial time, nondeterministic polynomial time,
respectively - have been studied extensively. Still little is known about the
comparative strengths of different resources - it is yet to be proved that the
above classes are not all identical. Previously these classes have been studied
from a mathematical viewpoint. The inherent difficulty of expressing conditions
has been studied and a robust alternate view of complexity ensues. The
computational complexity of a property is closely tied to the complexity of
expressing the property in first-order logic. A series of languages which
express exactly those properties checkable in a series of computational
complexity classes has been introduced. The existence of such natural languages
for each important complexity class sheds a new light on complexity theory.
These languages reaffirm the importance of the complexity classes as much more
than machine dependent issues. Quite recently this approach has lead to a proof
that the class NL is closed under complementation. A corollary of this
surprising result is that the class of context-sensitive languages is closed
under comlementation, thus settling a long standing open question in complexity
theory. This project continues this line of research on complexity theory. The
main thrust is the investigation of parallel time/processor trade-offs via the
equivalent parameters from descriptive complexity. Furthermore, the scope of the
research will be broadened to include the modelling of real-time and database
computing.