* 9008932
* Exploratory Visit to Yakut Science Center, Academy of       Sciences of the USSR, to Discuss Joint Research on Tectonicsof Northeast Siberia
* O/D,OISE
* 07/10/1990,09/10/1990
* Kazuya Fujita, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerson Sher
* 09/10/1990
* USD 0.00

The purpose of this travel award is to allow three American specialists in the
tectonics of extreme northern regions - Dr. Kazuya Fujita of Michigan State
University and Drs. John N. Davies and David B. Stone of the University of
Alaska at Fairbanks - to visit the U.S.S.R. in July 1990 to determine the
feasibility of conducting long-term U.S.-U.S.S.R. coopera- tive research on
tectonic rifting and deformational processes in northeastern Siberia. The lead
Soviet institution, the Institute of Geology of the Siberian Division (Yakut
Branch) of the Soviet Academy of Sciences in Yakutsk, has arranged for the
American team to make a field trip to one of the potential research sites along
the remote Indigirka river. In addition to offering the opportunity of visiting
previously inaccessible research sites, this study could result in seismological
and paleomagnetic data that could be invaluable in supporting or invalidating
current models of the tectonic evolution of the Arctic. This project fulfills
the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading
researchers in the United States and the U.S.S.R. to combine complementary
efforts and capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and competence in
the field of basic scientific research on the basis of equality, reciprocity,
and mutuality of benefit.