* 9008775
* Efficiency and Macroeconomic Consequences of Deterministic  and Stochastic Inflation
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1993
* Roland Benabou, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1993
* USD 80,453.00

This project develops models of the interaction of inflation with the price
system which are microtheoretic but can be aggregated to shed light on
inflation. Two complementary directions of research are pursued, corresponding
to the deterministic and stochastic components of inflation. First, the project
studies inflationary trends in a monopolistically competitive search market with
costly price setting. The model captures the idea that inflation results,
through increased price dispersion, in more resources spent on search. Second,
the project examines the effects of the variance in inflation rates, in a
duopoly model where buyers and sellers face a Lucas-type signal extraction
problem. The central issues here are how inflation variability affects the
informational content of prices, buyers' incentives to become informed, and
firms' monopoly power. According to conventional macroeconomic wisdom, one of
the main channels through which inflation disrupts the efficiency of markets is
through the increased variability and dispersion of relative prices. This in
turn is said to cause many inefficiencies, such as incorrect production
decisions, more resources spent on search and a deterioration in the
informational content of prices. There is substantial empirical support of this
view of inflation. The contribution of this project comes from developing a
rigorous microeconomic foundation for addressing the macroeconomic issue of
inflation and for interpreting empirical facts. By dealing with inflation both
in trend and in variance, and analyzing its effects in two very different
models, this project should encompass a wide range of efficiency effects, and
cast theoretical light on several important propositions about inflation.