* 9008991
* Parallel Algorithms & Software for Nonlinear Problems in    VLSI Circuit Simulation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1993
* Xiaodong Zhang, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 06/30/1993
* USD 47,748.00

The goal of this project is to design, analyze, implement and test several
parallel methods for solving the nonlinear block bordered equations arising in
VLSI circuit simulation on parallel computers. The focus will be on three
important problem areas: 1) solving large block bordered systems of nonlinear
equations for a VLSI circuit simulation, 2) VLSI circuit partitioning problem,
efficiently mapping a circuit network to a parallel computer system; 3) load
balancing problems on a distributed system, to balance the numerical computation
load for circuit simulation among the processors in a parallel computer. The
nonlinear block bordered equation is also one of the most common types of large
scale systems of nonlinear equations in science and engineering applications.
Effort will be devoted to develop parallel explicit, implicit, and iterative
methods for solving the block bordered nonlinear systems of equations, including
convergence analysis, perturbation methods for singular or nearly singular block
bordered systems, applications of secant method, and the implementations of the
methods on different types of parallel computers. Efficient partitioning methods
will be investigated in order to speed up the convergence rate of the nonlinear
block bordered systems of equations, and to balance the parallel load
distribution statically. The dynamic load balancing is one of the most important
issues for parallel computation. A load balancing scheduler will be developed on
a parallel system to improve the computation efficiency for solving the block
bordered equations in the circuit simulation. The design method is motivated by
the use of parallel computers, and the implementation and testing will be on
parallel computers. The aim is, however, to discover new methods that
efficiently solve the numerical problems in VLSI circuit simulation on a
parallel computer.