* 9008160
* Formation of Specific Synaptic Connections
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1994
* Donald Wigston, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Stacy Springer
* 08/31/1994
* USD 239,242.00

How neurons make synaptic connections with the correct cells during the
development of the nervous system is still largely a mystery. It is clear that
the guidance of growing nerve cell processes (axons) to appropriate regions of
the developing nervous system, where their future target cells reside, places
constraints on which neurons can ultimately connect with each other. However,
even within a small region there exist neurons with very different functions,
and growing nerve axons must be able to recognize these different neuronal types
and choose only the ones appropriate for them to make connections with. This
project will examine the mechanisms by which neurons that normally innervate
muscle fibers (motoneurons) discriminate between different muscles. One
possibility is that each muscle is unique in some way that motoneurons axons can
recognize. A way to achieve this would be for muscle fibers to carry a molecular
label of some kind that distinguishes them from muscle fibers in other muscles.
Dr. Wigston will examine this possibility by searching for molecules unique to,
or highly concentrated in, a particular muscle, by generating monoclonal
antibody probes that bind selectively to particular muscles. Another possibility
is that each muscle secretes its own diffusible factor that attracts the axons
of only those motoneurons appropriate for that muscle. This possibility will be
examined by culturing pieces of spinal cord and muscle near to one another, and
determining whether particular axons grow preferentially towards particular
muscles. Furthermore, using various experimental designs, isolated motoneurons
will be grown in tissue culture and their selectivity for different muscles
examined. If selective synapse formation occurs in such a system, it will
provide tremendous opportunities for the elucidation of the mechanism by which
selectivity is achieved. This work should help us to understand how the correct
"wiring pattern" is laid down in the developing neurons system, and in
particular how the right motoneurons connect with the right muscles during
embryogenesis. The normal functioning of the brain, and normal behavior of the
organism, is critically dependent on the establishment of proper orderly
neuronal connectivity.