* 9008057
* Long &amp; Medium Term Research:  The Mammalian Y Chromosome,   Sex Determination and Evolution, A Marsupial Approach
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1990,02/29/1992
* Linda Strausbaugh, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 02/29/1992
* USD 31,641.00

Long &amp; Medium-Term Research: The Mammalian Y Chromosome, Sex Determination
and Evolution, A Marsupial Approach This award recommendation is made under the
Program for Long &amp; Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence.
The program seeks to enable U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct long-term
research abroad at research institutions of proven excellence. Awards provide
opportunities for the conduct of joint research, and the use of unique or
comple- mentary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions in foreign
countries. This award for a proposal sponsored by Dr. Linda A. Strausbaugh will
support a 12-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Gregory K. Hampikian of
the University of Connecticut to work with Dr. Jennifer M. Graves of La Trobe
University, Bundoora, Victoria, AusPtralia, on "Mammalian Y-Chromosome Evolution
and Sex Determination: A Marsupial Approach." The predominant theory of
mammalian Y chromosome evolution predicts that the only Y genes conserved are
those involved in sex determination, male-specific traits, and X-Y pairing.
Marsupials (infraclass Metatheria) diverged from placental animals (infra class
Eutheria) at least 130 million years ago. The researchers propose to isolate
genes conserved between the infraclasses from a marsupial Y-specific library in
order to detail the general plan of mammalian sex determination and shed light
on the evolution of sex chromosomes. The marsupial Y is ideal for these
comparative studies because its small size (2-3 X 1,000,000 bases) facilitates
library construction and its lack of an X chromosome pairing region simplifies
characteri- zation. The award recommendation provides funds to cover, as
appropriate, international travel, local travel abroad, stipend, dependents'
allowance if applicable, and a flat administrative allowance of $250 for the
U.S. home institution.