* 9008051
* Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Geometric Function Theory
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1992
* C. David Minda, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 07/31/1992
* USD 35,000.00

The goals of this mathematical research are to apply differential geometric
tools to the study of problems arising in geometric function theory. A common
feature of the work is the use of conformal metrics, especially the hyperbolic,
euclidean and spherical metrics. One of the primary areas of interest will be a
reexamination of the Bloch constant in light of a recent result which provided
the first improvement in the lower bound in fifty years. While the improvement
is small, the method is new. Moreover, a new geometric derivation of the
improved bound opens up the possibility of further improvement as well as
applications to other extremal problems (some of which have already been made).
Extensions of this work to several complex variables also will be considered. A
second line of investigation involves the derivation of analytic expressions
which are necessary and sufficient for a given function to be univalent on a
domain. These are given in terms of two-point distortion theorems, of which
there are many. Two particular goals in the work concern conditions which imply
univalence in domains which are not simply connected and establishing whether an
expression can be found which, when satisfied by all univalent functions, gives
information about the connectivity of the underlying domain. Work on circle
packing as a means for approximating conformal mappings will continue. This
relatively new point of view was introduced five years ago by W. Thurston and
has led to several new lines of investigation in function theory. In this
project, work will be done expanding on recent successes in the approximation of
conformal maps of finitely connected domains to the case of mappings on Riemann
surfaces. Equivalently, attention will focus on the use of circle packings to
approximate the covering map of a disk onto a region of finite connectivity.