* 9008839
* The Design and Implementation of an Adaptive                Associative Processing System
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Ronald Fellman, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John R. Lehmann
* 12/31/1992
* USD 66,529.00

The goal of this research is to develop a system controller based upon neural
computing techniques that can be efficiently implemented using currently
available digital VLSI technology. The controller will be capable of
continuously adapting to changes in its environment by using a learning
algorithm and associative memory as the basis for its operation. This research
explores the use of digital associative memory coupled with fuzzy logic matching
techniques in the design of such an adaptive associative processor. In contrast
to a conventional computer, the associative processor will not operate in a
deterministic fashion. Instead, its operation will be probabilistic and based
upon a given set of heuristics. By using a closest-fit data matching unit, it
will attempt to find a relatively optimal solution via associative and iterative
techniques. A scoring unit will monitor its operation in order to provide
feedback to the system. Although we anticipate implementing this processor using
digital VLSI technology, investigation using computer simulations is a first
step. A biped walker paradigm is used as a tool for developing the associative
processor and learning algorithms. As a result of this investigation, we intend
to build such a biped walker robot controlled by the VLSI associative processor.