* 9008639
* Sulfur in the Marine Atmosphere (Part 2): A Contribution    to the Global Tropospheric Chemistry Program
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1992
* Ronald Ferek, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 12/31/1992
* USD 285,000.00

One of the outstanding problem areas in global tropospheric chemistry is the
sulfur chemistry of the marine atmosphere. The University of Washington (UW) has
embarked on a research program to address two important aspects of this problem:
determination of the vertical distributions of sulfur species in marine air and
the factors responsible for these distributions, and determination of the
relationships between dimethylsulfide, sulfate, cloud condensation nuclei and
cloud microstructures in marine air. In the past two years, the UW has
developed, calibrated and field tested the instruments needed for field
measurements. It has developed sampling protocols and analysis techniques,
obtained preliminary field measurements, and begun numerical modeling studies.
Topics to be studied include: relationship between dimethyl sulfide in seawater
and the air, diurnal, seasonal and geographic variability of dimethyl sulfide
concentrations, dimethyl sulfide oxidation, sulfur dioxide production, sulfur
dioxide oxidation, MSA-sulfur dioxide branching, cloud pumping, sulfur dioxide
to sulfate conversion in clouds and the dimethyl sulfide-climate hypotheses. The
field studies will be carried out as part of the Pacific Sulfur/Stratus
Investigation in the NE. In addition, seasonal variability will be explored
through flights over the NE Pacific.