* 9008685
* Clostridial Neurotoxin Binding Proteins in Exocytosis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1994
* Mary Bittner, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Stacy Springer
* 07/31/1994
* USD 246,586.00

Cells secrete prepackaged hormones and neurotransmitters by a process known as
exocytosis. This process plays an important role in the function of most organ
systems in the body. For example, the pancreas secretes hormones that regulate
blood sugar. Secretion of neurotransmitters is the means by which the nervous
system controls a whole host of function, including heart rate, blood pressure,
breathing, and muscle movement. Despite its obvious importance, exocytosis is
poorly understood. We know a great deal about the signaling systems which
initiate the process, but very little about what happens at the biochemical
level once secretion is triggered. In a resting secretory cell, hormones or
neurotransmitters are stored in small, membrane- covered vesicles, waiting for
an appropriate signal. During exocytosis, these vesicles make their way to the
surface of the cell, where they bind and fuse with the cell membrane, releasing
their contents outside the cell. Although it seems likely that one or more
proteins participate in this process, it has proved difficult to demonstrate
this experimentally. This proposal takes a new approach toward identifying such
proteins. It takes advantage of the fact that certain bacterial toxins can
partially or totally block one of the later stages of the secretory process.
Although the exact mechanism by which the inhibition occurs is unknown, it
almost certainly involves an interaction with the proteins which are of interest
to us. I plan to use radiolabeled toxin interact. I will then purify these
proteins and determine their subcellular localization and functions will
markedly increase our understanding of, and thus our potential ability to
control, the process of exocytosis. Eventually, these studies may lead to novel
therapeutic approaches towards diseases such as hypertension which have a
prominent secretory component.