* 9008077
* Design and Analysis Issues in Group Research
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1994
* David Kenny, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Jean B. Intermaggio
* 01/31/1994
* USD 219,103.00

Research in the area of small groups is important to the complete understanding
of social behavior. Currently, the study of groups is limited by the lack of
adequate statistical tools to describe fully the ongoing processes that occur in
small groups. One of the most interesting and important aspects of group
research is that people interact with one another in groups and, through this
interaction, influence one another. Methods which are available today either
ignore or treat as a statistical nuisance the fact that people in groups
interact with one another and are, therefore, linked to one another.
Understanding the links between people in groups will help clarify the nature of
social interaction in small groups. This research will investigate three
different research designs. The first design, influence networks, involves
models of the extent to which people influence each other in groups. These types
of models allow study of the effect of different types of influence hierarchies
on group productivity and group member satisfaction. The second design is the
rotation design, in which people move from group to group. In the rotation
design, each person participates in several groups, so that the consistency of
individual behavior when a person becomes a member of a new group can be
examined. The third design is the generations design. In this design, there is a
turnover in group membership. Some group members enter the group and other
members leave. This design essentially models the birth and death cycles in
families. This design allows examination of the stability of group norms with
changing members. For each area, the research will explore design considerations
and develop data analysis techniques and computer software. These methods should
be of use to researchers of leadership, social influence, group socialization,
productivity, and personality.