* 9008225
* Systematics and Evolutionary Biology of the Reef-Building   Coral Genus Porites (Scleractinia)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1995
* Ronald Garthwaite, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 06/30/1995
* USD 269,906.00

Porites is one of the most diverse and widely- distributed genera of living
corals. It has dominated, ecologically and geologically, most tropical reefs
since the Eocene (55 Mya). Porites has been the primary frame-builder of many
reefs; it helps create the habitats occupied by innumerable other organisms; and
its skeletons are a major constituent of some of the world's most productive
Tertiary oil formations. Porites also contains preserved in its skeleton some of
the most detailed paleoclimatic records available from shallow tropical seas. In
this study, Porites is used as a model system for investigating the evolution of
long-lived tropical marine organisms within the context of the major geophysical
processes (plate tectonics and glacial sea-level fluctuations) that have shaped
the world's oceans during the Cenozoic. Enzyme electrophoresis and three kinds
of morphological data will be used to describe at least 80% of Indo- Pacific and
Caribbean species. The data will be used to: 1. estimate ages of species and
dates of divergence from common ancestors; 2. construct and compare phylogenies
based on genetic and morphological similarities among the species; 3. test
alternative hypotheses about the times and geological conditions favoring coral
speciation; 4. examine relationships between life history characteristics,
evolutionary rates and probabilities of speciation. The study is expected to
resolve many chronic taxonomic problems within the genus by correlating genetic
and morphological classifications, to describe previously unknown species, and
to identify reliable diagnostic characters that can be used by biologists and
geologists working with living and fossil material.