* 9008435
* An Experimental and Numerical Investigation of Shellside    Boiling in Horizontal Tube Bundles
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1990,09/30/1994
* Michael Jensen, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 09/30/1994
* USD 199,468.00

This research project proposes to investigate the thermal hydraulics of
shellside boiling in a horizontal tube heat exchanger in a recirculating liquid
pool as well as in a once- through feed system. Experiments will be run in an
existing flow loop using refrigerant R-113. A model of half of a slice of a
square, inline and an equilateral triangular horizontal tube bundle will be
designed and constructed such that with an insert the shell/bundle geometry can
be changed from that of a kettle reboiler to that of a once-through submerged
evaporator. The tubes in the bundle will be electrically heated and instrumented
with thermocouples. Measurements will include the pressure distribution, void
fraction and mean liquid velocity throughout the bundle, liquid velocities in
the space between the shell and the bundle when operating as a kettle reboiler,
test section power and wall temperatures. A two-dimensional, two-fluid numerical
model of the thermal hydraulics will be developed to simulate the experimental
setup. Once this model has been verified by comparing the experimental and
predicted data from this experiment and by comparing computer simulations
against industry data from full scale bundles, then innovative fluid-to-fluid
heat exchangers will be studied. These latter speculative studies will
investigate a variety of geometric and operating conditions. This research is
intended to develop new data on shellside boiling and two-phase flow and to
integrate the results from two previous projects to obtain overall tube bundle
performance. It will pave the way for studying innovative designs unconstrained
by past practice for heat exchangers with shellside boiling, and will
demonstrate where future research activities should be directed.