* 9008925
* Study of the Atmospheric Boundary Layer Turbulence Processesin the Tropics, Dispersion Parameters Experiments, Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1990,03/31/1996
*  M Singh, Indian Institute of Technology New Delhi
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 03/31/1996
* USD 115,882.00

Objectives: This project allows Dr. Sethu Raman of the Department of Earth and
Atmospheric Sciences, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, and Dr. M.P.
Singh, Center of Atmospheric Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology, New
Delhi, India, to continue collaboration in the study of numerical weather
prediction and air pollution. Work will continue on 1. development of a regional
weather prediction model to predict short range monsoon events, 2. storm surge
prediction, 3. monsoon boundary layer processes and 4. air pollution. Emphasis
in this research will be on atomospheric turbulence and diffusion. Improved
parameterization schemes for boundary layer physics and cumulus heating will be
incorporated into the regional scale model along with a dynamics initialization
scheme. Scope: The two teams have been collaborating in the field of numerical
weather prediction for several years with considerable benefit to both countries
and with significant publications published in international journals. The two
scientists have strong backing in India for conducting experiments and obtaining
important data that may not be readily available otherwise, thus the research is
likely to be of benefit to the scientists in the U.S. Funding: This project is
being supported under two grants: 1. North Carolina State University FY90 U.S.
$25,993 plus $31.200 in Indian rupees FY91 U.S. $32,466 plus $44,500 in Indian
rupees FY92 U.S. $25,993 plus $31,200 in Indian rupees 2. Indian Institute of
Technology New Delhi: FY90 $115,882 in Indian rupees