* 9008586
* Portable Real Time Speech System
* CSE,EIA
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1992
* Herbert Berman, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald L. Engel
* 05/31/1992
* USD 49,644.00

In the past five years researchers have made good progress in the areas of
speech recognition and synthesis. Despite the inevitable delay between
publication of new results and appearance of new technology based on these
results, novel applications are invariably developed for these technologies.
These applications, in turn, spawn new research questions. This work concerns
the problems of real time speech recognition and synthesis for a person with a
particular speech disability. Each year throat cancer, which is the fifth or
sixth most common type of cancer in the United States today causes a large
number of individuals to undergo a partial or total laryngectomy. These
individuals are no longer able to speak in a normal fashion. Advances in VLSI
have catalyzed the development of speech recognition and synthesis hardware. One
of the popular speech aid devices is the "ElectroLarynx" produced by Siemens,
Inc. It is a battery-operated, hand-held vibratory device which, when pressed
against the throat of a laryngectomized person, creates sufficient "turbulence"
in the throat to partially simulate the undifferentiated sound produced by a
normal larynx. This sound is then converted into speech in the upper oral
cavity. The problem is that a voice produced in this fashion sounds very
mechanical; certain phonemes cannot be produced or are produced only marginally;
and the speech can be difficult to understand. The practical goal of this
project is to use current hardware and speech technology to build a device which
will produce a high-quality, life-like voice in a very small package. The
research goal of this project is to study the complexity of the voice produced
by a partially laryngectomized person in terms of its speech recognition
properties. This is a more difficult problem than standard speech recognition
and thus, very high risk undertaking. The researchers will be attacking the
engineering problem of designing a more practical speech aid device to replace
the "Electrolarynx" and the research question of how the augmented speech of a
laryngectomized person differs in speech recognition features from standard
speech.