* 9009320
* Modeling Strategy Competition
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1991
* Susan Goldman, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 12/31/1991
* USD 60,000.00

This career advancement award will permit Dr. Susan Goldman to acquire new
methodological skills relevant to understanding how people learn from written
material. In previous work, Goldman provided evidence that readers exhibit a
great deal of flexibility in the strategies they use to learn from text. Goldman
will study how readers select various strategies by (1) having readers describe
and explain their reading behavior, and (2) creating computer models of the
reader that vary the knowledge available to the "reader." To do the computer
modeling work, Goldman will acquire the necessary skills by studying at two
research laboratories where scientists are engaged in this type of work. She
will pursue skills in two approaches to modeling, one relying on the assumption
that readers have many rules that govern their behavior and a second that makes
the assumption that readers operate with very few of these rules. Goldman will
spend approximately two months at each research laboratory, devoting the
remainder of her time to implementing the project at her home institution. The
activities in which Goldman is engaged will enhance understanding of the
knowledge requirements of different types of reading material, of the types of
strategic knowledge for reading that lead to efficient learning from text, and
of how texts can be written to facilitate understanding and learning.
Ultimately, the information and the techniques Goldman is developing can be used
to assist in the diagnosis and remediation of developmental and adult reading
difficulties. Thus, this career advancement award will contribute toward
improving independent learning skills and levels of literacy in our society.