* 9009694
* Script Abstraction and Episodic Memory Development
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1994
* Michael Farrar, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 07/31/1994
* USD 104,219.00

This project will investigate children's memory for their everyday experiences,
such as going to school. Two types of memory will be investigated: (1) script
memory and (2) episodic memory. Script memory refers to an abstract general
memory for the typical activities that occur during routine events (e.g., eating
at a restaurant). Episodic memory refers to memory for a specific event episode.
The research will address three specific interrelated questions. The first is
the role of script memory in facilitating episodic memory. Of interest are the
conditions under which children remember specific episodes of a repeated event.
For example, it has been argued that episodic memories are established only when
a particular experience deviates substantially from the typical scripted event.
Whether an episode is perceived as different depends on several factors, such as
event complexity, similarity to other event experiences, and the frequency of
experiences. To determine how these conditions function, the research will use
novel, artificial events created for children to experience. This will provide
systematic control of these factors. Second, the research will use the same
sorts of events to examine how these same elements contribute to script memory
development. Of interest is whether differences in event experience will produce
different levels of script abstraction. Second, the studies will examine whether
there are developmental differences between younger and older children on how
much they depend on scripts to form an episodic memory. That is, are younger
children more likely than older children to falsely report typical script
activities when recalling an episodic event. even when that activity did not
occur during that particular episode? These studies will investigate the
conditions (i.e., the complexity, frequency and similarity of events) in which
script dependency occurs. Of interest is whether the degree of script dependency
can be altered in both older and younger children under these different event
conditions. Results of this research will have implications both for education
and for the judicial system. First, by examining the conditions under which
children form different types of memories, it will be possible to create
learning experiences to facilitate the acquisition of different educational
concepts that are more appropriate for either script or episodic memory. Second,
this research will provide much needed information on the accuracy of children's
memory. This information is important for questions regarding children's
eyewitness testimony in cases of physical and sexual abuse. In many of these
cases, children are often called to testify about repeated events that took
place over an extended period of time.