* 9009309
* Regional Economic Growth in U.S. Manufacturing Industries
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1993
* Charles Hulten, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1993
* USD 90,311.00

Four major problems have dominated recent discussions of U.S. economic growth:
the productivity slowdown that began in 1973, the dramatic differences in growth
across regions throughout the postwar era, the relationship between productivity
and U.S. international competitiveness, and the impact of the deterioration of
the public infrastructure on the nation's economic performance. The analysis of
regional productivity growth from this project could potentially offer important
insights into all of these issues. In this project, the growth rate and level of
productivity in twenty one industries for each of nine regions over the
1951-1986 period will be estimated. This approach parallels the trend in
national productivity research toward disaggregation. Although this
disaggregation has focused on narrower industry detail, it is likely that
focusing on regional growth will lead to further gains. The results of the
project will allow several important questions to be answered: (1) Has
productivity grown more rapidly in some regions than others? (2) Was the
productivity slowdown limited to a small number of regions, or was it more
pervasive? (3) Is there any evidence that regional productivity levels are
converging? (4) Are regional differences in productivity correlated with
industrial characteristics, the degree of urbanization, education expenditures,
regional investment in public infrastructure capital, and other public policies?