* 9009018
* Centering of Attention, Pronominal Reference, and           Discourse Coherence
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1994
* Barbara Grosz, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Larry H. Reeker
* 07/31/1994
* USD 206,563.00

This work addresses fundamental problems in three facets of discourse
processing, (1) the focus of attention of discourse participants, (2) the use
and understanding of pronominal reference, and (3) the coherence of discourse.
The research focuses on the interaction among these facets within a discourse
segment. It will refine and expand current computational theories of discourse
coherence and reference at this local level. The approach is interdisciplinary:
it includes the development of algorithms that embody the theory and
psychological investigations to determine constraints on parameters of the
theory (e.g. the ordering of candidate referents for pronouns). It will
empirically test the claims of the theory as a model of human language use, and
will compare the performance of algorithms for handling pronouns employing the
constraints of this theory with alternatives based on other theories. The
results will contribute to computer science and the cognitive sciences in three
major arenas: the construction of more fluent and robust natural-language
processing systems; the development of more computationally sufficient
psychological theories of discourse processing; and, potentially in the longer
term, the design of more sophisticated computer languages (e.g. database-access
languages, system-interface languages).