* 9009444
* Earthquake Predominant Ground Motion in the San Francisco   Metropolitan Area Using Data from Microtremors and the      Loma Prieta Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/1990,04/30/1992
* Marijan Dravinski, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 04/30/1992
* USD 50,000.00

This project is part of the NSF/USGS initiative within the National Earthquake
Hazard Reduction Program (NEHRP) to investigate the effects of the Loma Prieta
earthquake of 17 October 1989. This project involves extensive measurements of
long-period microtremors in the San Francisco basin. Microtremors, or
microseisms, are small tremors or vibrations of the earth that are generated by
natural occurrences such as the pounding of surf on the shore, or road traffic.
They can be detected only by sensitive instruments and are not associated with
earthquakes, but may be used to understand better the process of ground shaking
due to earthquakes. The aim is to investigate the use of long-period
microtremors in the San Francisco basin to identify "critical" structures having
a natural frequency of vibration close to that of the predominant motion of the
basin. The program consists of three phases: (1) The measurement of long-period
microtremors at approximately 30 locations within the basin, with some of the
sites coinciding with the locations were strong motion records were obtained
during the Loma Prieta earthquake, (2) processing these data, and (3) analyzing
these data and comparing them with the strong ground motion records obtained
during the Loma Prieta earthquake. Special emphasis is being given to the Marina
district which consists of very soft sediments and in which considerable damage
occurred. All recorded data are being stored on floppy disks, which will be
available upon request. In addition, the records will be accessible through
electronic mail.