* 9009936
* Probabilistic Computation and Interactive Proof Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1992
* Lance Fortnow, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Dana S. Richards
* 07/31/1992
* USD 36,869.00

An interactive proof system consists of two players, an "infinitely" powerful
prover and a probabilistic time-bounded verifier. The prover tries to convince
the verifier of the validity of some statement. However, the verifier does not
trust the prover and will only accept if the prover manages to convince the
verifier of the validity of the statement. The prover and the verifier have a
conversation with the verifier using random coins to ask questions to the prover
until the verifier is or is not convinced of the validity of the statement. This
project will examine the complexity of these interactive proof systems and the
techniques used in the recent results showing every problem solvable in a
reasonable amount of space has such a proof system. The new ideas, based on
looking at certain hard problems with a simple algebraic characterization, may
prove useful in tackling some of the other hard questions in structural
complexity theory. Using certain cryptographic assumption, one can show every
interactive proof system has an equivalent "zero-knowledge" proof system, i.e.
the verifier receives no information from the protocol other than whether the
statement was valid. This project will try to determine whether such a theorem
is true without any cryptographic assumptions. Perhaps one could use the new
ideas for interactive proofs using certain "hard" functions whose hardness do
not depend on unknown assumptions. This project will also study how much more
time is needed for a computer with access to random coins to be more powerful
than a similar computer with less time. Standard techniques will not help to
solve this problem but perhaps the techniques used for interactive proof systems
may also prove this question. This project will also look at some complexity
issues of multiple- prover interactive proof systems where there are two or more
provers who can not communicate among themselves. While the complexity of
multiple-prover interactive proof systems is known, this project will look at
the complexity of such proof systems with a constant number of rounds of
communication been the provers and the verifier and also various applications of
the complexity of these proof systems.