* 9009481
* Research Initiation Award: Nonlinear Optical Materials Via  Sol-Gel Processing
* ENG,CBET
* 06/02/1990,11/30/1992
* Joel Plawsky, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 11/30/1992
* USD 70,000.00

The discovery of optical second harmonic generation in crystals in 1961 spurred
rapid progress in the field of nonlinear optics. Nonlinear optical materials are
materials whose optical properties depend upon the intensity of light incident
upon them. The nonlinearity could be in the form of an intensity dependent
refractive index or a saturable absorption. These materials have practical
applications in telecommunications, digital computers, and laser fusion. They
have the potential to become future optical semiconductors which can operate at
frequencies two to three orders of magnitude higher than current semiconductor
technology. The PI plans to explore formation of commercially viable nonlinear
optical materials using the sol-gel technique. The sol-gel process is a means
for producing inorganic films and monolithic structures from organo-metallic
monomeric compounds. The process is analogous to step reaction polymerizations
in organic systems where the monomer is usually a metal alkoxide such as
tetramethoxysilane. These reactions are run at room temperature, in a common
solvent for alkoxide and water, and using either an acid or base catalyst. The
sol-gel process will be used to produce new nonlinear optical materials by
polymerizing modified alkoxide monomers of the form RSi(OR')3 where R represents
an organic functionality demonstrated to have a high nonlinear susceptibility.
Work will focus on R-groups which are primarily substituted benzenes, pyridines
and azo dyes. Commercially available alkoxides and custom alkoxides synthesized
as part of this research will be investigated. Thin film and monolithic
materials will be made. To facilitate the observation of second-order nonlinear
effects, the dipoles of the organic functionality will be aligned using corona
poling. The second-order and third-order susceptibilities of the starting
materials as well as the polymerized materials will be assessed using second
harmonic generation and four-wave mixing respectively. The strength, chemical
and environmental resistances, and thermal stability of the film and bulk
materials will also be determined.