* 9009100
* Shape Recognition and Figure-Ground Organization
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/1990,05/31/1994
* Mary Peterson, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 05/31/1994
* USD 202,843.00

Theoretical attempts to understand visual perception often partition perceptual
processes into those processes that can be performed simultaneously and those
that must be performed successively. Most theorists have assumed that figure-
ground organization and shape recognition are performed successively. Figure-
ground organization is the determination of which regions in the visual field
represent figures and which constitute the backgrounds against which the figures
are viewed. Figure and ground regions are separated by a contour; the region to
which the contour is assigned appears to be the recognizable figure, whereas the
other region appears to be an undifferentiated ground which simply appears to
continue behind the figure. Despite the linkage between shape recognition and
figure-ground organization, these theorists have argued that figure-ground
organization must precede shape recognition, appealing either explicitly or
implicitly to the argument that one cannot recognize a figure until there is a
figure to be recognized. Consequently, figure-ground relationships are generally
conceived to be determined by stimulus variables only (i.e., variables such as
the relative areas, symmetries, convexities, and enclosure of the two regions on
either side of a contour). Contrary to this argument, however, previous studies
in Peterson's laboratory have shown that certain shape recognition analyses are
conducted prior to the determination of figure and ground. These experiments can
be readily integrated into current theoretical approaches to shape recognition,
thereby rendering this argument obsolete. The planned experiments will examine
the conditions under which shape recognition processes can contribute to figure-
ground computations. One series of experiments will identify which specific
types of contours (e.g., luminance contours, binocular disparity contours,
and/or color contours) permit shape recognition computations to be performed
simultaneously with the analysis of the stimulus variables relevant to figure-
ground organization. Another series of experiments will test whether the shape
representations corresponding to both interpretations of a reversible figure-
ground stimulus are activated simultaneously prior to the assignment of the
figure-ground contour. A third series of experiments will attempt to explicate
the rules governing the interactions between shape recognition variables and
stimulus variables in figure-ground computations. These experiments will provide
information about fundamental aspects of visual processing, including the manner
in which analyses of physical variables interact with cognitive variables in
perceptual organization. These experiments are certain to be relevant to the
design of surrogates for physical scenes.