* 9009743
* Reconstructive Democratic Theory
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1991
* John Dryzek, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli Jr.
* 12/31/1991
* USD 38,861.00

The subject of democracy has always been of major concern to political science.
Political scientists have conducted research on what democracy means, how
democratic systems are organized, the content and effects of different kinds of
democratic institutions, the social and economic preconditions of democracy, and
so forth. In contemporary society the basic idea of democracy is triumphant
throughout the world (even though democratic ideals are frequently violated in
practice). It remains the case, though, that democracy means very different
things to different people. This is as true for political philosophers as it is
for political leaders and ordinary citizens. In this project the investigator
will ascertain and compare the variety of meanings that political activists,
political leaders, and ordinary people ascribe to the idea of democracy. This
will be done through intensive examination of the beliefs of selected
individuals, chosen on the basis of variety in their orientation toward
politics. A research procedure called "Q methodology" will be used, in which
individuals are asked to react to a large number of statements relating to
democracy. The results of this investigation will be used to do two things.
First, they will determine whether particular theories of democracy (e.g.,
liberal democracy, participatory democracy) find support or rejection in the way
people feel. Second, they will be used to specify the variety of ways in which
individuals actually do conceptualize democracy. It is quite possible that these
conceptualizations will arise in ways not accounted for in existing models of
democracy.