* 9009099
* RIA:  High-Breakdown Point Estimation in Electric Power     Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1993
* Lamine Mili, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Vijay Vittal
* 01/31/1993
* USD 70,000.00

The security and the economic operation of an electric power system can benefit
greatly from robust estimation theory. Its major concern is the design of
estimators which are robust against departures from the assumptions, due to bad
measurements for instance. The first objective of the proposed research is to
extend this theory to electric power systems, which are represented by models
involving sparse matrices. In particular, the important concept of breakdown
point, which is defined as the maximum fraction of contamination that an
estimator can handle, has to be generalized in order to account for the local
properties which characterize sparse regression models. Based on this concept,
algorithms which apply high-breakdown point estimators to power systems will be
developed. Here, the resampling technique and the simulated annealing method
will be considered, the objective being the development of algorithms which can
be implemented in a real-time environment of a control center. The third
objective of the proposed research is the investigation of meter placement
methodologies which are optimal for bad data identification. This is indeed an
important issue since in power systems the redundancy in the measurements is
very low. Preliminary results showed that a poor measurement configuration for
bad data analysis can be dramatically improved through appropriate measurement
re-allocation.