* 9009842
* Research Initiation Award:  Microfabrication of Electron    Optical Components
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1994
* Alan Feinerman, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Brian J. Clifton
* 06/30/1994
* USD 80,000.00

Semiconductor processing techniques will be utilized to fabricate electron
optical structures. In addition to electron microscopy the results of this
research can also be applied to high definition cathode ray tubes (HDCRT), 10um
period wigglers, and vacuum microelectronics. The areas considered in this
proposal are: . A specimen holder with a binary selection of square apertures in
a diaphragm ranging from 1um to 32um on a side, to support ultrathin specimens.
. Miniature thermionic electron sources that have a flat emitting surface of
varying size. There will be up to 10,000 of these filaments on each substrate.
In addition a pseudo- blackbody source of electrons will be fabricated, this
will have the advantage of a reduced evaporation of work function lowering
impurities for tungsten. . Programmable thermionic electron sources that can
control the emitting surface by changing the current path. This feature will add
flexibility to the traditional triode design that relies on a Wehnelt electrode
to control the emitting area. Electron specimen holders, and sources have been
traditionally made with a beaker or in a machine shop. Semiconductor processing
techniques developed for integrated circuit manufacture can generate 1-100um
patterns in two and three dimensions with appropriate etching. This
unprecedented control can be used to greatly improve the ease of manufacture of
electron optical components and the resolution in microscopy.