* 9009246
* Research Initiation Award:  An Investigation of Admicellar  Catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1990,06/30/1993
* Lance Lobban, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 06/30/1993
* USD 74,501.00

Admicellar catalysis, a novel technique to enhance reaction rates and
selectivities. will be investigated. The hydrolysis of ethyl benzoate has been
selected as a model reaction. The catalysis by a cationic surfactant adsorbed on
porous silica will be studied over a range of surface coverages, support surface
areas, and porosities, and solution pH and reactant concentrations. The
objectives are (1) the quantitative evaluation of admicellar catalysis, and (2)
the clarification of the morphology of the adsorbed surfactant aggregates.
Admicellar catalysis is similar in many ways to micellar catalysis. Exploitation
of micellar catalysis is discourage by the difficulty of product separation from
the catalyst. The significant advantages of admicellar catalysis are expected to
include (1) easy separation of the catalyst from the product, and (2) enhanced
reaction rates and selectivities due to the particular characteristics of
adsorbed surfactant aggregates. the results of this study may lead to new,
efficient catalytic processes for production of pesticides, pharmaceuticals, and
other highly specific reaction products, and to new processes for hazardous
chemical detoxification. In addition, this study should provide new knowledge on
absorbed surfactant aggregate structures. This information is of great practical
importance to the fields of detergency, enhanced oil recovery, and numerous
other areas.