* 9009379
* The Systematic Study of Senate Elections
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1992
* Warren Miller, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 01/31/1992
* USD 491,856.00

By comparison to our knowledge of U.S. House elections, our understanding of
Senate elections and the institution itself remains impoverished. We know rather
little about how voters choose their Senators, how Senators represent the
interests of their constituents, and the kinds of campaigns that Senators and
their opponents wage. The problem is not that Senate elections are of little
theoretical interest: the study of elections provides an excellent and in some
respects optimal entree to fundamental questions for American democratic
politics. Nor is it a case of indifference on the part of the research
community: there is in fact a considerable and growing interest in the study of
Senate elections. The problem, rather, is the absence of appropriate data: our
comparative ignorance reflects the drastic limitations of the evidence now
available. This project involves a study of Senate elections to repair this
defect, justified by the substantive and theoretical advances that the study
will make possible. Advances will come in concentrated form on four topics, each
fundamental to understanding the contemporary American political system: (1)
political representation, of interest not least because, contrary to the
intentions of the framers of the Constitution, the contemporary Senate appears
to be more responsive to popular sentiment than the House; (2) the "simple act
of voting," Senate elections provide a comparative context for elaborating and
testing theories of voter choice that is useful in and of itself but that also
throws light on voter choice in other settings; (3) divided government, now the
norm in the American system of separated powers, one that appears to menace
coherent legislation and erode political accountability; and (4) the nature and
consequences of political campaigns, Senate elections provide an opportunity to
examine the interplay among candidates, the political institutions governing
elections, and voters in a particularly powerful way, one that is simply
unavailable in other electoral arenas. With support from the National Science
Foundation, the Principal Investigator and National Election Studies Board,
initiated in 1988 the first phase of a three-part study of Senate elections. The
present study involves a data collection of the 1990 Senate elections through
telephone interviews with a national sample of 3,750 members of the eligible
electorate. The average length of the interviews is 35 minutes and will involve
a randomly selected set of respondents, divided among all 50 states, interviewed
in the period immediately following the November general elections. Initial
analyses of the 1988 Senate elections suggest that the study to be conducted
here will have the same kind of explosive impact for research on Senate
elections that the 1978 National Election Study has had on our understanding of
the House.