* 9009710
* Incremental Case-Based Learning Through Introspective       Reasoning About Knowledge Goals
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1993
* Ashwin Ram, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Larry H. Reeker
* 02/28/1993
* USD 67,033.00

This research will investigate how a reasoner can improve its understanding of
an incompletely understood domain through the application of what it already
knows to novel problms in that domain. Recent work in AI has dealt with the
issue of using past experience stored in the reasoner's memory to understand
novel situations, plan for novel goals, or solve novel problems. However, this
process assumes that past experiences are well understood and provide good
"lessons" to be used for future situations. This assumption is usually false
when one is learning about a novel domain, since situations encountered
previously in this domain might not have been understood completely. The
research will develop techniques by which a reasoner can (a) use domain
knowledge that may not be completely understood to solve novel problems, (b)
maintain an explicit model of the "gaps" in its knowledge base, (c) learn by
filling in these gaps when the information it needs become available, and hence
(d) gradually evolve a better understanding of the domain. This research is
important for several reasons. On the theoretical side, it will contribute to
our understanding of learning, explanation, and experience-based reasoning. On
the practical side, it will provide the foundations for technology that will
allow us to design practical resoning systems that can learn and improve their
own performance through experience.