* 9009509
* A Study of Contracts and Markets
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1993
* Asher Wolinsky, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1993
* USD 81,816.00

This project consists of three independent parts. The first investigates in
detail a different approach to the analysis of renegotiation of contracts. The
emphasis of this approach is on taking explicit account of the role of the time
dimension in the implementation and the renegotiation of contracts. The notion
of renegotiation proofness employed here recognizes the fact that renegotiation
of contracts normally involves some costs. The results so far indicate that this
approach yields significantly different predictions than has been common in the
related literature. The second part investigates the effect of small deviations
from perfect maximizing behavior on the functioning of dynamic and decentralized
markets. The basic intuition is that such models may capture explicitly the idea
that the maximizing agents devote special efforts to gain at the expense of the
nearly rational ones and in the proces disrupt significantly the operation of
such markets. The third part is concerned with an industrial organization
problem. The purpose is to investigate the nature of inventory accumulation
resulting from strategic considerations faced by a durable goods monopoly. This
research is significant because it enriches and changes important lines of
research. For example, this project develops renegotiation-proofness criteria
which take explicit account of the time cost of renegotiating contracts. There
is a large, growing literature on the conditions that must hold for contracts to
be renegotiation proof. This literature is important because the possibility of
contract renegotiation can lead to inefficient market outcomes. Preliminary work
by the investigator demonstrates that introducing time into contract
renegotiation theory dramatically changes the results and suggests many
promising new directions of research.