* 9009370
* A Novel Optoelectronic Thyristor for Picosecond High Power  Switching Applications (REU Supplement)
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Jian Zhao, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Brian J. Clifton
* 12/31/1992
* USD 80,000.00

A new three terminal device, double heterostructure optoelectronic thyristor
(DHOET), will be investigated for picosecond high power switching and for
generating short laser pulse with high output power. The device is developed
from concepts of Si thyristors and double heterostructure (DH) lasers and will
be based on GaInAsP/InP heterostructures grown by liquid phase epitaxy. While
numerous research works have been reported about Si based thyristors, little has
been done as A1GaAs/GaAs and no work has been reported on GaInAsP/InP based
thyristors. The main thrust of this proposed study is to understand the effects
of band discontinuities ( Ec, Ev) on the turn-on and turn-off speed of the
proposed DHOETs and to explore their unique features as compared to Si
thyristors including: (i) much higher device speed, (ii) higher device operating
temperature, (iii) higher radiation resistance, and (iv) excellent optical
triggering sensitivity with InP as the optical window. This research may open up
a practically important new research area of III- V-DHOETs for the applications
of high speed pulsed power switching and the generation of subnanosecond
electrical and optical high power pulses. Research performed in this project is
expected to advance our understanding of heterostructures and will have many
other important applications such as the potential of fabricating novel optical
amplifiers.