* 9009378
* Hormonal Control of Sex Differences in Brain and Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1994
* Ernest Nordeen, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 08/31/1994
* USD 234,000.00

The neural system controlling avian song has proved a powerful model for
elucidating hormonal influence on neural organization and behavior. Song is an
androgen-dependent behavior produced predominately in males. Sex differences in
song behavior are mirrored in the anatomy of brain regions that control song.
Neuron size and number, androgen binding activity, and the projections of song-
related brain regions are all much greater in males than in females. The
striking anatomical dimorphisms result from differences in exposure to gonadal
steroids during development. Dr. Nordeen will use sophisticated anatomical
techniques to examine how gonadal steroids act on developing song regions during
the first few weeks after hatching. He will determine how hormones regulate the
production, migration and/or survival of neurons within these specific brain
nuclei. These experiments will provide insights into the cellular mechanisms of
sexual differentiation. Possibly the most exciting contribution resulting from
work on this model system is the recognition of the plasticity of the brain
during development and in adulthood. A major outcome of these studies will be to
increase our understanding of those mechanisms that permit aspects of neural
plasticity and thus, may eventually prove important in developing treatments for
enhancing the recovery of function in humans that have been incapacitated by
accidents or strokes.