* 9009154
* RIA: Message Passing in Distributed Real-Time Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Parameswaran Ramanathan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John R. Lehmann
* 12/31/1992
* USD 62,500.00

Due to its potential for high reliability and high performance, a carefully
designed distributed system can make an ideal controller for real-time
applications. However, the main drawback of a distributed system is that the
communication latency between tasks executing on two different nodes can be
fairly large. This research is to improve the communication performance by
addressing the problems related to message passing in a distributed system with
point-to-point interconnection topology. First, the assignment of deadlines to
messages based on the deadlines of related tasks is formalized. Message passing
techniques are then developed that have higher probabilities of messages meeting
their assigned deadlines. Since, by the first objective, the deadlines have been
assigned in a proper manner, the new message passing techniques result in a
better communication mechanism between the real-time tasks. Our approach is to
first characterize the probability distribution function of message delivery
times. Using this distribution, the deadlines for messages from the deadlines of
related tasks will then be derived. Finally, use will be made of the multiple
disjoint paths in a distributed system to increase the probability of a message
meeting its assigned deadline.