* 9009458
* Digital Image Processing Techniques for Flow Field Analysis and Interpretation
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/1991,08/31/1994
* Robin Strickland, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* George K. Lea
* 08/31/1994
* USD 217,531.00

A pattern modeling techniques for representing, analyzing, and classifying
features in data sets resulting from fluid dynamics and combustion diagnostics
research, with particular emphasis on turbulent flows will be developed. The
primary thrust of the research is directed toward a two component model for flow
fields; one being oriented along the major direction of anisotropy, describing
the large scale flow; the other being a residual pattern representing the
independent small scale flow structures. The separation into global and
localized flows facilitates subsequent identification and tracking of features
such as eddies. Significant data compression will be achievable due to the
decorrelation of the flow patterns. Low level image processing techniques will
be developed to meet the challenges posed by the unconventional properties of
fluid imagery. A method for low level image segmentation based on a topographic
classifier will be investigated. In addition, orthogonal transforms for further
compression of the two component flow model will be researched. Data acquired
from established laboratories will be used to test our modeling strategy.
Spatially and temporally resolved 2D data sets will be used to extend our
previous work in feature detection and tracking experiments. We expect the
proposed work will meet some of the needs voiced by the combustion and heat
transfer community concerning the automation of computer analysis techniques for
large fluid flow data sets.