* 9009666
* Collaborative Research:  Stimulus Equivalences and Stimulus-Class Formation
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1994
* Peter Urcuioli, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 07/31/1994
* USD 57,255.00

People can learn that different events are interchangeable because they
essentially "mean the same thing." Such "stimulus equivalences" are one means by
which people can respond immediately and appropriately to new situations on the
basis of learning and experience in other situations. This characteristic of
behavior is often regarded as special, and maybe unique, to human beings. Is
language necessary for this important behavioral attribute? If animals without
language can learn stimulus equivalences, language is not necessary. Dr.
Urcuioli, in collaboration with Dr. Thomas R. Zentall, of the University of
Kentucky, will examine this question using pigeons as the experimental animal.
Well-established training techniques and the excellent visual abilities of
pigeons make them a most appropriate choice. The pigeons will first be taught
that certain (visual) stimuli go with other (visual) stimuli. Later, they will
be tested to see if, as a result of that training, they have learned that those
stimuli belong to the same "group" or "class." To do this, they will be taught
in a second phase to match new stimuli to some of the stimuli with which they
were originally trained. Then, their ability to match the remaining training
stimuli to the new ones introduced in the second phase will be measured.
Successful performance during this latter (test) phase would show that pigeons,
like humans, can form stimulus equivalences or stimulus classes. If this ability
can be established, it would mean that human language is not necessary for this
important behavioral attribute. It would also encourage scientists to study more
intensively in the laboratory just how this supposedly special human
characteristic comes about.