* 9009924
* Research Initiation Award:  Reaction, Transport, and        Geometry in Electrochemical Micromachining:  A Moving-      Boundary Analysis Via the Finite Element Method
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1990,11/30/1992
* Jeffrey Derby, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 11/30/1992
* USD 70,000.00

Electrochemical micromachining (EMM) is becoming increasingly important in the
processing of high-precision metallic parts and in device fabrication in the
microelectronics industry. However, the complicated interactions of transport
phenomena, electric current distribution, and tool and work piece geometry have
made engineering advances difficult. Usually, the choice of operating parameters
is made empirically, based primarily on trial and error experimental approaches.
A fundamental theoretical study of the electrochemical micomatchining process is
proposed. The analysis will employ the finite element method to simultaneously
calculate mass transport, fluid flow, potential, and geometrical changes as a
self-consistent, mathematical moving boundary problem. Past modeling approaches
of similar electrochemical systems have generally considered only those cases
where fluid flow is unimportant or have ignored the interaction of changing
geometry on mass transport in the system. The potential impact of this work is
great. A prior calculations can be used as a cost-effective test bed to asses
process changes and to determine optimal process parameters, such as current
density, electrolyte flow rate, and tool shape. This work will advance the
fundamental understanding of EMM and will enable rapid advances of
micromachining techniques for many applications.