* 9009186
* Synthesis and Study of Transition-Metal Complexes of        Reactive Silicon Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1994
* T. Don Tilley, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 06/30/1994
* USD 380,751.00

In this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program, Dr.
T. Don Tilley of the University of California at San Diego will prepare
transition metal complexes containing reactive silicon species. Transition metal
complexes are known to act as catalysts for reactions of silicon compounds and
may serve as catalysts for the preparation of silicon-containing polymers. These
polymers could have structural and electronic properties useful in diverse
applications. By analogy to studies of carbenes (important in polymer formation
in hydrocarbons), Tilley will prepare complexes to help eludicate the chemical
properties of silicon-containing fragments in the coordination sphere of
transition metals. Complexes of silylenes, silenes, and disilenes which could
serve as intermediates in new synthetic methods for monomeric and polymeric
silicon compounds will be prepared. For example, silylene complexes may be
intermediates in metal-catalyzed Si-Si bond formation in polysilane polymers.
Modes of silicon activation by transition metals will be studied by acquiring
mechanistic information on formation of eta-2-silane complexes, migration of
silyl groups to a metal center, and dehyrogenative silane coupling. Among the
metals used will be Ru, Pt, Rh, Ir, W, Os, and Mo.