* 9009757
* Paradigms and Protocols for Real-Time Digital Video and     Audio Services in Distributed Computing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1993
* Venkat Rangan, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 06/30/1993
* USD 70,000.00

With networks and storage devices beginning to offer very high capacities,
distributed systems can support communication and file services in the digital
video and audio domains. The project investigates paradigms and protocols for
multi-media services that support visual/voice conversations and allow selective
storage/retrieval of parts of a converstation. Conferencing is used as the basic
paradigm for accessing any multi-media service. For instance, to retrieve
digital video a client establishes a conversation with the video file service;
to record parts of a conversation, the file service joins as a party to the
conversation transforming it into a conference; for entertainment during idle
periods, a client joins a background conference with the HDTV service. The
project is developing precise models and connection management mechanisms for a
powerful multi-level multi-channel conferencing paradigm. The project uses
conversational file systems for storage/ retrieval of multi-media data. The file
systems handle gigabyte file sizes and handle inter-media synchronization.
Multi-media communication requires protocols that provide performance
guarantees, and support multiple media streams while preserving temporal
relationships among the streams. The project investigates the design of such
protocols and algorithms for allocation of resources to performance guaranteed
channels. The outcome of the research is software architectures, protocols, and
algorithms that will enable multi-media computing systems to replace real-world
services such as physical mail, telephony, news, advertising and video/audio
entertainment.