* 9009376
* Research Initiation Award: A Comprehensive Controller       Design Methodology for Nonlinear Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1992
* Michael Nikolaou, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 05/31/1992
* USD 55,104.00

The main body of control literature has dealt with the development of controller
design techniques for linear time- invariant systems. Nonlinearities encountered
in a process model have usually been treated as uncertainties resulting from the
linearization of that model around a steady state. Most of the real processes in
chemicals manufacturing are inherently nonlinear due to, for example, the
exponential form of the rate equations' dependance on temperature, hold-up on
trays in distillation columns, etc. The objective of this project is to develop
controller design methodologies for continuous-time nonlinear processes. Process
modelling uncertainty, disturbance uncertainty, and hard constraints on process
inputs and outputs will be explicitly considered. The overall controller design
problem will be formulated as a weighted minmax problem, whose solution will not
be interpreted as "worst-case" design, but will be shown to generate one of the
noninferior solutions to a naturally occurring multi-objective optimization
problem. Investigation of the solvability and of theoretical properties of the
minmax problem will be undertaken through a number of case studies on chemical
and biochemical reactors and distillation columns, all of which are known to
present nonlinearities. Nonsmooth calculus of variations will be used to perform
the maximization of the objective function with respect to closed loop input
signals, while nonlinear programming will be employed to carry out the
minimization with respect to the controller, the latter modelled through finite
Volterra series.