* 9009190
* Biological Controls on Nitrate Retention in Northeastern    Forest Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1994
* Knute Nadelhoffer, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 06/30/1994
* USD 316,600.00

Recent reports of large nitrate exports from forests to surface waters raise
concern that losses of nitrate, together with associated acidity and cations,
may result in gradual decrease in forest soil fertility and impoverishment of
aquatic ecosystems downstream of forested catchments through eutrophication and
acidification. Field experiments will be conducted to: 1) quantify and compare
nitrate retention capacities of several different forest ecosystems in the
Northeast; 2) compare the importances of nitrate uptake by growing vegetation
vs. nitrate immobilization in decomposing organic matter as sinks for excess
nitrate; and 3) relate tree species growth rates and N use efficiencies to both
nitrate and ammonium availabilities. The work will take advantage of two on-
going research projects. One is the EPA's Watershed Manipulation Project (WMP),
a large multiple-investigator study of the effects of nitric and sulfuric acid
deposition on soil biogeochemical processes and soil solution chemistry at both
plot and catchment levels in a mixed-species forest in Maine. The other is a
plot-level N enrichment experiment conducted at the Harvard Forest NSF-LTER site
in Massachusetts where investigators are now studying the effects of chronic N
additions on N cycling rates, primary productivity, and canopy chemistry. The
in-place, EPA project provides a unique opportunity to trace the paths and to
identify the fate of nitrate additions to forest ecosystems. This project will
support N isotope studies that will allow for this. Preliminary 15N analysis of
soils and tissues from the WMP plots show that the high sensitivity of
techniques proposed here will allow for quantifying nitrate retention in
important ecosystem components. This research will improve our basic
understanding of forest ecosystem processes that are important in controlling
exports of nitrate and acidity to stream, lake, and estuarine ecosystems. It
will also improve our ability to predict changes in forest productivity as
patterns and rates of N cycling change due to both natural processes and human
caused N deposition.