* 9009051
* Unemployment and Labor Markets
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1992
* Janet Yellen, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1992
* USD 139,012.00

The purpose of this project is to develop and to test empirically a model of
"wait unemployment" which is designed to explain both the incidence of cyclical
unemployment across skill groups and also the extent of cyclical variation in
job quality for workers of given skill. The theoretical model provides a
microeconomic foundation for the phenomenon of upward and downward mobility of
workers over the business cycle first observed by Arthur Okun. The treatment of
unemployment in the model closely parallels the treatment of unextracted
exhaustible resources in Hotelling's model of natural resource extraction. The
model will be tested with panel data from the National Longitudinal Survey. The
project will provide new estimates of the extent of cyclical variability in
wages and "job quality" for workers either leaving unemployment or else entering
the labor force. The theory predicts that it is these new job seekers, rather
than the entire workforce, which will experience significant cyclical variation
in job opportunities. This project addresses an important critique that has been
levelled against models assuming involuntary unemployment. Even in the deepest
recessions, substantial numbers of new jobs are constantly being created and
filled. Assuming that employers prefer to fill new jobs with the highest quality
workers available, highly skilled individuals can easily bump less skilled
workers for the job openings which appear in recessions. Simple models with
involuntary unemployment imply incorrectly that the incidence of cyclical
unemployment will fall entirely on the least skilled members of the labor force.
The key insight pursued in this line of research is that a high quality worker
who takes a "poor quality" (low paying) job, perhaps in a recession, will suffer
long term consequences from this decision. Preliminary work by the investigators
under their previous NSF grant demonstrates that this assumption is realistic
and the theory yields many testable predictions regarding the behavior of the
labor market. This project extends the theory and tests it empirically.