* 9009899
* Research Opportunities for Women: Characterizavion of a     Research RF Parallel Plate Reactor
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1992
* Mary Brake, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 05/31/1992
* USD 59,038.00

Plasmas have become important in materials processing because they can provide a
highly chemically reactive environment while remaining at relatively low overall
gas temperatures. One of the more common industrial reactors consists of radio
frequency (RF) power capacitively coupled to two parallel plate electrodes. The
material to be processed is placed on one of the electrodes and the plasma
generated in the fill gas provides the free radicals, ions and energetic
neutrals needed for the particular chemical process. With this Career
Advancement Award, the PI will design and construct a "standard" RF reference
parallel plate reactor with maximum capability for diagnostics as well as
certain characteristics desirable for modeling. Specifically, the reactor will
have the following properties - RF power (capacitively coupled) 0 - 500 Watts -
RF Frequency 13.56 MHz - Electrode Spacing 2.54 cm - argon 99.999% - Gas flow 2
- 20 sccm - Gas pressure 0.1 -1.0 Torr The diagnostics she plans to measure
include: (1) the first five harmonics, magnitude and phase of the voltage and
current at both electrodes, (2) spatial and temporal measurements of the visible
optical emission, (3) spatial measurements of eletron temperature and density,
and (4) spatial measurements of the electron energy distribution function. The
results of these measurements will be compared to measurements taken on another
reactor on the University of Michigan campus. Once the standard reactor is fully
characterized, it will be used as for comparison in the modeling and
experimental study and analysis of industrial reactors. The grant will advance
the career of the PI by providing her initial experience in a new line of
research on which future projects can be based.