* 9009251
* Chemistry of Life Processes-Coupled Networks: Chemical      and Neural
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1994
* Irving Epstein, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Comer
* 08/31/1994
* USD 300,000.00

By studying some relatively complex chemical reactions and a relatively simple
neural network, the principal investigators hope to derive new insights into how
the different parts of a network interact to produce rhythmic behavior.
Ultimately, the principal investigators seek to explain how groups of neurons
work together to generate and modulate simple rhythmic behaviors such as
walking, chewing or breathing. The principal investigators propose to construct
and study the properties of networks of coupled components, each of which is
independently capable of oscillatory, bistable or other complex dynamical
behavior. Two classes of systems will be investigated: a) inorganic chemical
reactions in continuous flow reactors coupled through mass transfer or through
computer- controlled concentration-dependent modulation of input flows; and b)
neurons of the crustacean stomatogastric ganglion grown in tissue culture and
coupled through electronically-controlled artificial synapses and electronic
connections. By employing a variety of different components and varying the
nature of the connections between them, the principal investigators shall be
able to explore questions that have not bee answered by studies of neural
networks consisting of large numbers of simple, identical units. Such issues
include a) the relationship between emergent network properties, which depend
primarily on the coupling between units, and network properties that result from
the properties of individual units; b) the range of behavior modes that can be
displayed by coupled oscillator networks; c) how the details of the coupling
influence the behavior of the network; and d) the role of delayed coupling in
oscillator networks. The proposed experimental studies will be supplemented by
ongoing theoretical work on both the chemical and neural systems. While the
chemical systems are better understood mechanistically, dynamic similarities
already apparent between the two classes of systems should make for a fruitful
interplay between the two sets of experiments and ultimately lead to a clearer
picture of the operation of real neural networks such as those found in rhythmic
motor systems in general, or the stomatogastric nervous system in particular.