* 9009197
* Worker Policing in Social Hymenoptera
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1994
* Wayne Getz, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 07/31/1994
* USD 205,000.00

Colonies of social ants, bees, and wasps provide fascinating examples of
cooperation in the animal world. However, modern evolutionary theory suggests
that there should be considerable conflict over reproduction within an insect
colony. In particular, there should be conflict between individual workers and
the queen over male production. (Worker ants, bees, and wasps are females. In
most species, workers cannot mate but can lay unfertilized eggs, which develop
into males.) Theory suggests that individual workers should prefer to rear their
own sons rather than their brothers, the sons of the queen, because they are
more genetically related to sons than brothers. In some species of social
insects, for example, bumble bees, workers produce many of the colony's males,
whereas in others, for example, honey bees and yellowjacket wasps, all the males
are sons of the queen. The absence of male honey bees produced by workers is
thought to result from workers preventing each other from reproducing by eating
each other's eggs. This "worker policing" has apparently evolved in the honey
bee because the queen mates with many males. This leads to workers being more
genetically related to the queen's sons than to the sons of other workers (who
are mostly half-sisters), so that it is in each worker's genetic interest to
stop other workers from reproducing. In contrast, bumble-bee queens mate with
only one male, so that workers are more related to the sons of the workers (who
are all full sisters) than to the queen's sons, and should not stop each other
from reproducing. This research project will examine in more detail the
mechanism of worker policing in honey bees, and also look at yellowjacket wasps
to see if worker policing by differential egg removal occurs in these insects as
well. One important area of research will investigate how worker honey bees can
distinguish queen- from worker-laid male eggs, by looking for a queen-produced
chemical (pheromone) that may give their eggs a distinctive odor. In addition,
the project will quantify the rate of production of worker-laid eggs in normal
bee hives, and will look at the behavior of worker bees entering cells
containing male eggs to see if some workers are special "police bees."