* 9009158
* Research Initiation:  Investigation of the Thermomechanical Behavior of Compression Molded Fiber Reinforced Composite   Parts
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Tim Osswald, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 12/31/1992
* USD 88,000.00

The thermomechanical behavior of fiber reinforced composite parts will be
investigated. The objective of the study is to conduct research in modeling,
analysis and process simulation of the thermomechanical behavior of compression
molded fiber reinforced polymer parts. Such a study will increase our
understanding of the phenomena and the physics behind shrinkage, warpage and
surface waviness of reinforced plastic parts. The project can be divided into
two portions: an experimental and a computer modeling potion,. The experimental
aspect of the research deals with thermomechanical material properties
qualification and characterization. Here, the effect that different types of
matrices and fillers have on part's properties will be studied. During these
studies different degrees of fiber orientation will be considered. In the second
portion of the project a finite element computer simulation of the
thermomechanical processes that take place during molding will be developed. The
simulation will be compared to parts of complex geometry molded under realistic
industrial processing conditions. Understanding the thermomechanical behavior of
plastics and being able to predict filling patterns, fiber orientation,
shrinkage, warpage and surface waviness before a part is actually molded leads
to higher part quality and eliminates some of the expensive and time consuming
tasks done in the early stages of part and mold design.