* 9009500
* SGER:  Isolation and Characterization of Rapidly-Evolving   Human Genes
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1993
* Maryellen Ruvolo, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 07/31/1993
* USD 40,000.00

A surprising fact that has emerged in recent years is the great degree of
genetic similarity between humans and chimpanzees. Ninety-eight percent of human
single-copy DNA (the inherited genetic material) is so similar to chimpanzee DNA
that it forms hybrid human-chimpanzee DNA molecules when mixed together under
appropriate conditions in a test tube. Dr. Ruvolo will study the 2% of human DNA
which does not form hybrid molecules with chimpanzee DNA. Because only a
fraction of all DNA consists of genes (protein-coding units), the first question
to answer is whether there are any genes in this 2% "human- specific" DNA
fraction. If there are, they will be characterized by DNA sequencing. If not,
then the genes most different between humans and chimpanzees can still be
isolated from the other 98% of human DNA and similarly characterized by DNA
sequencing. In either case, Dr. Ruvolo will isolate those genes maximally
different between humans and chimpanzees. These DNA sequences will be compared
with all known DNA sequences by computer search techniques to test whether, and
in what way, they resemble any known genes. This research is important because
it develops a general method for identifying genes maximally different between
closely- related species. Such genes are useful in population biology and in
systematics for determining how groups and species are related to one another.
Extension of this method may allow isolation of genes common to groups of
organisms, such as "primate-specific" or "mammal-specific" genes. Isolation of
the most rapidly- evolving genes in humans can help partition the human genome
into ancient and modern segments.