* 9009155
* Neurobiology of Peptidergic Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 10/15/1990,03/31/1995
* Nathan Tublitz, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 03/31/1995
* USD 321,828.00

Neuropeptides are small proteinaceous molecules which are involved in a variety
of brain roles, ranging from controlling movements to transmitting sensory
information such as pain. These chemicals are also implicated in more long-term
behavioral changes such as learning and memory, arousal and various emotional
states. Although much is known about the behavioral effects of neuropeptides,
relatively little is understood about how these neurochemicals cause changes at
the cellular and molecular levels. Unfortunately, these sorts of physiological
studies are not currently feasible in mammals because of technical difficulties
and that the mammalian brain is exceedingly centralized and complex. To overcome
these problems, Dr. Tublitz has capitalized on relatively simple nervous system
of invertebrates. He concentrates on a family of neuropeptides, the
Cardioacceleratory Peptides (CAPs), that modulate several different tissues,
including the heart, gut and CNS. Dr. Tublitz will examine the physiology of
individual cells which synthesize and release the CAPs. He will examine why the
number of neuropeptide neurons change during the animal's lifetime. Moreover,
Dr. Tublitz will determine the molecular mechanisms by which the CAPs exert the
powerful and long-lasting effects upon the target tissues. These investigations,
currently possible only in simple invertebrate preparations, will likely provide
new and important information about neuropeptide function that will be
applicable to all species, including humans. This work will lead to a better
understanding of how the chemicals in the brain interact with each other and
with the brain's nerve cells to modify behavior.