* 9009002
* Expanded Plant Growth Facility for the University of GeorgiaDivision of Biological Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1993
* Rowan Sage, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 06/30/1993
* USD 418,291.00

Funds are requested for the purchase and construction of two greenhouses with an
attached headhouse and an indoor environmentally controlled growth facility
consisting of three growth rooms and 12 growth chambers. The greenhouses are
designed to be easily modified to conform to potential future regulations for
the propagation of transgenic plants. Three rooms within one of the houses will
be equipped with refrigerated cooling to provide temperature reduction during
summer months. The growth rooms and growth chambers will be located within the
University's new BioScience Complex. They will provide relatively large amounts
of environmentally controlled space for routine plant growth. The chambers will
provide greater and more precise ranges of temperature (100 to 400 C) and light
(0 to 1200 micro mol/photons m-2 s-1 at growth height) for more rigorously
defined growth requirements. Major projects utilizing the proposed new
facilities include: hybridization in natural plant populations (Arnold);
regulation of gene active in later embryogensis (Galau); breedng structure and
gene flow in plant populations (Hamrick); genetic and environmental control of
flower development (Malmberg); differential expression of two multigene families
(Meagher); environmental effects on heat shock and auxin regulation (Nagao);
phytochrome structure and functional relationships in transgenic plants (Pratt);
photosynthetic acclimation in C3 plants (Sage); transposable elements in maize
and rice (Wessler); and moss phylogeny and paternity in milkweeds (Wyatt).