* 9009285
* Development of American Metropolitan Industrial Complexes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1993
* David Meyer, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/1993
* USD 70,085.00

The changes currently reshaping the geography of manufacturing activities in
the U.S. have received considerable scholarly attention. Among the important
questions being asked are: How have changing technologies altered the locational
requirements of firms? and How have changing forms of management altered the
relationships among firms? This is not the first time that American industry has
undergone dramatic transformations, however. From 1860 to 1880, new technologies
and management practices fundamentally altered the locational structure of
American manufacturing. This project will examine the formation and development
of industrial complexes in large northeastern U.S. metropolises from 1860 to
1880. Manufacturing data based on 4-digit standard industrial codes will be used
to analyze the changing mixes of 16 metropolitan complexes. These data analyses
will be complemented by reviews of articles in business periodicals and by case
studies of selected firms and industries that will seek to identify and explain
the decision making of entrepreneurs, the market areas of goods, and linkages
among firms. Case studies of industrial complexes in Chicago, Cincinnati, New
York, and the Pittsburgh-Cleveland corridor will amplify on the relationships
detected in the general study. This research will complement work already
completed in many of the study areas, enhancing our knowledge about the complex
dynamics at work in the evolution of major American industrial centers in the
latter part of the 19th Century. Even more importantly, it will provide the
basis for elaboration of a model of metropolitan industrial complex development.
This model will provide a basis for assessing other industrial transformations
in the past, and it will provide a new perspective for evaluating contemporary
manufacturing growth.