* 9009177
* Research Initiation Awards:  Convection in Mushy Layers
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1992
* M Worster, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 11/30/1992
* USD 70,000.00

The aim of the proposed research is to understand the nature of gravitationally-
driven convection within mushy regions during the solidification of binary
melts. Better understanding of the interactions between convection and
solidification will allow improvements to be made in the manufacture of many
materials. Mushy zones are regions of mixed phase, comprising a rigid matrix of
dendritic crystals with fluid filling the interstices, that form during the
casting of alloys. Buoyancy-driven convection of the interstitial fluid can
occur due to compositional variations that arise when one component of the alloy
is preferentially incorporated within the solid. The convection can cause
"chimneys" to form in the mushy region that interrupt the uniformity of the
microstructure and create local regions of high impurity ("freckles"). By
transporting solute, the convection also causes macrosegregation of the casting;
an initially homogeneous melt can solidify to form an ingot with large-scale
variations of bulk composition. This project is a combined theoretical and
experimental investigation of the onset of such convection and the structure of
the fully-developed, convective state. The convective exchange of solute between
a mushy layer and the liquid melt will be determined, so that calculations of
macrosegregation can be made. Additionally, the means by which the number
density of chimneys is determined internally by the system will be studied; this
should suggest a means by which freckle-free ingots can be cast.