* 9009926
* RIA:  Control of Multi-Media Traffic in High Speed Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1992
* San-Qi Li, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Aubrey M. Bush
* 06/30/1992
* USD 69,105.00

The research is developing system theories for control of multi-media traffic
in high speed networks. As compared to today's networks, a high speed network
will be operated in a much more heterogeneous environment. Many assumptions and
constraints used by network system analysts have also changed, largely by recent
rapid advances in lightwave and photonic technologies. The control of multi-
media traffic in high speed networks has therefore become a most challenging
task in the telecommunication network field. This research is being conducted at
three different levels: ATM link, switching node and network. The performance
measurement, as well as the control objectives, at each level are substantially
different. The emphasis at the ATM link level is placed on developing effective
analytic tools for study of service scheduling, congestion control and buffer
management of multi-media traffic. The research at the switching node level is
focussed on performance analysis and congestion control design of multi-media
traffic within a space-division fast packet switching node. The initial effort
at the network level is to develop simple heuristic routing algorithms
appropriate for multi-media traffic, with emphasis on real time and high speed
services. This project is being carried out on the basis of new analytical
methods and system concepts the principal investigator has developed, and is
establishing guiding principles for control of multi-media traffic in high speed
networks.