* 9009272
* Designing Geometric Algorithms with Correct Rounded         Arithmetic Implementations
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1993
* Victor Milenkovic, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 06/30/1993
* USD 31,826.00

Geometric algorithms, when implemented using rounded arithmetic, are generally
unreliable. Unfortunately, exact arithmetic is impractical, and much development
time is spent modifying geometric programs to deal with round-off error, never
reaching absolute reliability. Investigation will be carried out in the area of
robust geometry: the specification and creation of geometric algorithms with
provably correct rounded arithmetic implementations. Under the strict robustness
approach followed in this project, algorithms are also feasible and accurate,
meaning that they generate valid geometric objects close to the exact answer.
Employing techniques called xy- monotonic reasoning and high level rounding, the
investigator has recently presented algorithms for accurately and efficiently
performing any combination of set operations and Euclidean transformations on
polygonal regions in the plane. Strictly robust algorithms will now be developed
for constructing the following objects: convex hulls and Voronoi diagrams of
points in multiple dimensions, Voronoi diagrams of polyhedra, and intersections
of polyhedral regions. These objects have important applications, among them the
modeling of solids and the automatic generation of meshes for finite element
analysis. In addition, the experience gained from the creation of these
algorithms is expected to provide a basis for the creation of other robust
algorithms.