* 9009425
* Cryopreservation of Drosophila melanogaster embryos
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1990,03/31/1991
* Ronald Pitt, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 03/31/1991
* USD 26,841.00

The ultimate goal of this project is to develop a protocol for the
cryopreservation of Drosophila melanogaster embryos. In our studies to date, we
have taken a mechanistic approach in investigating three strategies of
cryopreservation; supercooling, conventional cryopreservation, and
vitrification. Of the three, only vitrification is appropriate because it allows
for ultra-rapid cooling rates to minimize injury associated with the extreme
subzero chilling sensitivity of the embryos. With this approach, we have
attained 20.0 > 10.3% hatching of eggs following recovery from liquid nitrogen.
More important, in recent studies 3% of the surviving larvae developed into
fertile adults. For this proposal, studies will first focus on modifications of
the culture conditions to increase the number of larvae that develop into adults
by minimizing larval desiccation, adding ecdysteroids that control
sclerotization and pupariation, varying temperature, and modifying the culture
medium. A systematic analysis will then be conducted on the effects of each step
of the vitrification procedure on larval development, pupariation, and adult
eclosion, including cryoprotectants used for loading, loading time, dehydration
time, different vitrification solutions, and cryogenic treatment. The results of
this analysis will be used to optimize the vitrification procedure with respect
to larval development, pupariation, and adult eclosion following recovery from
liquid nitrogen. For this work, a multidisciplinary team of cryobiologists, a
biophysicist, an engineer, and a Drosophila geneticist has been assembled. A
successful increase in the number of fertile adults produced by this
cryopreservation technique will significantly reduce the costs of maintaining
Drosophila stocks. Drosophila now have to be maintained as living cultures in
order to keep the myriads of genetic types available.