* 9009546
* Strategic Behavior in Small Markets
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1993
* Mark Satterthwaite, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1993
* USD 89,870.00

This project studies how the strategic behavior of economic agents shapes
equilibrium outcomes within small markets. It has three parts. (1) The first is
bilateral bargaining when the bargainers have the option to break off the
bargaining and seek another bargaining partner. The project seeks to show that
the presence of this outside option changes equilibrium bilateral bargaining
behavior from being essentially indeterminate to being essentially determined.
The efficiency of decentralized markets with bilateral bargaining is also
compared to centralized markets with multilateral bargaining. (2) The second
part is the study of the behavior of duopolists whose costs are declining
through learning- by-doing. Each period each firm decides how aggressively it
should produce so as to reduce its costs further. The goal is to characterize
the variety of subgame perfect equilibria that can exist when learning is
important. (3) The third part involves the use of heuristics by economic agents
within dynamic games. A heuristic approximates the value function that the agent
would use if he or she were perfectly rational. The goal is to understand how
the presence of such boundedly rational agents changes the set of equilibria.
This research is important because it addresses one of the basic limitations in
bargaining theory, i.e., bilateral bargaining theory with incomplete information
has been unable to narrow in an interesting way the wide range of outcomes that
are compatible with at least one reasonable equilibrium. The contribution from
the first part of this project comes from exploring a neglected aspect of the
bargaining problem that could provide determinate solutions. Conventional models
of bilateral, incomplete information bargaining neglect the option bargainers
have of breaking-off bargaining with a particular partner and bargaining with a
new partner from the outside. The project studies bilateral, incomplete
information bargaining with the outside option explicitly modeled. Preliminary
work by the investigator demonstrates that introducing the outside option in
bargaining models may eliminate the indeterminacy found in standard models. The
research should provide useful new analytical tools and valuable substantive
insights into the many bargaining problems in economics.