* 9009204
* Gender Politics in Social and Legal Constructions of Self-  Defense: ROW Planning Grant
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1991
* Jo Dixon, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 07/31/1991
* USD 11,997.00

During the past two decades, the prevalence of violence against women has been
extensively studied. Citizens generally support the right of individuals to
defend themselves against violence, but this support appears to break down for
some women victims such as battered women who turn on their batterers. The
majority of the research about rape and battering has not dealt with the issue
of female victims fighting back, especially fighting that results in homicide.
Recently, some explorations have been made on the historical and legal reasons
affecting the perception of women acting in self-defense following physical
and/or sexual abuse. However, the issues are complex and in need of further
exploration. This Research Opportunities for Women Planning Grant will allow
this young investigator to undertake preliminary research prior to developing a
full scale project on gender politics in self-defense. The project will be the
first to examine systematically the social constructions of self-defense in
situations where women are physically and sexually abused. The pilot project
will include open-ended interviews that ask victims, judges, prosecutors, and
defense lawyers about their perceptions of self-defense in various situations.
The results of the interviews will be used to construct a set of vignettes that
will be used in a full-scale project. This research will add valuable insight to
our understanding of whether belief in rights to self-defense varies by social
categories. Questions relating to whether the right to self- defense is granted
differently to men and women and to black and white women have great theoretical
significance. Also, such research will be of practical significance to those
interested in legal reforms related to the self-defense of women against
violence.