* 9010199
* Older Adult Employment and Earnings in Service Society:     ROW Research Initiative Award
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1993
* Shelley Smith, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 02/28/1993
* USD 43,994.00

This ROW initiation proposal is to investigate how economic factors, family
structure, and labor market structure shape the employment and wage profiles of
employed older Americans. This research will provide information important to
older adult economic well-being and has implications for the potential shortage
of skilled labor during the early years of the 21st century. Specific aims of
the research are: 1) To identify sources of change in the age composition of
occupations in the total labor force and sources of change in the gender and
labor supply composition of occupations in the labor force aged 55 and over; 2)
To identify determinants of wages and labor supply in the older labor force as
additive and interactive functions of individual characteristics, receipt of
non-wage income, family structure, and trends in the industrial structure of the
labor market; 3) To determine whether change in the industrial structure offsets
effects of non-wage income on the labor supply from older employed adults; 4) To
identify how family structure conditions labor market outcomes among older
employed adults; 5) To evaluate the differential effects of change in industrial
structure on employment profiles of youth and older adults. Census data and
Current population Survey data for 1960, 1970, 1980, and 1989 will be analyzed.
Shift share analysis and least squares regression methods will be used.