* 9010153
* Computed 3D Reconstruction of Brain Microvasculature
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1993
* Lyndon Hibbard, Washington University School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 01/31/1993
* USD 50,000.00

Three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction is the re-creation of an object from
images of serial sections, for the purpose of examining the interrelationships
of its parts. Dr. Hibbard will use this technique to investigate the structure-
function of the median eminence of the hypothalamus. By reconstructing the
microvasculature within this distinctive but complex brain region, he will help
understand how the hypothalamus and the pituitary regulate the flow of hormones
into the blood stream. Moreover, the microarchitecture of this system may
elucidate systems of communication as of yet unrecognized, and may uncover
mechanisms that may contribute greatly to our understanding of blood flow in the
brain. Within the context of studying this major biological question, Dr.
Hibbard will continue to develop specific methods that will advance the
technology of 3D reconstruction. Specifically, he is working on the procedures
to compute image alignment and feature extraction required for reconstructions
without manual tracing. This would allow the objectivity and analytic
flexibility unattainable with conventional methods which opens major
opportunities for important investigations in all areas of anatomy as well as
spatially based problems in other fields of physical science and engineering. As
problems addressed in the neurosciences are expanded and rely more on
computational methods, the development and the implementation of these methods
for the analysis of brain using 3D reconstruction will be of great benefit to
science and engineering and to education. Indeed the effectiveness of 3D visual
images in teaching anatomy has already been demonstrated within the classroom.