* 9010442
* Research Initiation Awards:  Experimental Investigation of  Transient Convective Freezing and Melting of Ice on a Cold  Tube Bank in a Crossflow of Water
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1990,08/15/1990
* Michael Kazmierczak, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 08/15/1990
* USD 0.00

This research is an investigation of the phenomena of freezing and melting of
ice on a cold tube bundle. The tube bank is immersed in a flowing stream of
water (T OoC) and the ice layer is studied that grows on the outside surface of
the tubes, when the tubes are internally cooled below the freezing temperature
(Tw OoC). The subsequent melting process of the ice formations when the coolant
is removed will also be studied. The main focus of this research is to document
in terms of new correlations, the time-dependent heat transfer (Nusselt number)
and fluid flow (pressure drop) characteristics (per row) of the systems as the
freezing and melting process proceeds. We will photographically record, at
various times, the exact ice shape profiles and will visualize the resulting
flow field through the tube bank. Under the steady state condition, the local
Nusselt number distribution will be obtained. Experiments will be conducted in
the low to moderate Reynolds number range and for a number of different cooling
temperature ratios. Both in-line and staggered tube geometries will be
considered. The effect of the tube's pitch and the upstream turbulence level
will be documented. The interest in this research is justified from both a
practical and from a fundamental view-point. The results of the proposed study
is important to the field of thermal energy storage involving phase change
materials. To be more specific, the findings obtained in this study would have
direct engineering consequence in the design of ice storage systems and in phase
change storage heat exchangers. From the broader perspective, the problem under
investigation is a highly complex coupled phase change heat transfer and fluid
dynamic problem that addresses new areas in which our current understanding is
lacking and needs improvement.