* 9010009
* ROW:  Edge Effects in Fragmented Piedmont Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1991
* Lynn Maguire, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jethro Moorefield
* 12/31/1991
* USD 11,771.00

Clearing of Caroline Piedmont hardwood forests following European settlement
reduced or eliminated populations of many plant and animal species farmland
abandonment and secondary succession to pine and then hardwood forests in the
first half of this century afforded some species a partial recovery. In the
second half of this century, urbanization is again fragmenting Piedmont forests
with renewed threat to forest interior species. The secondary fragmentation of
Carolina Piedmont forests offers a timely opportunity to study population and
community responses and develop predictive models for both theoretical and
practical use. The purpose of this planning research is to develop the ability
to predict likely changes in population status and community composition for
selected forest taxa as functions of measures of environmental pattern
reflecting forest fragmentation. The geographic region of interest is the
Carolina Piedmont, particularly Durham and Orange Counties and adjacent sections
of neighboring counties, which contain the largest protected sections of
Piedmont forest as well as the most rapidly urbanizing areas. Taxa selected for
study will likely include forest birds and vascular plant communities. Measures
used to describe forest fragmentation may include total and core areas in
several forest types; distribution of forest fragment patch sizes; amount of
edge between forest types and other land uses; distances among patches; lengths,
widths and habitat characteristics of riparian and other corridors connecting
forest patches; and ages of patches, measured since lost major disturbance. This
planning activity will provide the information necessary for development of a
more complete study of forest fragmentation and landscape ecology.