* 9010748
* Family Behavior, Human Capital, and the Economy
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1994
* Gary Becker, National Opinion Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1994
* USD 100,870.00

In this accomplishment-based renewal project, Gary Becker will continue his
research that links the family to investments in human capital, bequests and
other types of physical capital accumulation, economic inequality, and economic
growth. One study will be an expansion of A Treatise on the Family. It will
include a response to some of the criticisms and discuss several additional
issues. Particular attention will be paid to the so-called "Rotten-Kid Theorem",
which states that, under certain conditions, beneficiaries of altruists have
incentives to behave altruistically to their benefactors, even when
beneficiaries are selfish. One defect is that the Treatise does not interact
parental altruism with other attitudes of parents towards children. That is, the
degree of parental altruism is not fixed. The new work will show that such links
between the behavior of children and the degree if parental altruism help
overcome various inefficiencies that can result from altruism, such as the so-
called "prodigal son" issue. Other work will continue on the relationship
between family behavior and economic growth by incorporating endogenous
fertility into a neoclassical growth model. In a related study, endogenous
fertility is combined with physical capital as well investment in human capital.
Two states tend to emerge - one with low human and physical capital, low income,
and high fertility - and another with low fertility and high human and physical
capital and income. The research will attempt to explain why human capital
increases relative to physical capital when countries grow, why fertility
declines when countries get richer and why luck and other temporary events may
have an effect on whether a country grows or stagnates. Another line of research
will be on how the division of labor and specialization with regard to human
capital varies with economic growth and other variables. Stressed here will be
importance of coordination costs and the extent of general knowledge (since
increased accumulation of general knowledge raises the growth rate partly by
inducing greater specialization).