* 9010667
* Information Processing Biases in Experimental Asset Markets
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Forrest Nelson, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1992
* USD 133,934.00

Are market prices a good estimate of value? Economists routinely answer yes, but
other social and behavioral scientists are less certain. An abundant literature
in psychology, political science, and sociology finds judgement bias in the
processing of information by individuals. This project examines whether
judgement bias about the value of an asset can affect trading behavior in
markets. Laboratory experiments are used to test for the existence of judgement
bias. A procedure is developed for measuring the cost of judgement bias in a
laboratory setting. In practical situations one normally would not be able to
control the amount of judgement bias, hence there is a need for methods that
measure the cost of judgement bias in the absence of experimental control. These
empirical methods are developed and two methods of validation are used. Market
prices might be correctly established in the presence of judgement bias as long
as some group of traders are sufficiently well-informed and act as arbitragers.
This possibility is examined as part of the experimental design. The ability of
markets to accurately forecast future events is often taken for granted by
economists despite demonstrations by psychologists of the existence of
substantial judgement biases by individuals in performing the tasks necessary
for the efficient operation of markets. To an economist, the psychological
evidence about these biases is often unconvincing. The experimental studies
which document their existence frequently use unpaid students who are required
to participate to earn course credit. Thus participants have nothing at stake.
If these biases do exist at the individual level, can they persist in a market
setting where individuals have financial incentives and can gain experience to
avoid mistakes? Finally, if these biases do exist are they important in any
meaningful sense? Persistent statistical evidence of widespread judgement bias
would be of little importance if judgement bias cost an individual only one
cent. This project is important because it develops rigorous measures of the
cost of judgement bias and tests for the presence of significant judgement bias
in experimental asset markets.