* 9010486
* Buffering Calcium Transients in Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1994
* Stanley Thayer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 07/31/1994
* USD 192,000.00

Nerve cells utilize calcium ions to convert electrical signals to biochemical
changes within the cell. Electrical activity causes an increase of intracellular
calcium in the cell. Once inside, calcium acts as a messenger, carrying
information to various parts of the cell's interior. Only during electrical
stimulation, or during certain pathologies, is the calcium concentration in the
cell elevated. Under normal resting conditions, the intracellular calcium
concentration is kept very low by a complex series of pathways which pump
calcium out of the cell. The purpose of this research is to characterize the
processes which remove calcium from nerve cells. The investigator is interested
in determining which pathways are present in nerve cells and how calcium's
relative contribution changes with the size of a calcium challenge. This study
will examine calcium levels during various levels of electrical activity and
locate the various calcium pathways in the cell. Nerve cells will be grown
individually in culture and examined by using optical and electrophysiological
instrumentation developed by the investigator. This inquiry will increase the
understanding of how nerve cells process information at the molecular and
cellular level, revealing new target for drugs and insight into the mechanisms
of certain neurodegenerative disorders caused by calcium overload.