* 9010307
* Job Exit Behavior:  An Empirical Analysis for the U.S. UsingSIPP
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1992
* Theresa Devine, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 01/31/1992
* USD 11,983.00

Transitions into employment have been studied extensively within the "search"
framework -- a paradigm which incorporates uncertainty in the labor market
explicitly. Theoretical models have been developed; wage and unemployment
duration data have been interpreted in light of this theory using estimation
methods developed primarily for this purpose; the theory has then been revised
and refined in light of empirical findings. Overall, this research has advanced
out understanding of the dynamics of unemployed worker behavior and provided
insights into important policy issues (unemployment benefits, in particular).
Transitions out of jobs and between jobs -- long recognized as a major form of
motion in the labor market -- have not been studied as extensively. Theoretical
models of job-exit behavior have been developed within the search framework, but
empirical research has lagged behind. Planning activities for an empirical
analysis of variation in job-exit behavior across major demographic groups in
the U.S. labor force are the focus of this project. Specifically, the potential
of both parametric and nonparametric estimation techniques for determining
patterns of systematic variation in job-exit behavior across workers in
alternative age, race and gender groups will be explored. Among the questions
addressed will be: (i) Do workers in alternative job groups generally exit their
jobs involuntarily (versus voluntarily) ? and (ii) Are there systematic
differences across groups in terms of destinations? That is, are workers with
certain characteristics more likely than others to enter alternative jobs
directly, or perhaps more likely to engage in nonmarket activity? In addressing
these questions, potential sources of systematic variation suggested by economic
theory will be investigated. These will include the relationship between job-
exit behavior and variation in educational attainment, on-the-job training,
marital status, parental status, occupation and industry attachment, union
membership and valuation of nonwage benefits (health insurance, in particular).
The limited experience accumulated on demographic variation in job-exit behavior
in the U.S. may in part be attributed to constraints imposed by the data that
have been available to date. This project includes construction of a labor
market histories data set for a large, representative sample from the U.S.
population from the Public Use Files for the 1986 Panel of the Survey of Income
and Program Participation.