* 9010067
* Integration of Text Across Interword Saccades in Reading
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1992
* Albrecht Inhoff, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 08/31/1992
* USD 120,287.00

This research will examine the integration of visual and cognitive information
across eye movements in reading. During each eye fixation in reading, skilled
readers acquire effective information from the word directly fixated and the
next word in the text. In general, the word directly fixated is fully
identified; the next word in the text, usually referred to as the parafoveal
word, is "pre-viewed" but not identified. These experiments will examine the
nature of this word preview process. One group of experiments will examine
whether skilled readers use parafoveal word previews to acquire useful word
length information and effective orthographic/lexical information. A second
group of experiments will examine whether the usefulness of parafoveal word
previews is a function of the sentential context within which these words occur.
In each experiment, skilled readers' eye movements will be recorded while they
read single sentences. During sentence reading, a stimulus available
parafoveally will be replaced with a target word after completion of the eye
movement from the fixated word to the parafoveal stimulus. The linguistic
relationship between the stimulus available paravfoveally and the target word
subsequently fixated will be varied to determine which type of effective visual
and cognitive information was obtained from the parafoveal stimulus preview. The
outcome of this research will reveal how learned perceptual and cognitive skills
contribute to the effective "pre-viewing" of parafoveally available words in
skilled reading. This may assist the development of remedial reading programs
for people who lack sufficient development of these skills.