* 9010114
* Investigation of Speech Perception Models
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1991
* Joan Sussman, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 06/30/1991
* USD 12,000.00

This research will provide new insight into auditory, phonetic and attention
requirements necessary for speech perception. The research will study children's
unique responses to speech perception tasks in order to uncover basic processing
abilities of humans and in order to test theories of speech perception. In the
first phase of study, ten children aged five to six and ten adults will
participate in discrimination testing, labeling, and selective adaptation tasks.
The selective adaptation task typically results in a shift in the location of
listeners' phonetic category boundary after exposure to repeated presentations
of one stimulus (the adaptor). The boundary change reflects the differing
contributions of peripheral auditory, more central auditory, and
linguistic/phonetic influences on speech perception. These contributing factors
can be addressed by manipulation of characteristics of the adaptor stimulus used
during selective adaptation trials. Because Sussman and Carney (1989) showed
that school-aged children, in sharp contrast to adults, did not demonstrate a
selective adaptation effect, this research should clarify whether results with
children were due to children's poorer discrimination ability, different choice
of best phonetic category exemplar, or attention factors. By administering
different adaptor conditions to children compared to adults and comparing
performance to measures of auditory discrimination, phase one will reveal the
importance of acoustic, phonetic, and attention factors for speech perception.
Results from the first phase of research will be expanded into a multi- year
project including three sets of investigations. 1) Older children will be
studied to determine if and when the relationship between lower-level auditory
abilities and selective adaptation becomes adult-like. 2) Adult selective
adaptation ability will be studied with a spectral match variable to further
examine the necessity of attention factors. 3) Psychoacoustic and speech
perception abilities of children with language impairment will be studied.
Preliminary research has shown that language-impaired children have poorer
discrimination abilities for speech perception than their age-matched peers, and
investigation should clarify the contribution of auditory perceptual vs.
linguistic factors for speech perception.