* 9010394
* Research Initiation Award: Modeling Time and Space for the  Integration of Construction Planning, Scheduling, and Site  Layout Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Iris Tommelein, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 12/31/1992
* USD 59,850.00

Sequencing activities, determining activity durations, and allocating resources
to activities are typically performed in planning and scheduling; locating
temporary facilities on site in layout. It is clear, however, that space
availability and its timing greatly affect activity interaction. This
interaction is primordial to many problems addressed by site managers (e.g.
competition for prime space between contractors, path interference during
equipment movement). These examples show that detailed construction plans,
schedules, and layout necessarily share time and space as variables. However
space (and sometimes even time) is ignored entirely in most planners and
schedulers developed to date, while temporal variation of the layout is ignored
in most layout programs. PI claims that developing a program taking time as well
as space explicitly into account would greatly enhance the realism of
construction management models, and would contribute to the effective
integration of planners, schedulers, and layout tools. PI will develop an
integrated planning-layout system in a blackboard expert system architecture.
Separate prototypes have demonstrated that such a system is conceptually
realizable, but implementation experiments will determine its computational
feasibility. The research will also implement distributed planning and layout
systems that exchange information, and contrast that implementation with the
fully-integrated system in order to assess the costs/benefits of integration vs.
distribution.