* 9010816
* The Impact of Law on the Development of Transnational       Markets in the Islamic World
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/1990,04/30/1994
* Ellis Goldberg, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 04/30/1994
* USD 41,364.00

Throughout history, the legitimacy of the state has been generally thought to be
tied to territoriality and familiar concepts of voting and voice. Law has been
considered to play a supportive role in the political and economic systems in
the state. This project promises a radical revision of the concept of society
organizing politics around territoriality and "voice" and suggests
conceptualizing a society organized around movement or "exit," with the legal
system playing a major role. To demonstrate this new concept, the investigator
will conduct a comparative history of state-building in medieval Europe and the
Islamic world. The study will trace the role of law in the medieval Islamic
world order as the crucial institution that allowed free movement of goods,
people, and capital. It is argued that the coherence of the medieval world order
was structured by movement or exit. Critical to the working of exit as a device
for ordering transnational markets is the role of law as a system of
establishing property rights and resolving disputes. Primary Arabic source
material and secondary social history documents will be examined to test the
thesis that merchants, artisans, and intellectuals moved freely in the Middle
East during the medieval Islamic world and that movement was related to the tax
policies of the local kings. Thus, instead of belonging to a particular polity
or powerful state, they participated in the structuring of a translocal market
in the southern Mediterranean region. This created a system of economic and
political relations which minimized the costs of movement (exit) and enhanced
competition between would-be monarchs, thus limiting the attempts of potential
aggrandizers to create territorial dynasties. In Europe, by contrast, the
legitimacy of the state was tied to territoriality, voting, and voice. This
study offers a new perspective for understanding medieval history and for
shedding light on why the political structure of Islam was so different from the
political structure of Europe. In addition, the open and fluid character of the
market in medieval Islam also bears certain structural resemblances to the
transnational character of global markets in the present world order. Thus, this
project should advance our comparative understanding of the way in which markets
are formed and structured. The possibilities for exiting a political system
(made possible by the presence of Islamic law across the domains of Islam and
the weakness of individual Islamic states) helps to understand the world of
increasing interdependence. The part that Islamic law played in the process has
important implications for the sociolegal aspects of contemporary global change.