* 9010120
* Understanding Properties of Dynamically Evolving Objects andTheir Schemas in Object Oriented Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1992
* Shamkant Navathe, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Ashany
* 12/31/1992
* USD 39,342.00

Object-oriented databases intend to support non-traditional database application
areas such as artificial intelligence (AI), computer-aided design (CAD), and
office information systems (OIS). An important requirement of non-traditional
database applications is the support of application evolution which includes
evolution of schemas as well as objects. The overall goal of this research is to
understand properties of dynamically evolving objects and their schemas and find
mechanisms for supporting them in object-oriented databases. One goal of this
research is to implement an extensive schema manager having many useful
capabilities for dynamic schema management, such as schema evolution, graphics
schema editor, schema versioning, DAG rearrangement views, and logical database
schema design. Also, in this research, two more issues which are closely related
with dynamic schema management will be investigated: (1) storage model issue
(i.e., ways of storing dynamic object instances), (2) the issue of how to
achieve code (i.e., method) compatibility in the face of dynamic schema changes.
This research contributes toward: (1) identifying data structures and operations
which are necessary to support dynamic schemas and objects, (2) analyzing basic
properties of storage models, and (3) investigating techniques for method
conversion which can cope with dynamic schema changes, in object-oriented
databases.