* 9010464
* The Role of Law and Social Movements in Environmental       Conflicts:  A Japanese Case Study
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1992
* Robert Kidder, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 07/31/1992
* USD 28,257.00

Environmental degradation is one of the most serious problems facing
industrialized societies. Remedies or prevention of harms caused by
environmental pollution require collective activities of many people. Sociolegal
research has for many years focused on the connections of law to disputing,
dispute transformation, and social change. This project will draw on theories
and research from this literature to examine the expansion or contraction of
rights and the handling of conflicts about the environment. Using a new class-
action lawsuit in Kobe, Japan as a case study, this project will trace the
formation of a social movement and the transformation of its conflict with
industry and government over the issue of air pollution. Through interviews with
participants involved in the filing of 500 lawsuits by Japanese citizens in an
industrial pollution case, the investigators will trace how the grievances of
individual citizens produced a victims' organization, government legislation,
subsequent government retreat from aid to victims, and involvement in
litigation. Thus, the in-depth study permits detailing the different social
forces which have affected the development of both political and legal action as
well as the relationship between the two. This research will illustrate the
complex legal, cultural, and political processes involved in policy formation
and the relevance of theory in this area to the explanation of responses to
environmental change. It promises to extend our understanding of the connection
between legal institutions, policy change, and the actions of everyday citizens
as well as provide important new insights into patterns of conflict management
in Japan and elsewhere. How rights are articulated and how law becomes mobilized
on issues relating to the environment have immensely important theoretical and
policy implications for understanding global environmental change, the
development of rights movements, and the process of legal mobilization.