* 9010530
* RIA:  Some Novel Power Control Strategies for Static Power  Converters
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1992
* Prasad Enjeti, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Vijay Vittal
* 05/31/1992
* USD 60,000.00

Increased automation in the manufacturing process has spurred considerable
research interest in the next generation of solid state power converters. These
converters are expected to be rugged, cheap and compact. These requirements
cannot be satisfied by existing converters because of bulky L-C components and
their inability to operate under all operating conditions. Recent research on
Matrix Converters, PWM inverters and PWM rectifiers has shown the following
advantages: complete absence of dc link components (for matrix type); compact,
light in weight, and the ability to integrate along with heat sink; the
possibility of bi- directional power flow and low distortion input current. In
spite of the enormous application potential of these converters, and the
availability of new power semiconductor devices such as MCT's, further
development and application has been relatively stalled. This is due to the
following reasons: high converter performance claims are valid only for ideal
operating conditions such as when the input supply is balanced and the output
load is linear and balanced. An important list of unknowns for the converters
are: Matrix and ac to dc converter input output behavior is very sensitive for
the unbalances in input supply and their effects are unknown; PWM inverter
behavior in the presence of dc-link voltage ripple is also unknown. Therefore,
for the next generation converters to be rugged, small in size and high in
performance the effects of unbalances must be first evaluated and some novel
power control strategies to guard against these imperfections must be explored.
The aim of this research is to address these issues and systematically evaluate
the converter behavior via mathematical modeling and provide answers to the
above listed unknowns. Some novel power control strategies to correct for
unbalanced operation and methods to reject dc-link voltage ripple are proposed.
Finally, design guides for practical realization of the proposed strategies via
digital signal processing hardware are examined. The success of this research
will be a major contribution towards a full scale practical realization of next
generation static power converters.