* 9010883
* Origins of Children's Semantic Categories of Spatial Relations: A Cross-Linguistic Study of English, Korean and Dutch
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1992
* Soonja Choi, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 01/31/1992
* USD 35,000.00

ABSTRACT According to a currently influential view, children begin language
acquisition by mapping linguistic forms onto concepts previously established
through nonlinguistic cognitive development. The project will evaluate this
hypothesis by comparing the early semantic categorization of topological spatial
actions (e.g., PUT IN/ON) by children learning English, Korean, and Dutch. These
languages classify spatial actions in strikingly different ways for purposes of
linguistic expression. However, to the extent that children rely on
nonlinguistic concepts rather than analysis of the linguistic input for the
meanings of words, their spatial semantic categories should be similar, or at
least should not differ systematically according to language. Two cross-
sectional studies will be carried out with 80 children in each language (age
range 1;0-3;6). In the production experiment, children are encouraged to tell
the experimenter how to spatially arrange objects. The comprehension study
assesses sensitivity to language-specific semantic distinctions with the
"preferential looking paradigm". The data will be analyzed (1) to determine how
early children learning each language develop language-specific principles of
categorizing spatial actions, and (2) to aassess, through analysis of correct
and incorrect patterns of generalizations, the relative difficulty for children
of alternative principles of spatial classification. Our conclusions should
enable us to characterize more precisely than is now possible the nature of the
interaction in early language acquisition between nonlinguistic categorization
predispositions and children's sensitivity to the semantic categories of the
input language.