* 9010365
* Transaction Management in Interpolation-Based Grid Files
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1993
* Aris Ouksel, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Ashany
* 07/31/1993
* USD 63,903.00

This project implements mechanisms for cooperation and communication within and
between complex database transactions with the aim of increasing the degree of
parallelism as well as the level of recovery control during failures. A
transaction is defined as a partially ordered set of primitive database
operations. The approach exploits the spatial properties of a multidimensional
data structure, the Interpolation-Based Grid File (IBGF), which represents
objects --points, boxes, or otherwise. It provides a capability to learn
important access path information from live processes, prior to accessing the
data, and a technique to allow sharing of this information among processes.
Throughput will be greatly improved by using this capability to anticipate
potential conflicts and to reduce access redundancy. This research will develop
servers, responsible for any transaction on the IBGF structure, which
incorporate this access path information passing capability. A transaction
manager will be built on top of IBGF servers. Methods developed by other
researchers will be modified to take advantage of IBGF spatial properties to
improve performance. The portability of the results to a commercially available
system such as INGRES will be considered. The results provide tools for the
design of advanced transaction systems.