* 9010323
* Context Effects on Reinforcement
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1994
* None   DATA NOT AVAILABLE, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 07/31/1994
* USD 195,000.00

The major issue in the study of animal learning has been the processes involved
in how an animal associates two events with each other. The traditional answer
to this question has been that such associations are formed automatically
because the two events occur at the same time, or one event occurs just before
the other. But we now know that such an answer is too simple, because the
strength of the association depends critically upon the context of events in
which the two events occur. For example, if an animal is presented a pairing of
sound with food, the likelihood of a sound-food association may vary, depending
upon whether or not other events in the conditioning environment have a pre-
existing association with food. Dr. Williams will analyze the behavioral
processes underlying such contextual effects, for a variety of different
conditioning procedures. Such analysis is important because basic conditioning
processes have been used increasingly in studies of neural organization with
primitive animals (e.g., Aplysia) and now form the basis of neural-network
models that constitute the major theoretical development in human cognitive
psychology in the past decade. Thus, a proper understanding of how contextual
effects are mediated has major implications for several different areas of
psychology and physiology.