* 9010706
* The Effect of the Carbohydrate Moiety on the Physical Properties of a Glycoprotein: ROW Award
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1990,03/31/1992
* Mary Walsh, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Arthur Kowalsky
* 03/31/1992
* USD 18,000.00

A series of physical studies will be performed to examine how the carbohydrate
side chains of a glycoprotein (and their chain length) affect the secondary and
tertiary structure of the glycoprotein, the thermodynamics of unfolding and 3-
dimensional structure. To accomplish these goals: (1) a series of derivatives of
beta2 glycoproteinI (B2GPI) will be prepared and isolated using specific enzymes
to sequentially remove individual carbohydrate residues from each of the
N-linked chains; (2) the solution conformation of each derivative (both
secondary and tertiary structure) will be examined using far and near UV CD
spectroscopy. These studies will be performed as a function to temperature in
aqueous buffers. The solvent environment will also be varied to investigate the
effect of different solvents (aqueous buffers, ionic strength, pH, organic
solvents) have on the conformation of each derivative; (3) the thermodynamics of
unfolding of each derivative will be examined using high resolution calorimetry.
This will provide energetic information on the effect of carbohydrate chain
length on the thermal stability of each derivative. Aqueous buffer, ionic
strength and pH will be varied. The thermodynamic data will be correlated with
the structural data provided in goal (2); (4) native B2GPI, one partially
deglycosylated and the totally deglycosylated derivatives will be crystallized.
The effect of carbohydrate chain alteration on the conditions for crystal growth
and crystal structure which may arise from alteration of the conformation of the
folded polypeptide as a result of removal of defined carbohydrate residues will
be examined.