* 9010344
* Leaching of Nickel Copper Iron Sulfides in Cupric Chloride  Media, Award in  U.S. and Indian Currencies.
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1991,06/30/1996
* Renato Bautista, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/1996
* USD 30,268.00

Description: This project is for support of cooperative research by Dr. Renato
Bautista of the Department of Chemical and Metallurgical Engineering at the
University of Nevada, Reno and Dr. C.K. Gupta of the Extractive Metallurgy
Division of the Bhabha Atomic Research center (BARC) in Bombay, India. The
project is to characterize the application of cupric chloride leaching to
complex nickeliferous sulfide ores where the nickel is mainly present in the
minerals millerite (NiS) and pentlandite (NiFeS). Experimental work will be done
at BARC and mathematical modeling will be developed by the U. of Nevada team.
The effect of different parameters on the rate of leaching of the nickel
sulfides will be examined. The rate of dissolution of both millerite and
pentlandite will be developed from the experimental data, including their rate
constants and activation energies. The mathematical model will cover the
leaching reactions and the simultaneous reactions in the solution phase. The
information derived from the experimental work and the model will be applied to
an indigenous nickel-copper sulfide concentrate. Scope: the project brings
together two experienced scientists from India and the U.S. to work on a problem
that has significant importance to the material processing industry in the U.S.
and India. This collaboration meets the objective of the U.S.-India Cooperative
Program.