* 9010046
* Comparison of the Behavior of Human and Robot Traders in a  Computerized Double Auction Market
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1992
* John Rust, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1992
* USD 52,000.00

This project conducts a series of human double auction market experiments to
generate a matching data set for a tournament of "robot traders" who compete in
an artificial double auction market. The double auction market is a simplified
version of the AURORA electronic double auction market recently developed by the
Chicago Board of Trade. Precise comparisons will be made of the behavior of
human and robot traders. Existing experimental data on human double auction
markets are not directly comparable to the computerized market because the
latter divides time into discrete bid-offer and buy-sell steps, and adopts a new
institutional design, Chicago Rules, that allows only holders of the highest
outstanding bid or lowest outstanding offer to execute transactions. The project
uses the experiments to study the impact of Chicago rules, the effects of
variations in period length in a market with discrete trading intervals, and the
consequences of restrictions on the messages that can be transmitted and
received by traders. The results of this research will improve experimental
methods and our understanding of widely used market institutions. By matching
human experimental data with the results from the tournament of computerized
robot traders, the project will be able to provide strong tests of the ability
of "artificially intelligent" agents to mimic the behavior of human traders in
Double-Auction markets. If computer simulations could complement human
experiments, this would dramatically increase the number and type of experiments
that investigators could use to study the effects of institutional changes. The
results of the experiments should also provide new insights into the performance
of double auctions. This is important because the double auction is the type of
trading institution used by the Chicago Board of Trade, the New York Stock
Exchange, and many other securities and commodities exchanges throughout the
world.