* 9010903
* The Diffusion of Information Technology Capital: An         Industry Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1994
* Vijay Gurbaxani, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Su-Shing Chen
* 02/28/1994
* USD 53,164.00

Information Technology (IT) capital currently represents 7% oftotal capital
stock in the U.S. and accounts for a rapidlygrowing share of capital
expenditures, making it one of the mostimportant innovations of recent times.
Surprisingly, fewtheoretical or empirical analyses have focussed on the
diffusionof IT and in particular, quantified its growth. Given thesignificant
role of IT as a capital input in every sector of theeconomy, it is important to
analyze these growth trends. This project studies the demand for IT capital for
the period1972.1987 at both the industry and the aggregate economy levels. While
much of the literature refers to the growth of IT in thecontext of the diffusion
of innovation and S.curve behavior, itis argued in this project that the
declining costs of computingwill have a significant impact on the pattern of
diffusion. Theresearcher develops economic models of the demand for IT
thatintegrate these two factors. The models also examine theinfluence of other
factors, including the cost of labor andgeneral business conditions on the
demand for IT. The quality ofthe models, and their form and parameters are
determined throughan econometric analysis of data on the stocks and flows of IT
atthe industry and aggregate economy levels. The research examinesthe extent to
which the growth of IT stock can be explained bythe effects of the innovation
diffusion versus the price effects. The Principal Investigator looks at the
relationships between theaggregate and the industry demand functions as well as
inter.industry differences.