* 9010988
* Preservation, Microfilming and Computerized Cataloging of   the Frank H. Cushing and Fredrick W. Hodge Papers
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1995
* Kathleen Whitaker, Southwest Museum
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1995
* USD 125,000.00

Under the direction of Mr. Craig Klyver, the Southwest Museum will catalog and
conserve the anthropological papers of Frank Hamilton Cushing and Frederick Webb
Hodge. Both played active roles in the development of American anthropology and
the documentation of traditional Southwestern Native American cultures. Cushing
conducted both ethnographic and archaeological research in the late 1800's and
was a pioneer in new methods of ethnological investigation. He lived and worked
among the Zuni people over an extended period of time and was one of the first
participant/observer ethnographers. Based on this original work, he later
returned to the Southwest as a Smithsonian Institution staff member to conduct
archaeological research in a attempt to understand the development of the
patterns he observed. Hodge was also a Smithsonian staff member who first
accompanied Cushing and then later undertook extensive publication of his
findings. Together the Cushing and Hodge photographs, letters, manuscripts, and
other documents cover 30 linear feet. Because many of these materials are
fragile and poorly catalogued they are not readily available to researchers.
With National Science Foundation support the Southwest Museum will provide
proper storage, repair damaged items, and take steps to preclude further
deterioration of these collections. The materials will be catalogued on ARGUS,
the museum's computerized collection management system. On-line access to
documents and photographs in the collections will be available to other ARGUS-
user institutions. In addition, the materials will be microfilmed and copies
deposited with the National Anthropological Archives, the Museum of the American
Indian, and the Zuni Tribal Archives, as well as the Southwest Museum. Printed
indexes and finding aids will be generated, and the original materials conserved
and housed in proper containers. This project is important for several reasons.
It will preserve documents which contain significant scientific information and
make them more readily available to researchers.