* 9010834
* RIA:  Synthetic Aperture Radar Diversity Measurement and    Signal Processing Techniques for Surface Roughness          Determination from Speckle Patterns
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1992
* Mark Bell, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 12/31/1992
* USD 60,000.00

The objectives of this project are to examine and develop new observation and
information extraction techniques for synthetic aperture radar (SAR) images of
terrain. These techniques extract surface roughness information on a spatial
scale on the order of the radar illumination wavelength using diversity
measurements of speckle patterns arising in the imaging of the observed surface,
where diversity can be in the form of frequency, position, or polarization
diversity. Hence, rather than viewing speckle as a corrupting noise in the SAR
imaging process, image speckle is used as a carrier of information on the imaged
surface. These techniques have the potential of providing surface roughness
characteristics on a much smaller scale than the typical spatial resolution cell
of SAR imagery, greatly enhancing the geological measurement capabilities of SAR
terrain images - one of the major uses of SAR. These techniques involve the
extension of optical speckle metrology techniques for determining the surface
roughness characteristics of surfaces illuminated by laser light. This involves
extending optical speckle models to SAR imaging at microwave frequencies and
extending speckle metrology techniques to provide useful new surface information
under the constraints of airborne and spaceborne SAR platforms. The resulting
techniques are tested using computer modeling and real SAR measurements.