* 9010878
* RIA: Lukasiewicz Logic Arrays
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/1990,05/31/1993
* Jonathan Mills, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* John R. Lehmann
* 05/31/1993
* USD 59,884.00

This research explores parallel architectures that unify classical AI and
parallel distributed processing. Parallel architectures for classical AI
(symbolic processing) are based on abstract machines for the -calculus or first
order logic. They differ greatly from connectionist (sub-symbolic) architectures
which are based on abstractions of biological systems, such as Hopfield's model
of the neuron. Earlier research by the Principal Investigator suggests that a
new class of systolic arrays, Lukasiewicz logic arrays (LLAs), support both
symbolic and sub-symbolic computation. These preliminary results are
investigated by implementing resolution, back-propagation and adaptive resonance
theory algorithms for neural networks, and the RETE algorithm for production
system on an LLA simulatory and a VLSI LLA. Operational four-cell and 32-cell
analog VLSI LLAs were fabricated in January 1990, and will be used to test these
algorithms on small data sets. A more complex 128-cell analog VLSI LLA is being
designed as part of this research. The results being sought include an improved
understanding of the design principles of integrated symbolic and sub-symbolic
architectures, characterization of the electrical properties of analog VLSI
LLAs, specification of a computational model for LLAs in general, and new
algorithms for massively parallel processors based on the LLA model of
computation.