* 9010049
* U.S.-U.S.S.R. Workshop on Soviet-American Cooperation in    Arctic/Northern Social Sciences (Moscow: September 1990)
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1991
* Sherburne Abbott, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Gerson Sher
* 12/31/1991
* USD 35,000.00

Recent events in both the United States and the Soviet Union have created a
productive environment for, and strong interest in, scientific cooperation in
the field of Arctic social science research. In the United States, the Arctic
Policy Research Act of 1984, together with reports of the National Academy of
Sciences (NAS) and other bodies, have focused attention on this field; as a
result the National Science Foundation (NSF) has recently established a new
program in Arctic Social Science Research. In the U.S.S.R., intense public
debate has emerged over the socioeconomic and ecological impacts of northern
development has led to significant interest in social science research on these
areas on the part of the Soviet scientific community. The primary objective of
this workshop is to take advantage of the rising interest in both countries in
this field by giving leading U.S. and Soviet specialists an opportunity to
exchange information on current work and to develop plans for long-term
cooperative research, with particular emphasis on the relationships between
human communities and the biological and physical systems that make up the
natural environment of the Arctic. The workshop is being organized jointly by
the U.S. National Academy of Sciences (NAS) and the Academy of Sciences of the
U.S.S.R. (ASUSSR). The NAS participation is being managed by the NAS/National
Research Council Polar Research Board and the delegation will be led by Dr. Oran
Young of Dartmouth College. The Soviet delegation, under the auspices of the
ASUSSR Commission for Arctic Research, will be chaired by Academician V.M.
Kotlyakov, Director of the ASUSSR Institute of Geography. This project fulfills
the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading
researchers in the United States and the U.S.S.R. to combine complementary
efforts and capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and competence in
the field of basic scientific research on the basis of equality, reciprocity,
and mutuality of benefit.