* 9010269
* Parallel Programming with Equations
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/1990,05/31/1993
* Shaunak Pawagi, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 05/31/1993
* USD 60,000.00

Nonprocedural programming, such as functional, has been an attractive approach
to programming parallel computers. Programs written in such languages exhibit
implicit parallelism which can be exploited for their efficient parallel
execution. This project will investigate the applicability of equational style
to parallel programming. Equational programming is a style of nonprocedural
programming in which a system of oriented equations of the form l -&gt; r, where
l and r are terms, constitute a program. Equational languages have logical
semantics which is intuitive and easy to understand. A new class of equations
called path sequential systems has been identified. This class of equations is
naturally suitable for parallel execution of equational programs on both shared
memory as well as message passing architectures. Efficient strictness analysis
techniques have been developed which work well for flat parallelism in
equational programs. In continuation of this research, a parallelizing compiler
and run- time system for a first order equational language that is constructor
based will be implemented. The implementation will be done on a shared memory
and on a message passing parallel computer. A major thrust of this investigation
will be on load balancing and minimizing inter-processor communications.
Specifically, dynamic load balancing strategies that are based on regular
communication patterns of path sequential systems will be investigated. Finally,
the performance of the equational programming system will be examined by
executing numerical and nonnumerical applications such as sparse matrix
computations and toy theorem provers.