* 9010556
* ROW:  Resource Allocation Patterns in Dimorphic Plants
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Lynda Delph, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 12/31/1992
* USD 42,327.00

Organisms allocate resources to a variety of activities, such as reproduction,
growth, and maintenance, and it is generally perceived that the allocation of
resources to any one activity occurs at the expense of the other activities.
Plants provide an excellent opportunity to determine how resource allocation
strategies are affected by the sex of an individual, as many genera contain
species that vary in their sex expression. Within the genus Silene, there are
species that are hermaphroditic (both sexes in one individual) and others that
are dioecious (separate male and female individuals). It has been shown for one
of the dioecious species of Silene that males and females have very different
resource allocation patterns. Dr. Delph's long-term research plans include
investigating how these differences evolved. In order to do so, it is necessary
to unambiguously determine the sex of plants early in their development. At the
present time, the sex of an individual can only be determined when it is
flowering. The grant will provide necessary funds to develop molecular
techniques that would enable sex determination prior to flowering. In addition,
a protocol for a technique will be developed to detect differences between the
sexes in where resources for flowering and fruiting originate within the plant.