* 9010955
* Production and Immobilization of Antibody Fragments for     Improved Affinity Purification
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1990,06/30/1993
* Douglas Clark, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 06/30/1993
* USD 130,143.00

This research involves novel strategies to produce antibody polypeptides with
optimal structures for immobilization to insoluble carriers. Each approach is
designed to result in immobilized, monovalent antibody fragments with their
combining sites facing out from the carrier surface, and attachment to the
carrier will be achieved in a highly specific manner through a site on the
polypeptide far removed from the combining site itself. Attachment in this
fashion should allow complete retention of antibody binding activity and thus
lead to improved techniques of affinity purification. In addition, immobilizing
antibody fragments rather than the much large whole antibody should increase the
number of antibody combining sites that can be immobilized on the carrier
surface. In the case of Fv fragments, site-directed mutagenesis will be used to
incorporate a single attachment site at a desired location on the polypeptide.
The modified polypeptide will then be expressed in E. coli. Production of Fv
fragments in E. coli may prove to be a superior alternative to present-day
hybridoma technology, which is frequently the limiting factor in monoclonal
antibody production and isolation. Moreover, both site- directed mutagenesis and
random mutagenesis can be used to rapidly obtain antibody polypeptides with
variant binding activities. Protein engineering may also be used to introduce pH
or metal-regulated binding affinity into the combining site.