* 9010920
* Case-Based Tutoring in Weak-Theory Domains
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1992
* Ellis Bareiss, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jolita D. Middleton
* 08/31/1992
* USD 64,000.00

This research will apply case-based reasoning techniques to the construction of
intelligent tutoring systems for diagnostic problem solving. It is believed that
when a tutoring system's expertise and curriculum are anchored in the same set
of cases, the tutor will be better able to select appropriate training cases, to
assess student performance on these cases, and to remediate when errors are
detected. This work will build on the foundation of the Protos automated
knowledge acquisition system. Complete tutoring systems will be developed in at
least two domains. Evaluation studies will compare the tutor's effectiveness to
that of classroom instruction. Evaluation in multiple domains will permit cross-
domain comparison to separate general results from domain idiosyncrasies. The
project will contribute to three areas of intelligent tutoring research. First,
it will address the modeling of expert and student knowledge in "weak-theory"
domains. Second, it will address the diagnosis and remediation of student
errors. Third, it will address curriculum generation and sequencing. In the long
term, synthesis of the lessons learned from research in intelligent tutoring
systems, expert consultation systems, and automated knowledge acquisition will
contribute to a deeper understanding of diagnostic expertise.