* 9010338
* A Study of a Solar-Thermochemical Energy Transport System   for the Pacific Northwest
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Jean Murray, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 12/31/1992
* USD 28,430.00

If solar energy is to make a significant contribution to the national energy
economy, it must displace the use of fossil fuels to supply process heat to the
industrial sector. Industry generally uses high temperature steam in the range
200-700 oC1. Temperatures in this range can be attained with ease in a
concentrating solar facility. But most industrial users of process heat are not
located in a climate of reliable solar flux. It is a major challenge to
efficiently store and deliver the high temperature thermal energy from the solar
concentrator to the point of use. If the high temperature energy available in
the solar concentrator were used as the process heat for an endothermic reaction
between gases, then the solar energy would be stored in the products of the
reaction. The gaseous products then could be transported at ambient temperatures
in a conventional pipeline hundreds of kilometers to the industrial user, where
energy could be recovered in the reverse, exothermic reaction. Such a system is
known as a thermochemical pipe, or chemical heat pipe. This research planning
grant will examine the technical and economic feasibility of a chemical heat
pipe system. The design of a reactor-receiver system that decouples the
absorption of the solar energy from the chemical reaction of interest will be
considered.