* 9010362
* Computer-Based Support for the Learning of Software Design
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1994
* Elliot Soloway, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara J. Hunter
* 01/31/1994
* USD 854,642.00

Increasingly, society is demanding that people put their knowledge to use. One
such application is the design of artifacts. The importance of technological
support in the design process is clearly recognized by professional designers.
The aim of this project is to explore how high schools and college students can
best be supported as they learn a particular type of design process--software
design. To this end, an educationally-motivated and educationally-sound
computer-aided design environment (SODA, Software Design Lab) will be developed
and classroom tested; SODA goes beyond merely supporting slices of the design
process, and provides support for the four major activities in software design:
planning, generating and evaluating alternative designs, debugging, and
reflecting. Key to effective design is the management of complexity. Thus, in
SODA, there will be mechanisms to manage artifact complexity (e.g., plan
libraries), process complexity (e.g. aids to create and then navigate among
alternative designs), as well as mechanisms to facilitate learning (e.g.,
scaffolding and customization). The research plan is to test increasingly more
sophisticated versions of SODA, in four different educational environments using
a broad range of students. A systematic procedure has been designed to assess
student performance as well as process, using quantitative and qualitative
methods; transfer of design skills will also be examined.