* 9010074
* Oral Traditions as Memory Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1994
* David Rubin, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 01/31/1994
* USD 169,994.00

This research approaches the study of human memory through the study of
materials that are not distorted or changed in memory; it asks what properties
afford these stimuli their stability. Such knowledge will not only advance
theory, but will also provide guidance on how to prepare materials to be
recalled more accurately, especially for use in situations where written memory
aids cannot be used. The research will focus on oral traditions which have been
handed down for generations without the aid of writing or other external memory
aids. For instance, ballads currently sung on the coast and in the mountains of
North Carolina differ only in minor ways from the ballads folklorists collected
in the British Isles hundreds of years ago. This research will test singers who
do not maintain the stability of their tradition by writing down the old ballads
and referring to them; rather, these singers keep the ballads in memory and
transmit them by word of mouth. The singers do not learn the ballads in a rote
tedious fashion, but rather use the rules and limitations of a good ballad to
ease their memory load. In sum, this research will study memory in a natural
context where it appears to be working in a near-optimal fashion. The research
will employ several methods. One is analysis of ballads and folktales from
existing North Carolina collections and those collected in previous research in
terms of the meaning, poetic, and musical constraints operating on the songs.
These constraints will be used to study the location and kind of changes that
occur over historical time as well as within a single singer or story teller.
The research will investigate the contribution to the overall stability of
memory of each constraint, taken individually or in combination with other
constraints. Undergraduates who know little or nothing of the tradition will be
asked to learn several ballads to see how their skills at learning imporve with
experience. In this way, the development of expertise in learning new, highly
structured material will be studied. The research will explore differences that
are due to the material being produced orally as opposed to in writing, both for
their theoretical and practical importance. Undergraduates will be asked to
explain a complex situation either in speech or in writing under various
conditions, and the research will analyze differences in the syntax, word
choice, and overall organization in these two situations. Differences in
production caused by the mode of production have been demonstrated to be
substantial. The research project will begin to look at mechanisms for these
differences.