* 9010251
* Local Synthesis in the Mauthner Axon
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1990,08/31/1994
* Edward Koenig, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* None
* 08/31/1994
* USD 221,874.00

Axoplasm, located in the axons of nerve cells, is composed of cytoskeletal and
cytosolic proteins which are supplied to the axon by a poorly understood process
of slow transport. Since all proteins exhibit a characteristic of half-life, it
is likely that during slow transport in the axon, proteins undergo significant
biological decay through degradation. In order to maintain the steady state of
protein composition and mass of the axon due to significant losses through
biological decay, local mechanisms for the replenishment of proteins are
necessary. This research project will examine the localization and distribution
of selected cytoskeletal protein manufacturing systems and ascertain what
proteins are synthesized locally in the axon. Although the evidence available
indicates that myelinated axons have a limited capacity for local synthesis and
that local requirements for newly synthesized proteins in a short half-life
period are probably modest, the amount of synthesis occurring over the whole
axon is probably significant. Experiments will be conducted at the cellular
level on the Mauthner neuron, the M-axon, an identifiable cell in the CNS of the
goldfish with a large myelinated axon extending the length of the spinal cord. A
major advantage in using the M-axon preparation is that the myelin sheath is
separated from glial cell bodies, making it possible to separate the axon from
the myelin sheath uncontaminated for the analysis of the cell body and the axon.
Specialized methods, designed and developed in Dr. Koenig's laboratory, for
studying ultrapure microscopic samples will be used. The investigator will
utilize in situ hybridization techniques to localize ribosomal RNA in the M-axon
and to assess its density and distribution. Messenger RNAs will be localized in
the M-axon for actin and/or tubulin, important cytoskeletal proteins that are
supplied to the axon from the cell body by slow transport. Analysis of axonal
polypeptides synthesized in the M-axon, in an in vitro preparation, will be
performed in order to characterize which proteins are synthesized locally in the
short half-life period and to establish that labeled proteins are due to de novo
synthesis. Proteins synthesized in the M-cell axon in vivo will be compared with
those synthesized in vitro in order to identify proteins synthesized under
physiological conditions, and proteins with a longer half-life. The results of
this study will address an important unresolved issue of how the mature axon
compensates for biological decay of its exogenously supplied proteins.