* 9010423
* Science Upgrade for R/V Knorr
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/1990,05/31/1992
* Joseph Coburn, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Richard W. West
* 05/31/1992
* USD 699,306.00

This project will provide support for shipboard scientific support equipment for
the research vessel KNORR, operated by the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution,
and dedicated to use in support of ocean science research. The Shipboard
Scientific Support Equipment Program provides funds for ship equipment deemed
essential to the proper and safe conduct of ocean science research. This Program
provides support for such items as deck equipment including winch systems for
the deployment and retrieval of scientific instruments, navigational equipment
such as radars, gyroscopes and earth satellite receivers to pin point the
location of research sites, communication equipment including radio transceivers
and satellite transceivers for voice and scientific data communications and
other equipment such as motorized workboats for transporting scientists to and
from data retrieval sites. The Project Director, Robertson P. Dinsmore is fully
qualified to direct this project having had considerable experience in
overseeing similar activities. The R/V KNORR is undergoing a major
overhaul/refit/upgrade including lengthening by 34 feet, replacement and
modernization of the propulsion system and refurbishment of interior services
and surfaces. This effort is being funded by the Navy through the Office of
Naval Research. The NSF contribution will complete the project by supplying
funds for the scientific upgrade of the R/V KNORR. This includes modifications
to the existing ship controls to allow precise dynamic positioning, installation
of a fully integrated winch readout system, a modern workboat which will also
serve as a rescue boat, two new cranes and a hydrographic boom for handling
scientific gear, the refurbishment of the ship's hydrographic winch,
installation of modern echo sounding systems and an uninterruptible power supply
for scientific instruments.