* 9010368
* Research Initiation Award:  Hydrocarbon Vapor Measurements  in Two-Phase Flows by Infrared Extinction
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1990,11/30/1992
* James Drallmeier, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 11/30/1992
* USD 70,000.00

Fuel spray vaporization is a crucial phase in the operation of liquid fuel
combustion devices. At present there is a lack of studies of evaporating sprays
with quantitative measurements of the vapor phase distribution, a result of the
limitations of the measurement techniques available for measuring vapor. A
nonintrusive, laser based, infrared extinction technique has been developed
based on the strong absorption of incident radiation at a 3.39 wavelength by
hydrocarbon fuels. The technique holds great promise for accurate quantitative
measurement of the vapor phase but, due to its limited use, little knowledge is
available on the accuracy of the technique in two-phase flows. In order to fully
assess the accuracy and limitations of the infrared extinction technique in
quantifying fuel vaporization, an experiment is proposed in which the techniques
will be used in a very controlled simulated spray environment. The simulated
spray consists of solid polystyrene spheres injected with a pure hydrocarbon
gas, providing great flexibility in studying the effects of spray
characteristics on the accuracy of the vapor measurements. Finally, improvements
are proposed in the optical system geometry previously used for the infrared
extinction technique, allowing more spatially precise measurements. Spatial
precision is vital to the successful application of the infrared extinction
technique to pulsed sprays and highly turbulent flows.