* 9010634
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Decision, Risk, and       Management Science
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1991
* William Frederick, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 12/31/1991
* USD 5,725.00

This award for doctoral dissertation research in decision risk, and management
science will support research costs for work on the dissertation, "The Relation
of Gainsharing, Work Climate, and Social Performance." This project will
integrate organization theory with businesss-and-society theory. The empirical
examination of multiple stakeholder models has led organization theorists to
conclude that it is extremely difficult for managers to fulfill the conflicting
needs of internal and external stakeholders. Missing from this body of research
is an examination of intervening variables. Business-and-society theorists have
proposed that participatory management is an attribute of socially responsible
companies and that it is likely to enhance a company's social performance. The
dissertation will empirically examine the relationship between gainsharing (an
institutional form of participatory management) and a company's social
performance as it pertains to multiple stockholders. Two companies with
successful gainsharing plans will be contrasted with two companies with less
successful gainsharing plans, through interviews, examinations of archivaal
data, field observations, and surveys. This work will provide theory and data of
use for firms' managers on (1) the relationship between a company's standard
operating policies, and procedures associated with gainsharing and its social
performance, and (2) the relationship between a company's work climate and its
social performance.