* 9010881
* Semiparametric and Nonparametric Estimation off Structural  Models
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1990,07/01/1991
* James Powell, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/01/1991
* USD 38,035.00

The project will develop new methods for estimating the parameters of nonlinear
econometric models using semiparametric or nonparametric approaches. Work on
three broad lines of research will be undertaken. First, estimation of
parameters of linear models subject to sample selection will be considered under
a weak nonparametric restriction on the form of the selection correction.
Specifically, the selection effect will be assumed to depend only on the
conditional mean of some observable selection variable, which is to be estimated
using a nonparametric regression method; this estimate will appear in the
second-step estimator for the parameters of interest. Second, nonparametric
estimation of structural equations using instrumental variables will be
investigated. This will involve nonparametric estimation of solutions of
integral equations, as well as nonparametric estimation of additive regression
models with preliminary nonparametric estimates of regressors. Third, a bound
for the attainable efficiency of estimators for monotonic regression models will
be derived when the error distribution satisfies a single conditional quantile
restriction. Also, a feasible estimation procedure which attains this bound will
be developed. This line of research will continue to push the frontier of
semiparametric and nonparametric estimation in econometrics. These methods will
be extremely beneficial in the development of economic modelling, as more
flexible assumptions are allowed and provide benchmarks for traditional
estimation techniques.