* 9010624
* Empirical Studies of Process Distribution and Redistributionin Multicomputers
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1993
* Dirk Grunwald, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 06/30/1993
* USD 60,000.00

This project examines the benefit of non-intrusive mechanisms for distributing
load and status information in a distributed memory multicomputer. To benefit
from the possible speedup of parallel computers, programs must be partitioned
into units that work in parallel. Once partitioned, these units, must be
assigned to specific processors for execution. On distributed memory
multicomputers, this is called load distribution, in comparison to rearranging
extant tasks, termed load redistribution. In previous work, program traces from
small-grain programs were simulated on a reference architecture, using a modern
network architecture. The interconnection network did not require strong
communication locality because messages could quickly cut-through intermediate
nodes, favoring simple process distribution strategies. In this project, the
reference architecture is augmented by firmware mechanisms for non-intrusive
load information distribution. This information was shown to be critical for
process distribution; these mechanisms are also useful for process
synchronization and network resource reservation. For the previous sample
programs, there was little advantage to processor redistribution; this study
will determine if this is true for parallel numerical applications by
instrumentation and measurement of those programs and comparison to current and
expected system performance.