* 9010033
* Research Initiation:  Scheduling, Control and Rescheduling  Methodologies for Uncertain Manufacturing Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1992
* S. David Wu, Lehigh University
* Continuing grant
* Senior Program Assistant
* 11/30/1992
* USD 50,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop methodologies for sequencing and
scheduling in uncertain manufacturing environments. The methodology involves an
off-line optimization strategy, an on- line control scheme, and a "rescheduling"
procedure. The off-line strategy utilizes a graph-theoretic formulation of the
scheduling problem to generate a priori static schedules which take into account
the presence of foreseeable system disruptions. A measure of schedule robustness
will be developed for the off-line schedule. The on-line control structure is
modeled as a discrete event dynamic system (DEDS). The research control
structure incorporates the dynamic information about future disturbances to
stabilize the operations schedule. The novelty of the approach is that it
decomposes the overall control problem into non-myopic local problems which
require minimum computation while retaining a global view of the system. The
rescheduling procedure updates the static schedule after a major system
disruption. The procedure generates an updated schedule which minimizes the
scheduling delay and at the same time adheres closely to the off-line schedule.
In contrast to the previous work on match-up scheduling, the research method has
no need to determine the match-up time. The robustness and the applicability of
the research methodology will be tested by experiments.