* 9010208
* Research Initiation Award: Energy Based Damage Model and    Procedure for Safety Analysis of Structural Systems In      Steel Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1993
* Iqbal Singh Sohal, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 06/30/1993
* USD 60,000.00

Most engineering structures are being designed to carry specified service or
normal loads. However, recent developments in computer technology have created a
potential for design of structures against the loads expected during the whole
cycle of their life. The structures designed by using this approach will have
improved durability, maintainability and damageability. Herein, an energy based
damage model will be developed for computation of residual strength and
stiffness of damaged steel structural members. The residual strength
computations will utilize yield, limit and failure surfaces of the member which
will be defined in terms of generalized forces for steel structural members. For
safety evaluation of structural systems, a damage analysis computer code is to
be developed. For increasing the efficiency of the safety analysis procedure, a
stiffness matrix will be derived for the damaged member by employing a deflected
shape which varies with increasing deformations. The safety of structural
systems will be evaluated by utilizing a procedure developed by modifying the
existing reliability technique. The whole procedure of determining probabilities
of damage and failure of structural systems will be automated. The above
developments will be validated by comparisons with existing experimental and
analytical results. The developed damage model and safety analysis algorithm
will aid in design of structural systems based on desired probability of damage
and failure. They will also aid in design of steel structural systems which,
under the extreme loads, will avoid concentration of damage and premature
failure.