* 9010322
* Research Initiation:  Analysis of Linear Programming        Relaxations of Combinatorial Optimization Problems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1993
* Dimitris Bertsimas, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1993
* USD 50,000.00

Linear programming methods have proven invaluable in solving a wide variety of
different applications of combinatorial optimization. Based on the belief that a
better understanding of the properties of linear programming (LP) relaxations of
integer programming formulations can be useful in obtaining additional insights
concerning the problem itself and concerning how to formulate and solve it
efficiently, LP relaxations will be investigated for several closely related
generic combinatorial optimization problems: the network design problem with
edge connectivity requirements, the Steiner tree problem, the traveling salesman
problem and the vehicle routing problem. The tightness of these linear
relaxations will be analyzed from three perspectives: worst-case, probabilistic
and algorithmic. Research will take advantage of the interplay between different
areas, such as polyhedral theory, probabilistic analysis, network flows, graph
theory and randomized algorithms. The research will be divided into three
tracks. In track 1, the relative tightness of different relaxations will be
investigated, worst-case behavior of relaxations as compared to the optimal
solution will be analyzed and the values obtained by heuristics for a particular
combinatorial optimization problem will be related to different LP relaxations.
In track 2, probabilistic analysis of various LP relaxation will be performed
and the idea of randomized rounding for constructing a solution to the
combinatorial optimization problem from its LP relaxation will be examined. In
track 3, algorithms to compute the LP relaxations will be developed and the
tightness of LP relaxation as well as the use of tight LP relaxations in large
scale optimization algorithms will be investigated computationally.