* 9010308
* Consumption Over the Life Cycle:  A Distributional Study    of Theory vs. Evidence.  ROW Planning Grant
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1991
* Diane Rogers, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1991
* USD 11,112.00

Many researchers have found that the life cycle/permanent income theory of
consumption fails to explain movements of aggregate consumption and savings.
What does determine savings remains unclear, especially given that the motives
behind savings are not the same for all individuals. In particular, such motives
are likely to differ significantly across groups of individuals with different
levels of lifetime incomes and/or different profiles of lifetime incomes. In
this project, a data set is developed on lifetime incomes and consumption paths
using data from the Panel Study on Income Dynamics and the Consumer Expenditure
Survey. The lifetime data will then be used to ascertain to what extent the life
cycle theory explains observed patterns for different types of consumers. For
each consumer category, observed patterns of total consumption will be compared
with those predicted by the life- cycle theory and those predicted by
alternative explanations. These alternatives include "rules of thumb", the
"behavioral" life-cycle hypothesis, the presence of liquidity constraints, and
myopia. The final stage of the research is to go beyond casual empiricism and
develop more appropriate econometric tests for the alternative explanations.
Consumption function and Euler equation approaches will be among those
considered; however, more powerful tests may be possible given the wealth of
information that will be available in the lifetime data set. The result of this
research will be a better understanding of what determines savings.