* 9010728
* Consumption, Labor Supply and Portfolio Choice with Time andState Nonseparable Utility
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1991
* Stanley Zin, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1991
* USD 33,409.00

A class of utility functions is proposed which relaxes some of the restrictive
assumptions constrains current models. Specifically, time and state separability
are no longer required. With respect to time separability, a recursive (due to
Koopmans) specification permits the consumption-leisure tradeoff in any period
to depend on consumption and leisure levels in subsequent times. This dependence
weakens the a priori constraints imposed in the standard models on the relative
responses of consumption and leisure to price and income shocks and this permits
one to model more flexibly the intertermporal substitutability of each of
consumption and leisure. With respect to state separability, this relaxed
assumption has the flexibility to disentangle intertemporal substitutability
from risk aversion. A further contribution of this work is that it allows for
the estimation of alternative utility specifications. The predictions of the
model developed in the theoretical section differ significantly from both the
expected utility model and the separable model. These alternatives can be tested
wither separately or jointly. Expected utility is a nested special case and can
be tested as a simple parameter restriction. Time- separability utility can be
tested using non-nested tests. This project will provide the first such
empirical testing of a model that embodies both time and state
nonseparabilities. The approach taken here will enable a very flexible modeling
of intertemporal substitution elasticities, allowing some separation between
risk preferences and substitution preferences and also allowing a greater
separation between wealth and substitution effects. The empirical testing will
permit a quantitative analysis of the importance of both state and time
nonseparabilities for dynamic economic analysis.