* 9010587
* Research Initiation Award: An Object-Oriented Model for     Engineering Applications Using A Geographic Database
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1990,08/31/1993
* Teresa Adams, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 08/31/1993
* USD 80,000.00

The full potential of Geographic Information Systems (GIS) in the field of
engineering has not been realized. A growing source of spatial and non-spatial
information may be found organized in GIS databases. These systems have the
potential for storing time dependent geographic information. Effectively
integration GIS databases with engineering applications involving planning,
management, construction, analysis and design to create powerful decision
support tools would be of enormous benefit. This research will identify and
specify the GIS queries and object- oriented (OO) data structure required to
model and simulate physical and geographical processes and systems which are
functions of time and geographic location. The object-oriented database model
will be capable of representing spatial and non-spatial geographical data
including geometric, material and functional information. By automatically
accessing GIS databases, powerful engineering decision support software which is
consistent and accurate can be developed at less cost. The results of this
research will serve as a link between engineering software and geographic
databases. Engineering systems used, for example, to model waste water
management, management, shoreline erosion, wellhead protection or air pollution
transport will have direct access to actual geographic information. This results
of this work will enhance the functionality of GIS software for engineering
applications..//