* 9010826
* The Dynamics and Impact of Criminal Law Reform
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1990,09/30/1993
* Julie Horney, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Continuing grant
* Kimberley C. Johnson
* 09/30/1993
* USD 144,953.00

Since the early 1970's there has been growing concern with the response of the
criminal justice system to the crime of rape. Many people have questioned the
special status of rape as an offense where the victim, as well as the defendant,
is put on trial. Some have suggested that the laws and the rules of evidence
relevant to rape have resulted in pervasive skepticism among police,
prosecutors, judges, and jurors about rape victims' claims. In response to these
concerns, most states have reformed their rape laws but these statutes vary in
range of reform and comprehensiveness. Reformers expected that the new laws
would reduce both the skepticism of criminal justice officials toward rape
victims and their reliance on extralegal considerations in decisionmaking. They
anticipated that the reforms ultimately would lead to an increase in the number
of reports of rape, and would make arrest, prosecution, and conviction for rape
more likely. For the last few years, Drs. Spohn and Horney have been embarked on
a research program studying the impact of rape reform legislation. In an earlier
NSF-funded study, they collected data on the outcomes of more than 24,000 sexual
assault cases indicted from 1970 to 1985 in six jurisdictions. They found that
the legal changes produced significant effects only in the jurisdiction
(Detroit) with the strongest and most comprehensive reforms. The present project
builds on the earlier study by: (1) specifying more precisely the nature of the
impact in Detroit; (2) determining whether more subtle effects may have occurred
in Detroit and in a second jurisdiction (Chicago) where strong reforms did not
affect overall case outcomes; and (3) assessing the role of legal and extralegal
variables in the processing of sexual assault cases. Detailed data will be
collected on a sample of cases in Detroit and Chicago and will be analyzed to
determine the relative influence of victim, defendant, and case characteristics
on the disposition of these cases in the pre-and post-reform periods. The
results of this research will advance understanding of the ways in which rape
reform legislation affects policy change and the subsequent processing of rape
cases by the legal system. It has both theoretical and practical relevance in
that it will contribute to scientific knowledge more generally on the effects of
legislative change on reform and to our ability to improve the manner in which
the criminal justice system handles offenses.