* 9010996
* Research Initiation Award:  Stability of Feedback Systems      with Sensor or Actuator Failures
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1993
* A. Nazli Gundes, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 06/30/1993
* USD 60,000.00

The project will study the problem of integrity in linear, time-invariant,
multi- input, multi-output feedback systems. We consider the closed-loop
stability of the unity-feedback system under three classes of sensor or actuator
failures. In the first class any arbitrary number of loops, including all, may
fail; in the second class any number of loops, except all, may fail; in the
third class, any loop but only one loop may fail. We analyze the stability of
the unity-feedback system with failures in each of the three classes. For the
first class of failures, the plant and the compensator have to be stable from
the start since the failure of all loops will reduce the configuration to a
cascade connection. For a given multi-input multi-output plant which has no
unstable hidden modes it is possible to parametrize the class of all
compensators that stabilize the closed-loop system. Our goal is to parametrize
the class of compensators that achieve integrity for each of the three classes
of failures. As expected, such parametrization is possible only for certain
classes of plants. The objectives are to identify those plants for which
simultaneous stabilization of the nominal plant with each failure can be
achieved, to find a systematic method to synthesize compensators that achieve
this simultaneous stabilization, and to find the class of all achievable closed-
loop transfer functions. This will indicate which performance objectives can be
achieved together with integrity. Based on the parametrization of all
compensators that the results will also be used in synthesis of compensators for
systems with partial loop failures where constant gain factors are introduced in
the feedback-loops and extended to an algebraic synthesis method for the case of
structured dynamics being introduced in the loops.