* 9011409
* Assembly of a Core Facility for Biological and Biochemical  Research -- A Laboratory for Protein/Peptide Synthesis,     Purification, and Characterization
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Richard Ikeda, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 12/31/1992
* USD 217,000.00

The purpose of this application is to solicit support for the establishment of a
basic core facility for Protein/Peptide Synthesis, Purification, and
Characterization in the School of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the Georgia
Institute of Technology. The facility is being established to provide routine
access to the major pieces of basic biochemical/biological instrumentation. The
PIs are requesting an amino acid analyzer, an autoclave, an ultracentrifuge, a
high speed centrifuge, a cold room, a densitometer, a fermenter, a FPLC, a HPLC,
a protein/peptide sequencer, a peptide synthesizer, and a scintillation counter
to equip this core facility. The core facility for protein/peptide synthesis,
purification, and characterization will be used primarily by five different
research groups whose present access to modern pieces of biological and
biochemical equipment is either extremely limited or nonexistant. The facility
will greatly enhance our capability to investigate the effects of ultraviolet
radiation on eye lens proteins, the molecular basis of function and regulation
of T7 RNA polymerase, the effect of mutations on the folding pathway of
ubiquitin, the design and synthesis of specific and effective protease
inhibitors, and the crystal structures of pea lectin and human serum
transferrin.