* 9011424
* Resource Allocation Among Multiple Agents:                  A Decision Theoretic Perspective
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1993
* Raghav Rao, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Su-Shing Chen
* 07/31/1993
* USD 55,848.00

This project attempts to advance theoretical understanding of problem solving in
a multiple agent environment, as applied to a resource allocation problem. The
research is cast in a decision theoretic framework. It explores the process of
decision making where: a) information is obtained about the preference profiles
of each agent; b) the information acquired is then used as a basis for finding
socially optimal resource allocation that maximize total net welfare, and; c)
the costs involved in acquiring information are considered an integral part of
the process. The objective of the research is to deal with the following
specific issues: 1) the study of various communication patterns and strategies
for information gathering and various system topologies for team decision
making; 2) the investigation of the incorporation of computational costs, and
the tradeoff between the relative cost and time of computation versus
communication for effective management of resources; 3) the study of the
problems concerning incentive compatibility; 4) the investigation of alternative
goals to finding a socially optimal resource allocation; 5) the examination of
the static resource allocation problem, versus the dynamic one, with incremental
addition and deletion of resources. Results of this investigation should have
significance, not only for the practical use of decision theoretic models, but
also in providing insights into research fundamental to the design and use of
computer and communication systems to coordinate work and decision making.