* 9011242
* The Thermal Characteristics of Combustion Waves in Self-    Sustaining Reactions
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1994
* Zuhair Munir, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* MILTON J LINEVSKY
* 02/28/1994
* USD 279,801.00

The motivation for research on self-propagating high temperature synthesis
(solid combustion) has been largely based upon materials considerations, but
many of the unresolved problems are directly or indirectly related to heat and
mass transfer issues. Temperature-related wave characteristics are governed, in
part, by the thermal conductivity, diffusivity, and specific heat of the
reactants and products of combustion. The research, which is to be performed
cooperatively with the Institute of Structural Macrokinetics in Chernogolovka,
USSR, consists of three experimental activities: investigations of the effect of
melting on combustion synthesis of refractory metal carbides, investigations of
nonuniform combustion fronts in the filtration combustion synthesis of nitrides,
and investigation of the propagation of combustion waves through compositional
gradients. Fundamental studies are needed to provide a thorough understanding of
the mechanisms of direct combustion synthesis. The apparent complexity of the
process has generated only a reserved optimism on the future of the technique
with US industry. A research effort coordinated with the Soviet Union, under the
guidelines of the US-USSR Cooperation in the Field of Basic Scientific Research
Program, will lead to a higher likelihood of understanding the combustion
process in synthesis reactions through investigations of the evolving
temperature wave.