* 9011458
* Site Response and Soil Liquefaction in San Francisco Due to the Loma Prieta Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/1990,10/31/1991
* Thomas O'Rourke, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 10/31/1991
* USD 70,000.00

This project is part of the NSF/USGS initiative within the National Earthquake
Hazard Reduction Program (NEHRP) to investigate the effects of the Loma Prieta
earthquake of 17 October 1989. San Francisco offers a unique opportunity to
compare the effects of two earthquakes through detailed and comprehensive
observations which now exist for the 1906 and the 1989 earthquakes. By studying
different locations within the city, it is possible to evaluate how variations
in fill thickness and density, the thickness and consolidation state of
underlying soft clay, the water table, and the depth to bedrock affect the
ground surface response and the development of soil liquefaction for similar
levels of bedrock seismic motion. Moreover, ground response coupled with the
performance of buried lifeline systems provides an additional chance to quantify
the effect of soil-structure interaction on complex networks that are critical
for emergency operations. To take advantage of the knowledge gained from the
1906 and 1989 earthquakes, this project is structured according to a three- fold
set of objectives: (1) to characterize subsurface ground conditions and site
response at select locations in San Francisco - this requires a comprehensive
data base on soil conditions, as well as the familiarity and the site-specific
knowledge gained from previous investigations and post-earthquake reconnaissance
in the city, (2) to model analytically the site response at select locations,
and to compare these analytical results with field observations and with seismic
data in order to substantiate and refine the analytical models, and (3) to use
analytical models to predict the effects on the city of San Francisco of
possible future earthquakes that are larger and closer than was the Loma Prieta
earthquake. This project involves cooperation with the U.S. Geological Survey
(USGS) and San Francisco geotechnical firms and city agencies. The USGS is
performing soil boring at selected locations; geotechnical firms are providing
soil boring logs (data) and geotechnical investigation reports in order to
expand the available data base on subsurface conditions and relevant soil
properties. In addition, city agencies, such as the San Francisco Fire
Department, are involved in evaluating how the site response characteristics
might affect the water supply, and how best to design and operate the pipeline
system so as to minimize the effects of locally severe ground shaking and
liquefaction.