* 9011286
* Evaluation of the Design Criteria and Analytical Reconcili- ation of the Instrumented Response of Three Engineered      Structures in the Loma Prieta Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/1990,11/30/1991
* Joseph Nicoletti, John A Blume and Associates
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 11/30/1991
* USD 44,406.00

This is a post-event investigation project to learn engineering lessons from
the Loma Prieta earthquake (October 1989). The design criteria and instrumented
response of three San Francisco Bay Area structures will be studied in this
project. Located in San Francisco, Emeryville, and San Jose, California,
respectively, each of the three buildings was designed for lateral forces
greater than those required by the governing codes. Furthermore, none of the
three structures incurred significant damage during the earthquake. The design
criteria for all three buildings was developed by URS/John A. Blume &
Associates, Engineers of San Francisco. The objective of the research is two-
fold. First, to assess the adequacy of code lateral force provisions for the
design of buildings in regions of high seismicity and to determine the
advantages of using more rigorously developed design criteria. The second is to
construct computer models of the three predicted with measured response. Through
this study the use of complex finite element codes for the purpose of dynamic
structural analysis will be verified and the opportunity for system
identification studies of the three subject structures will be presented. The
research will provide a rational assessment of the effectiveness of rigorous
design requirements through a comparison of demand and capacity resulting from
code level forces, specified design forces, and the actual forces developed in
the earthquake.