* 9011676
* Connection Classification and Modelling for Precast Seismic Structural Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/1990,10/31/1993
* Neil Hawkins, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 10/31/1993
* USD 147,000.00

This is a part of the coordinated research program in seismic precast concrete
structures. This project focuses on the study of connections of precast concrete
structures. The response of precast concrete structures to earthquake loading is
governed largely by the behavior of the connectons. Before precast concrete can
be widely used in seismic regions, suitable connections must be developed. The
behavior of individual connections influences the response of the total
structural system, which in turn dictates the loads and ductility demands on the
connection. Establishing suitable connection characteristics thus involves an
interaction between testing, analytical modeling of the connector force-
displacement relationships, and dynamic analyses of the response of the complete
structural system. The objective of the project is to provide a framework within
which the necessary developments can take place. Potentially suitable
connections are to be identified from present practice and classified according
to the nature of their primary resistance (e.g. axial force or shear). Ways of
combining or improving them by design will be investigated. Analytical models
will be generated. Based on performance predictions from seismic response
analysis, suitable connections will be selected for physical testing in
subsequent studies, and the parameters to be varied in the tests will be
identified.