* 9011787
* RIA: An Integrated Approach to High-Performance Network     Technology
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Joydeep Ghosh, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John R. Lehmann
* 12/31/1992
* USD 59,996.00

An integrated approach towards the synthesis of high-bandwidth, low- latency
interconnection networks is pursued that focuses on the interdependence of
system architecture, VLSI characteristics and packaging technology. New designs
of one-sided crosspoint switching modules that can provide several paths between
communicating ports in multichip switches are being studied. An architecture
solution is posed for the simultaneous switching noise problem and that has been
traditionally tackled at the circuit design and packing levels. Novel schemes
for fast arbitration and scheduling through the use of parallel bus-controllers
are analyzed under a variety of message traffic conditions. An alternative
approach uses artificial neural networks for contention resolution. Trade-offs
between switch cost, performance and reliability are studies under these
workloads for various chip sizes. Topological testing techniques are used for
drastic reduction of test time. The research findings are being incorporated
into a set of software tools recently developed at UT Austin for the computer-
aided design of networks. Recent technological advances have prompted a
resurgence of interest in cross bar-based designs in the industry, despite the
requirement of O (N2) switches. Indeed, by considering current VLSI and
packaging technology, it can be shown that power dissipation, current driving
abilities and pinout limitations easily outweigh circuit density demands of
switching networks. This research aims to lay the foundations for the cost-
effective design of 128-1024 port crossbars with a sustained bandwidth of 1
GBytes per channel, that can form the core of the next generation of massively
parallel machines and switching networks.