* 9011074
* Mathematical Sciences: Sampling Theory for Computer         Experiments
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1993
* Art Owen, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Izenman
* 12/31/1993
* USD 89,255.00

This research involves the extension of regression methods in statistics to
deterministic but very complicated responses. The motivating application is from
semiconductor process and device design. In this application there are computer
programs that simulate the physics of the fabrication and the operation of
semiconductor devices. The result is that electrical properties of
semiconductors can be computed as a function of the process specifications in
their fabrication. A combination of long running times for the programs and a
large number of variables that describe the process make it necessary to use
statistical techniques to find optimal settings of the input variables. One can
run the simulators at a set of points and fit the model to the computed values,
for interpolation and extrapolation to other possible settings of those values.
By choosing the points in a structured manner that incorporates some randomness,
one can estimate the uncertainty in the model. This project is in the area of
statistics and probability and offers a number of statistical applications to
the semiconductor industry. The research is to explore an approach that reflects
some standard settings in computer experiments: many dimensions, comparatively
few data points, and a need to fit a complex function.