* 9011487
* Determination of Genetic and Kinetic Parameters of Primary  Importance to the Productivity of Recombinant Organisms
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1993
* Dewey Ryu, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 07/31/1993
* USD 175,694.00

This investigation undertakes a fundamental biochemical engineering study to
develop a novel methodology for determination of kinetic and genetic parameters
of primary importance to the production of genetically engineered organisms.
These important parameters include: specific production rate, gene or plasmid
concentration, fraction of plasmid-harboring cells, growth ratio of plasmid-
harboring cells to plasmid-free cells, specific plasmid loss rate, relative
plasmid loss rate, lumped rate of transcription and translation, and gene
expression efficiency. There is a total vacuum of the data base of this kind at
the present time, because of total lack of rational and systematic methodology
for accurate determination of many important parameters, which dictate and
control the productivity of recombinant organisms. In view of this situation, it
is considered critically important to develop a relatively simple and yet
reliable method by which those genetic and kinetic parameters of recombinants
can be well characterized and determined through both theoretical and
experimental studies. Based on preliminary studies, one such method capable of
determining accurately those parameters is proposed. From these parameters,
other important parameters can be estimated and these parameters combined with
the environmental and operational parameters can then be used for design, scale
up, and optimization of recombinant fermentation processes of industrial
importance. In this study, the proposed theoretical method will be evaluated
experimentally by using at least two selected "host cell- vector" systems. Based
on experimental results, the proposed method of determining the genetic
parameters of recombinant organisms will be further improved or refined.