* 9011335
* Critical Zones in Global Environmental Change, Phase II
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1990,02/29/1992
* Robert Mitchell, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 02/29/1992
* USD 124,227.00

The ways in which human activities are altering natural and physical processes
of environmental change and the impacts of that change on humans are not evenly
distributed across the globe. Because of special combinations of human and
natural attributes, some locales are especially prone toward accelerated
processes of change induced by human-environmental interactions. This project
will continue the establishment of a methodological framework for the
systematic, comparative study of human-environmental interactions in nine parts
of the world where the situation has been assessed as especially critical: (1)
South Florida, (2) the Mexico Basin, (3) part of the Amazon basin, (4) the North
Sea, (5) the Kenya Dry Hills, (6) the Aral Sea, (7) the Himalayas of Nepal, (8)
the Ordos Plateau of China, and (9) the Sundaland Rainforest of Indonesia. Case
studies are being undertaken by scholars familiar with each of these locales to
identify and evaluate the human forces that are altering natural processes of
environmental change, the growing societal awareness of these impacts, and the
nature of societal responses to those changes. Common research approaches are
being used in all case studies to ensure comparability of results. The work is
coordinated by a central research team of scholars with complementary skills and
by an international board of advisors. The research also will be coordinated
with related activities of study groups of the International Geographic Union.
This research continues to lay the groundwork for an important series of
intensive, comparative case studies of human-environmental interaction in five
critical parts of the world. The research ultimately will provide significant
new insights about human and natural processes in the study areas themselves,
but more importantly, it will provide generalizable knowledge about global
patterns and processes of human impacts on and responses to natural
environmental change. The study will also establish a framework for replication
in other locales in order to further increase understandings about this critical
topic.