* 9011547
* Insurance Regulation, Structure of Product Liability, and   Product Liability Insurance Market Performance
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1990,06/30/1992
* W. Viscusi, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 06/30/1992
* USD 50,178.00

This project provides an empirical analysis of product liability insurance
focusing on three classes of issues: the functioning of the rate-making process,
the performance of the product liability insurance market, and the impact of
state insurance regulations and states' product liability statutes on insurance
market performance. Among the key matters of interest are: (1) determination of
the speed of the merit rating adjustment process and the relationship of this
updating to the insurance regulation structure; (2) the role of uncertainty in
loss performance in influencing insurance rates, differences across regulatory
regimes in the role of uncertainty, and the impact of uncertainty on price
competition and quantity rationing; (3) the effect of differences in regulatory
and product liability regimes across states on changes over time in price
competition and quantity rationing during the 1980-84 period; and (4) the nature
of the non-linear price schedules for insurance. Although a substantial
literature exists on recent patterns in the insurance industry, with the
exception of some recent work in medical malpractice, the entire literature has
been devoted almost exclusively to analyzing aggregative data on total premiums
and total loss rations by state and by year. The current project utilizes a data
base consisting of approximately individual policies over a five year period.
This data base will enable the research to distinguish changes in insurance
price and insurance quantity purchased. This will greatly extend the domain of
concerns that can be addressed.