* 9011540
* Scientific Inertia:  A Study of Resistence to Theoretical   Change in the History of Cosmology
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1990,01/31/1993
* Edward Grant, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 01/31/1993
* USD 20,000.00

From the very beginnings of medieval thought about the year 1200 until 1687, the
year Isaac Newton published his monumental Principia, the Aristotelian-Ptolemaic
geocentric cosmology dominated intellectual debate about the nature of our
universe. Professor Grant is examining how the Aristotelian system managed to
persist for nearly half a millennium. To understand this phenomenon is to
understand the ability of received views to persist, even in the light of
contradictory evidence. Or, better, to understand the persistence of the
Aristotelian system is to understand how a scientific theory can adapt to
accommodate new views and to understand how extraordinarily difficult it is to
overthrow entrenched views. By undertaking this study, Professor Grant is thus
shedding light on one of the most important issues in science studies: how
science changes--and why it does not change. Professor Grant has found that the
nearly 500 year period can be divided into two parts: 1200-1500 when the
Aristotelian view was overwhelmingly dominant and had no viable rivals. The
second phase from 1500-1687 was one in which a number of rival cosmologies
appeared ranging from the Platonic views to those of the hermetic tradition of
Hermes Trismagistus. He has found that, even if Copernicus had never written De
revolutionibus, a significant debate about the earth's possible axial rotation
and orbital motion would have occurred. Yet in 1543, Copernicus did publish his
revolutionary views and the remaining century and a half of Aristotelian
cosmology was one of trying to accommodate the Aristotelian system to the
discoveries which emerged in the 16th and 17th centuries--from Brahe's new
observations of the planets and stars to Galileo's telescopic discoveries. The
results of Professor Grant's study will be a massive history of Aristotelian
cosmology. This study will have major importance for studies in the history and
the philosophy of science which are concerned with the central issues of
scientific change.