* 9011998
* The Conservative Resistance in Scientific Revolution
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1991,06/30/1994
* Roger Ariew, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 06/30/1994
* USD 93,130.00

"How many times does the apple have to fall?" This question was raised by then
Representative Bowman who wanted to know why NSF needed to support a new
biography of Newton given the many that already existed. The question assumes
that history is a static discipline--that history is simply a gathering of all
the "facts" to be set on the page in chronological order. But the historian is
like the scientist--they continually seek to refine and improve upon our
understanding of events. They offer new theories and gather new evidence to
support them. Eddington, for example, sought new evidence in the bending of
light from star during a solar eclipse to establish Einstein's theory of gravity
over Newton's. Similarly, historians turn to new kinds of evidence in order to
establish new interpretations of how and why historical events came about. This
move to re-examine and re-interpret events has hit at what had long been thought
to be firmly established within the history of science: the Scientific
Revolution. The Scientific Revolution of the 17th Century involved the overthrow
of the Aristotelian world system and its replacement by "modern science." The
revolution began with Copernicus and ended with Newton and his theory of
universal gravitation. Yet recent historical scholarship has established that
the success of Copernicanism around the turn of the 17th century was quite
problematic and not explainable on any merely "rational" grounds. Indeed, the
Tychonic system, with the planets circling the sun, the sun circling the
immobile earth, made better sense than Copernicanism which so radically
contradicted our common-sense understanding of the physical laws of motion. But
by mid-17th century, historians and philosophers had assumed that
Aristotelianism was defeated and the triumph of modern physics was clear. Yet,
Professors Ariew and Garber have found that even this victory was nearly as
problematic as the victory of Copernicanism. They are examining the exact
process of rejection of Aristotelian natural philosophy during the early to
mid-17th century. Paris was then home to a lively and independent intellectual
community that included many of the figures most responsible for the rise of the
new mechanical philosophy, while at the same time, the University of Paris and
numerous smaller colleges were strongholds of traditional Aristotelian thought.
Their project involves studying intellectual currents both inside and outside
the University, including published books, lecture notes, letters, pamphlets,
broadsides, and engravings. They hope to illuminate how, with specifics and in
detail, the Aristotelian natural philosophy of the schools was set aside and
modern science emerged. The results of the project should enhance our
understanding of the complex relations among various scientific, philosophical
and theological doctrines, the intellectual context of early modern science, and
the status of scientific claims to authority.