* 9011732
* A New Storage Facility for the Bishop Museum Systematic     Anthropology Collections
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1994
* Toni Han, Bernice P Bishop Museum
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1994
* USD 144,138.00

The Bishop Museum is located in Honolulu, Hawaii and its systematic
anthropological collections comprise some 170,000 specimens. These are
significant to the advancement of knowledge of the natural and cultural history
of Hawaii and the Pacific. They constitute a historic baseline for the
understanding of Pacific peoples past and present, and this resource is used by
scientists around the world, as well as by the local academic community. For the
people of Hawaii it offers an important source of information about their
cultural backgrounds, and the collections provide documentation of traditions
which otherwise would have been lost. To improve storage and access to these
materials the Bishop Museum has constructed a new four-story building and will
transfer the collections to it. This National Science Foundation grant will
provide funds to purchase a compactor storage system. Compactors consist of
moveable storage units (carefully designed to minimize damage to materials)
which have been widely adopted by museums because they make extremely efficient
use of space. Not only will this system safely house the existing Bishop Museum
anthropological collection but will also provide room for future growth. This
project is important for several reasons. First, it will assist in the
preservation of scientifically important and irreplaceable anthropological
materials. Secondly, it will facilitate access by both researchers and the
interested public.