* 9011962
* RIA:  Performance Analysis of Communication Networks Under  m/t/MM/r/B Packet Arrival Processes
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Ioannis Stavrakakis, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 12/31/1992
* USD 60,000.00

This project analyzes the performance of discrete-time queueing systems,
appearing in packet communication networks, under dependent and/or slow (or
fast) packet arrival processes. Packet processes in today's networking
structures are usually dependent and they may deliver packets which are at least
tau time units apart (slow lines) or they may deliver multiple packets almost
simultaneously (fast lines). Such processes will be described by an m-state tau-
idle Markov Modulated r-Bernoulli model (m/tau/MM/r/B). The appropriateness of
the m/tau/MM/r/B modeling for complex packet processes is being established and
(a) statistical multiplexers and (b) token ring networks, under m/tau/MM/r/B
packet arrival processes, are being studied. The analysis approach is based on
the formulation of appropriate discrete-time queueing models. The buffer
occupancy process, for system (a), and the cycle time process for system (b),
are described. Based on these processes, packet delay results are obtained. The
following is being achieved: - A powerful class of models for complex packet
processes, which has the potential of leading to analytically tractable system
modeling, will be introduced and its superiority to previously adopted models
will be established. - Important systems appearing in complex networking
structures will be analyzed under certain models from the proposed class of
models. - Techniques for the anlysis of queueing systems under m/tau/MM/r/B
modeling will be developed.