* 9011405
* General Equilibrium with Incomplete Markets:  Money,        Production, and Default
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1993
* John Geanakoplos, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 11/30/1993
* USD 71,678.00

The theory of general equilibrium with incomplete markets (GEI) studies the
pricing of securities and commodities, and the interactions of perfectly
competitive asset markets and commodity markets in determining consumption and
investment. Since financial economics is fundamentally concerned with the
pricing of securities, and since macroeconomics is fundamentally concerned with
the real effects of monetary assets, the GEI model provides a framework for a
microeconomic analysis that touches a large number of different fields. The
purpose of this project is to extend the theory of GEI to incorporate money,
production, and default with asymmetric information. The contributions of this
project are important because many phenomena that cannot be described in the
traditional Arrow-Debreu model come to light in these incomplete asset markets
model. These include the distinction between real and financial assets, the
limitations for understanding local uniqueness and efficiency of representative
agent and single commodity models, the importance of diversification, the
dependence of asset prices on covariances and not variances, the "random walk"
or martingale property of asset prices, the relevance or possible irrelevance of
corporate financial policy, the rationale for lenient bankruptcy and default
penalties, the ambiguity of firm objectives, and a positive role for government
redirection of private investment and risk taking decisions.