* 9011172
* A Caltech Micromachining Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/1990,11/30/1993
* F. Culick, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 11/30/1993
* USD 385,414.00

This award provides funds to help with the establishment and initial operation
of a microfabrication facility that will produce semi-conductor devices to be
used in neuroscience, microelectronics and related areas of microdevice
research. The neuroscience devices will be used for both in vitro and in vivo
experimentation aimed at the simultaneous monitoring of the activity of an array
of nerve cells. Other types of devices to be fabricated include micro-robots,
-sensors, -antennas and pumps. An important role of the he facility is expected
to be the training of students and advanced investigators who have need of these
devices in the techniques used for microfabrication. The remarkable progress in
the miniaturization of electronic circuit boards has lead to the realization
that a variety of other types of micrometer-sized devices can be made. these
include both mechanical and electronic devices. In particular, the ability to
fabricate microchip-like multi-well cell culture dishes, where each well is the
size of a single cell, has opened up the possibility of simultaneous recording
of the activity of each of many interconnected nerve cells growing in culture.
This type of experimentation could lead to significant advances in understanding
the operation of networks of nerve cells, an area which has, in recent years,
been the subject of much theoretical interest. Similar devices, which could be
implanted directly in the brain, should allow measurement of the activity of
many cells in a single region of the brain. Such experimentation has enormous
potential for clarifying our understanding of the functional organization of the
brain and of how brain cells integrate and differentiate sensory input.