* 9011737
* Research Initiation Awards:  Ignition and Combustion        Phenomena of Laser-Ignited Baron Agglomerate at Elevated    Pressures
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1992
* Ke Nguyen, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* MILTON J LINEVSKY
* 11/30/1992
* USD 86,250.00

The objective of the proposed research is to study the effect of ambient
pressure on the ignition delay time and the burning time of boron agglomerates.
In this investigation a probe- supported boron agglomerate mounted inside a
high-pressure combustion chamber is ignited by a CO2 laser beam. The use of the
laser ignition technique and high-pressure combustion chamber will permit the
variation of the ambient pressure and oxidant mole fraction. Surface temperature
measurements of the laser-ignited boron agglomerate during the ignition and
combustion events will be carried out using a near-infrared, two-color
pyrometer. In conjunction with the two-color pyrometer, a broadband radiometer
is used to record the radiation emitted by the boron agglomerate. From the
temporal outputs of the two-color pyrometer and the broadband radiometer, it is
possible to determine the ignition temperature, the preignition delay time and
the burning time of the boron agglomerate as function of ambient pressure and
oxidant mole fraction. Boron slurries have a significant advantage over
conventional jet fuels when evaluated on an energy-density basis. This project
will provide experimental determination of boron particle agglomerate burning
rates in the operating pressure range of one to 20 atm, typical of high-
performance air- breathing engines.