* 9011731
* Insurance and Incentives in Poor High Risk Economics
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1993
* Robert Townsend, National Opinion Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1993
* USD 184,643.00

This grant renews support for an ambitious and productive project on economies
with uncertainty and with private information. This phase of the project studies
the presence or absence of insurance, credit, and risk reduction arrangements in
poor high risk economies. It develops and makes tractable economic models with
private information, limited communication, and spatial separation. It measures
which of these impediments are important in practice and determines what
information-communication structures prevail in poor high risk villages. More
specifically, the research contains the following: (1) Empirical tests of full
insurance for three villages surveyed by the International Crops Research for
the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) in India from 1975-1984; (2) The development of
general equilibrium prototypes with particular emphasis on private information
to explain dispersed land holdings, modeled from historical material for
medieval England, but applicable with modifications to India and Thailand; and
(3) The evaluation of survey questionnaires administered to villagers in
northern Thailand to quantify which, if any, risk reduction arrangements are
used and to measure the nature and type of information impediments. A variety of
important policy issues turn on whether or not there are private information
problems or impediments to trade in poor high risk villages and whether or not
risk reduction devices are available. For example, rice banks in Thailand are
run like standard text-book banks, not respecting the erratic nature of crop
yields. This project should show whether or not rice banks are needed and, if
needed, how they might be improved. But the major contribution of this project
is methodological. Standard economic theory relies on a paradigm of full
insurance and complete markets. The poor agrarian villages studied in this
project are used as natural laboratories in which to evaluate full insurance
models. Alternatives to full insurance models exist but they are unrealistic or
so complex that they can not be estimated empirically. This project for the
first time merges three different strands of theoretical research with actual
applied research.