* 9011837
* Human Cone Transduction
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1994
* Christopher Tyler, Smith-Kettlewell Eye Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 01/31/1994
* USD 249,873.00

The human eye detects light by a sheet of specialized photoreceptor cells and
nerve cells called the retina, at the back of the eye. Light energy is described
in terms of units called quanta; the conversion of light energy to a neural
signal output by the cell is called transduction. The electrical response within
the photoreceptors is initiated by the fastest chemical reactions known. Despite
the speed of these reactions, the total response time for the output of these
cells is rather slow, to as much as a tenth of a second, because there is a
cascade of biochemical reactions that effectively act to amplify the signal
energy. Two basic kinds of photoreceptors, called rods and cones, initiate
visual signals in the retina which then are sent to the brain by the optic
nerve. The cone system is usually used for color vision in strong daylight
illumination, while the rod system is very sensitive to low light level but does
not carry color information by itself. This project examines the component
mechanisms of the cone transduction process in the human eye, using human
responses to obtain thresholds for seeing stimulus lights of highly controlled
duration and intensity. Measurements will be made of responses to single flashes
from the cone system when it is in a state of dark adaptation, of the number of
quanta absorbed at the absolute threshold for different cone types, and of the
different time components in the dark-adapted cone responses. This novel
approach will generate important new fundamental information on normal human
vision that will have impact on further understanding the biochemistry and
physiology of vision in general.