* 9011194
* Knightian Uncertainty, General Equilibrium Theory and       Macroeconomics
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1992
* Truman Bewley, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1992
* USD 36,679.00

This project supports theoretical research on the economic implications of
Knightian decision theory, an alternative formulation of choice under
uncertainty. Knightian decision theory explains, among other things, how
different individuals with the same objective information could attach different
subjective probabilities to events of unknown probability. Thus, the theory
creates a coherent framework in which individuals with the smae information
could have different opinions about choices under uncertainty. The differences
of opinion create asymmetries of subjective information among individuals, for
they do not know each others' opinions. The research elaborates the view that
these asymmetries may help explain important economic phenomena, such as price
behavior, layoffs, and strikes. The ultimate goal of the project is to deepen
our understanding of general equilibrium and the possible underemployment of
resources in general equilibrium. It also provides a deeper theoretical anlysis
of possible remedies for the underemployment of resources. Knightian decision
theory gives behavioral significance to Frank Knight's distinction between risk
and uncertainty. According to these definitions, a gamble is risky if the
probabilities of its outcomes are known and it is uncertain if they are not
known. The development of Knightian decision theory by this project is an
important contribution because this new theory explains a number of different
types of decisions that appear irrational according to standard Bayesian
decision theory. These include the failure of certain markets to provide
insurance, bargaining behavior of labor and management that produces strikes and
layoffs and the insensitivity of personal saving to changes in interest rates.