* 9011263
* RUI: Receptor Mediation of Antiestrogen Effects
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1993
* Janet Gray, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 01/31/1993
* USD 111,600.00

While estrogens have long been known to have profound effects on reproductive
physiology and behavior, this steroid hormone also alters feeding behavior, body
weight gain and lipid metabolism. It is believed that these wide range of
effects of estrogens are mediated through a receptor-dependent process. Specific
protein receptors are localized in target cells within distinct brain regions
and compounds that interfere with steroid- receptor binding activity attenuates
the hormone response. Indeed these compounds, also known as antiestrogens, are
an excellent tool for elucidating the mechanisms underlying the action of
estrogen. An extremely interesting finding is that these synthetic agents
partially or fully antagonize the effects of estrogen on reproductive physiology
and behavior but mimic the effects of estrogen on regulatory processes, such as
feeding. Dr. Gray will examine the receptor systems by which these antiestrogens
exert their estrogenic agonistic vs antagonistic effects. She has demonstrated
the presence of two specific antiestrogen binding sites in different brain
regions. She will now characterize the distribution and binding properties of
antiestrogen binding sites in the CNS. The results from these studies should
lead to a better understanding of how estrogen exerts its complex effects on
both reproductive and regulatory systems. Moreover, antiestrogens, such as
tamoxifen, nafoxidine, clomiphene, are widely used for the treatment of
estrogen- dependent breast tumors. Her work on receptor mediation of
antiestrogen effects may help us understand how these compounds act as growth
suppressants in tumor cells.