* 9011608
* Cognitive Processes Affecting Zones of Agreement Between    Buyers and Sellers of Risky Alternatives
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1993
* Gerrit Wolf, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Shelton White
* 06/30/1993
* USD 83,149.00

The observation of a number of recent studies that compensation demanded to sell
goods or entitlements greatly exceeds willingness to pay for them is
inconsistent with standard economic theory, and has become a key topic in
experimental economics. These discrepancies are surprising, because they occur
even when the effects of strategic bargaining and other such economic factors
are eliminated. Instead, those gaps appear to be rooted in the cognitive
psychological processes people use in evaluating opportunities to buy or sell
goods or entitlements. The proposed work will assess via laboratory experiments
how discrepancies between willingness to pay and compensation demanded for risky
alternatives varies depending on (1) whether opportunity for learning in an
economic market-like setting is provided, (2) the riskiness of the alternatives,
(3) how the alternatives are described or framed, and (4) how willingness to pay
and compensation demanded are elicited from buyers and sellers. Whereas previous
studies have concentrated on whether these gaps are real phenomena, we propose,
and provide preliminary data supporting, a theoretical model based on Kahneman
and Tversky's prospect theory which predicts wide variation in gaps depending on
factors such as 1 - 4. These predictions will be tested in Experiments 1 - 3.
Experiments 4 and 5 will test prescriptive procedures using multiple
perspectives, frames or reference points, and modes of response in an attempt to
induce convergence between different measures of economic value, such as
willingness to pay and compensation demanded. If the sizes of these buyer-seller
gaps can be reduced by decision support procedures of this sort, the overall
quality of buyer - seller "deals" should increase. More broadly, it is hoped
that the proposed work will help to bridge the remarkably disjoint disciplines
of experimental economics and psychology of judgment/decision making.