* 9011214
* Parallel Algorithm for Special Graphs
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/1990,05/31/1993
* Xin He, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Krishna M. Kavi
* 05/31/1993
* USD 35,581.00

This project is concerned with the design of efficient parallel algorithms for
solving various graph problems arising from disparate areas in Computer Science.
These problems can be roughly divided into three categories: graph layout
problems, some fundamental problems for planar graphs, and optimization problems
for a class of special graphs including permutation graphs, comparability
graphs, and cographs. Because of their broad applications in a variety of
applied science disciplines, sequential algorithms for these problems have been
extensively studied. But it appears difficult to solve them in parallel. Either
no fast parallel algorithms for solving them are known; or parallel algorithms
exist, but require a very large number of processors. The properties of these
graphs and intrinsic structures of these problems will be investigated, and new
parallel algorithms for solving them will be developed (or the efficiency of
existing parallel algorithms will be improved). A main concern of this project
is to identify common characteristics and to find algorithmic tools for the
problems in each category. The results produced from this study will provide not
only efficient parallel algorithms for individual problems, but also new
understanding of these special graphs and new techniques for designing parallel
algorithms.