* 9011939
* International Conference on Social Influence to be held     at the University of Valencia, Spain, June 16-18, 1990
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/1990,10/31/1991
* John Levine, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jean B. Intermaggio
* 10/31/1991
* USD 10,000.00

ABSTRACT The ways in which people influence one another has been a central
concern of social psychology since its inception. For many years, research in
this country has viewed social influence as the process by which the will of the
majority is instilled into the minority. Recent European research has focused on
the compliment of this idea, namely the ways in which the minority impacts upon
the majority. This research has produced some interesting and provocative
deviations from the standard findings. Considerable progress on minority
influence has occurred in Europe. In the US, knowledge about factors that
influence social behavior has grown enormously, but very little research has
been done specifically on minority influence, which appears to involve processes
somewhat different from those involved in more standard majority influence
situations. The two scientific communities in Europe and the US are in a unique
position to contribute to one another in terms of theory, methods, and
established research findings. This proposal will facilitate this process by
allowing a group of America's best social influence researchers to meet in an
intensive workshop with Europe's best. The gains in theory and methodology
should be remarkable, and have long-term effects on social research in America
and Europe. Understanding the factors that affect social influence, of both
majority and minority groups, on majority and minority groups, has enormous
theoretical and practical implications. This research should foster this process
of understanding.