* 9011758
* Polypeptide/Nuclei Acid Structural Analysis &amp; Organic       Synthesis Core Biological Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1992
* Jerry Manning, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 07/31/1992
* USD 154,546.00

This proposal requests funding for instrumentation to further develop a
comprehensive and integrated core facility for the structural characterization
of peptides, proteins and nucleic acids and their organic synthesis for use as
reagents. The PIs propose to purchase an automated DNA sequencing instrument to
facilitate the analysis of DNA sequences. In addition to the major users of DNA
sequencing, the PIs have a relatively large number of users who sequence a few
KB of DNA per year that could benefit from this instrument. Currently one of the
major services of the existing core facilities is in the synthesis of
oligopeptides and oligonucleotides. Demand for synthetic peptides is increasing
for use as models of protein structure and function and the production of anti-
peptide antibodies. Anti-peptide antibodies are useful reagents for identifying
gene products and probing the relationships between protein structure and
function. The rate limiting step in the production of synthetic peptides has
become the purification of the desired product by HPLC as most of the users do
not have their own chromatography instrumentation. Funding for critical
supporting instruments such as liquid chromatographs to purify synthetic
peptides and capillary electrophoresis equipment to assess purity is also
requested. Chromatography equipment is requested for the isolation of proteins
prior to sequencing.