* 9011198
* An Econometric Analysis of Charitable Giving in the Federal Income Tax
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1993
* Robert Moffitt, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1993
* USD 105,230.00

The effect of the federal income tax system on charitable contributions has been
the subject of considerable interest. Several recent changes in federal tax law
have affected that deduction. This project outlines an econometric study of the
effect of the federal income tax on charitable giving which addresses two
specification issues in past work. First, the level of other deductions has been
held constant in earlier studies, but will be allowed to vary here. In general,
the price and income elasticities of such conditional demand functions are not
the same as those that obtain when other deductions are allowed to be
endogenous. For tax policy purposes, the elasticities from the unconditional
demand functions are the most relevant because a change in the tax price for
charitable giving may change the level of other deductions as well. Although the
treatment of other deductions as endogenous leads to an identification problem,
using charitable donations from non-itemizers (which was allowed in the early
1980s), will enable separate price elasticities for charitable giving and other
deductions to be obtained. The second specification issue is the endogeneity of
the itemization decision. This involves a model incorporating the choice of
other deductions as well, for the itemization decision is based upon the level
of all deductions. This creates some estimation problems - a nonconvex kink in
the budget set and, conditional on itemization, the tax price of the deductible
goods depends on the sum of the expenditures on these goods. This will be dealt
with by extending the piecewise linear budget constraint econometric methodology
used elsewhere. Estimates from this model using the 1984 SOI file of federal tax
returns will be compared with those obtained from the simpler model. Finally,
the parameter estimates will be used to simulate the effects of a wide variety
of tax policy changes, including the effect of the 1986 Tax Reform Act and other
possible reforms, on the level of deductions, the percentage of returns with
itemized deductions and the level of federal tax revenue.