* 9011917
* Stochastic Simulations for Inference in Nonlinear Errors-in-Variables Models
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1990,06/30/1992
* Roberto Mariano, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 06/30/1992
* USD 21,313.00

This project will study inference in simultaneous nonlinear error-in-variables
models - identification, estimation, prediction and specification testing. The
linkages between identifiability and nonlinearities in the measurement error
model will be studied and appropriate sufficient identifiability conditions
analyzed. The consequences of measurement errors on standard procedures for
testing hypotheses, estimation and validation in nonlinear models will be
studied. Parametric and semiparametric procedures are established for the
estimation of nonlinear error-in-variables models. Modifications of Monte Carlo
and residual-based stochastic simulations are developed to handle measurement
error problems and adapted to not only prediction but also estimation and
specification testing. The large-sample asymptotic theory for these procedures
will be developed. Particular attention is given to the treatment of the
measurement error generating process. The standard Gaussian white nose model for
measurement errors is the starting point for the analysis. Analysis then
continues to less restrictive and more appropriate measurement error models
which are nonlinear and non-Gaussian. Simultaneous systems with limited
dependent variables are used for a more specific examination of the
applicability of the new techniques.