* 9011560
* The Origins of Modern Anatomy and Physiology
* BIO,DBI
* 10/15/1990,10/31/1991
* Nancy Siraisi, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 10/31/1991
* USD 50,000.00

The rise of modern science, especially modern biological science, has been tied
to a close observation of nature. This is most closely associated with the
brilliant observations of Andreas Vesalius whose anatomical drawings are as much
works of art as they are careful delineations of the human form. Yet, if we have
learned anything from the revolution in history and philosophy of science of the
1960's and 70's, we have learned that "observation" is "theory-laden." To a very
large extent, what we see is predetermined by the theory to which we ascribe. In
anatomy and physiology, this "fact" can be seen in the observations of the human
body. For centuries, for example, writers on anatomy and physiology wrote of the
"horns" of the uterus and a five-lobbed liver; but it is "apparent" to us that
the human uterus has no "horns" while the liver has only two lobes, not five.
Similar observational "errors" can be found in dealing with the heart--we now
believe that the blood "circulates" but for millennia, the arterial and venal
systems were considered to be separate. Because the relationship of theory with
observation is central to contemporary philosophy of science, it is important to
understand their relationship in this first great modern observer of the human
anatomy. Andreas Vesalius's De humani corporis fabrica, first published in 1543,
is generally acknowledged to be one of the most important books of the
Renaissance. Yet Vesalian scholarship has mostly been concentrated on the
illustrations, his minor works, and his biography. The lengthy text of the
Fabrica--that is, the part of the work that presents the theory which controlled
in some sense what he observed--has been much less studied. With this grant,
Professor Siraisi aims to elucidate Vesalius's understanding and presentation of
anatomy and physiology in his principal work in the context of the scientific
culture of the age. Her objective is to investigate the Fabrica as an example of
Renaissance scientific writing, considering text and illustrations together as
Vesalius intended his readers to do. The result will be a close reading of the
scientific and scholarly activities involved in Renaissance anatomy and their
relationship to humanistic medical culture, as well as a fuller picture of the
scientific and cultural assumptions of a leading figure in Renaissance science.
The study will address several broad historical themes of current interest: the
role of the life sciences in scientific developments of the 16th and 17th
centuries; 16th century humanistic medical learning and the culture of the
medical community; the development of early modern scientific methodology and
values, including the role of physical demonstration and methods of persuasion
and proof. Her results will be of interest to philosophers of science,
especially of biology, of historians of science and medicine, and Renaissance
cultural and intellectual historians.