* 9011213
* Design and Detailing of Transverse Reinforcements for High  Strength Reinforced Concrete Columns Subjected to Seismic   Loading
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1993
* Atorod Azizinamini, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 07/31/1993
* USD 69,950.00

The development and investigation of high strength reinforced concrete
applications comprises a major advance in building planning and design because
of its increased capacities. The present state of high strength reinforced
concrete design needs in-depth study to accurately predict the anticipated
performance of its many component parts under dynaic lateral loading such as
earthquake loads. High strength reinforced concrete is also a sophisticated and
complex building material due to the large number of design and construction
constraints which influence its quality, long term behavior, and final stress
values. In order to more accurately model its structural response, it is
necessary to develop a fundamental data-base of performance standards. The
proposed project is concerned with the development of design and detailing
criteria for transverse reinforcement in high rectangular columns with
compressive strengths exceeding 15,000 psi. Its objectives are to determine
methods to provide sufficient ductility for earthquake-resistant structures. The
research plan includes both experimental and analytical studies. At least twelve
large-scale column specimens will be tested and be subjected to axial and
repeated lateral loads at increasing displacements. From these tests, data will
be collected for the analytical documentation of the effects of concrete
compressive strength, axial load, and types of transverse reinforcement on the
ductility of high strength concrete columns.