* 9011811
* Archaeological Investigations in the Middle Senegal Valley, Senegal
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1995
* Scott Nutter, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1995
* USD 158,690.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Drs. Susan and Roderick
McIntosh and collaborators will begin a long-term study of the recent prehistory
of the Middle Senegal Valley, Senegal. They will focus their attention on the
most recent two thousand years, and through a combination of site survey,
mapping, and excavation accumulate enough data to reconstruct both cultural and
environmental change over the last two millennia. Attention will focus on two
large sites, Cubalel and Sincu Bara. At both excavation should yield a wide
variety of faunal and floral remains which will permit reconstruction of
subsistence techniques. The sites will also yield a variety of cultural
material. Through combined use of radiocarbon and archaeomagnetic dating as well
as a seriation of ceramic types, it should be possible to establish a cultural
chronology. Because both sites contain deeply stratified middens, they are well
suited to this purpose. Attention will also focus on metallurgical materials
since preliminary work indicates that extensive smelting took place in this
region. Finally, sediment cores will aid in the reconstruction of environmental
change. While much attention has focussed on Egypt and the Near East and the
role they played in the rise of civilization, the Sahelian region of Africa -
the broad band just south of the Sahara Desert - has been generally ignored.
However, work by the McIntoshes and others has indicated that essentially the
same processes took place in this area as well. In their previous work in an
adjacent region, the McIntoshes have traced the rise of large and complex
chiefly societies, and they have argued that this development is primarily
indigenous. This Middle Senegal Valley project will explore a new geographical
region and further examine the mechanisms involved. This research is important
for several reasons. It will help to fill a glaring geographical blank in the
archaeological record. The data collected will be of great interest to a wide
range of archaeologists. Secondly, it will increase our understanding both of
how complex societies develop and the role which sub- Saharan Africa played.
Because of the integral role which students will play, the project also
contributes to the training of future scientists.