* 9011671
* Press Project 1.1: Concept Development
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1990,04/30/1994
* Robert Englekirk, Englekirk and Sabol Consulting Engineers, Inc.
* Continuing grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 04/30/1994
* USD 100,000.00

This is a part of the coordinated research program in seismic precast concrete
structures. This project will develop structural concepts for using precast
concrete in seismic zones of the United States. Due primarily to current
building codes and lack of relevent analytical and experimental data, precast
concrete is not currently used in U.S. seismic zones. Initially, several
regional research workshops will be held around the country. These will be
limited in size to facilitate interaction among the participants who will be
invited to represent various contributors to the design/construction industry
(including architects, developers, researchers, etc.) Next, the economic
viability as well as structural feasibility of the design concept will be
investigated. Design documents will be prepared using the concepts resulting
from the workshops. Feedback about economical ways to improve the details
proposed from general contractors will be obtained. Potential use of automated
processes will also be considered. The analytical model development and design
criterion development projects will require a feedback from design engineers and
other industry representatives. The required informtion to academic researchers
and other means will be provided throughout the duration of this project.