* 9011721
* Research Initiation: In Situ Measurement of Transient       Polymer Melt Temperatures via Infrared Pyrometry during     Injection Molding
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Jeroen Rietveld, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* F. Hank Grant
* 12/31/1992
* USD 61,500.00

The accurate and precise measurement of polymer melt temperatures during
processing is generally a problematic procedure. This is especially true for the
injection molding process where the cyclic and transient nature of the operation
results in spatial and temporal variations of the polymer melt stream
temperature. Current techniques to measure polymer melt temperatures in a
typical manufacturing operation are either ignored, misused, or highly
deficient, and there is a great need to advance the technology of measuring
important stream variables such as the temperature of a polymer melt. The
primary objective of this study is to develop a reliable methodology for
applying infrared pyrometers to the measurement of polymer melt temperatures
during the manufacture of plastic articles, whereby such a measurement could
then be used for either monitoring or control purposes. Several key advantages
that infrared pyrometers have over conventional thermometry techniques are:
response times on the order of milliseconds, capacity of in situ real-time
measurement, and potential for measuring subsurface temperatures in a non-
intrusive fashion. However, the conversion of infrared radiation emitted from a
polymer melt into more than just semi-quantitative information is not a
straightforward procedure. Commercially available instrumentation will be
installed on an injection molding machine so that the researchers can collect
and analyze data obtained from a series of controlled experiments. An immediate
benefit from the research will be a correct methodology for using infrared
pyrometers.