* 9011868
* Studies of Scientists' Uncertainty and Disagreement about   Global Climate Change
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1992
* Thomas Stewart, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 06/30/1992
* USD 74,986.00

This project concerns scientists' judgments regarding the anticipated buildup of
carbon dioxide and other "greenhouse gases" in the atmosphere. Since there are
major gaps in scientific knowledge about the greenhouse effect, policy makers
are forced to rely on scientists' judgments about the rate of climate change and
its effects. It now appears that significant policy decisions will have to be
made in spite of continuing uncertainty and disagreement among scientists.
Despite its importance, scientific judgment about the greenhouse effect has not
been systematically studied. Relying on theory and methods derived from judgment
research, the project will identify the critical elements that affect scientific
judgment about the greenhouse effect. Scientists involved in greenhouse research
will be surveyed, and specific "points of view" in the scientific community will
be identified. Follow-up interviews of proponents of the various points of view
will probe reasons for disagreements in critical areas. The description of
scientific uncertainty and disagreement that is communicated to policy makers by
normal channels will be compared with the results of this study. The study will
result in an improved understanding of the roots of scientific disagreement
about the greenhouse effect.