* 9011834
* Joint US/USSR Workshop on Fundamental Processes in Next     Generation Dense Plasmas (November 1990: Itkol, USSR)
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/1990,10/31/1993
* Richard Morse, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Gerson Sher
* 10/31/1993
* USD 17,500.00

Both the United States and the Soviet Union are planning large-scale dense
plasma research facilities at a cost of over $1 billion each. These facilities
will greatly expand the range of plasmas that can be produced and will pose a
number of important questions for fundamental research. As available plasma
energies increase, it becomes interesting and important for theorists to
consider fundamental processes that can occur and be measured on the
correspondingly greater time and length scales and at the higher achievable
energy densities. As the only countries now planning such next- generation
facilities, the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. have a major joint interest in this field.
This joint workshop, which is being organized by Dr. Richard Morse of the
University of Arizona and Dr. Sergey Anisimov of the Landau Institute of
Theoretical Physics of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, will be concerned with
the theory of such next-generation dense plasmas. The state of the existing
theory, and the new theory requirements for understanding these plasmas, will be
considered. A central purpose of the workshop is to identify promising
U.S.-Soviet research partnerships in this field and to begin preparation of
competitive proposals for support of long-term collaborative projects. Because
of prior contacts and strong patterns of complementarity of approaches and
capabilities in the U.S. and Soviet plasma theory communities, it is expected
that joint research in this area would be mutually beneficial. This project
fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling
leading researchers in the United States and the U.S.S.R. to combine
complementary efforts and capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and
competence in the field of basic scientific research on the basis of equality,
reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.