* 9011658
* Effects of Climate Change in the Colorado Alpine
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/1991,04/30/1993
* Donald Walker, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 04/30/1993
* USD 971,370.00

This project represents a third phase of the University of Colorado Long-Term
Ecological Research program. It builds upon research in alpine processes and
patterns related to disturbance conducted during Phase I and Phase II of the
program. Field studies will be continued at Niwot Ridge and in the Green Lakes
Valley with selected studies in the wider region of the Colorado Front Range.
The goal of this research is to understand the influence of snowpack and summer
precipitation on ecosystem processes and landscape patterns and to use this
understanding to predict responses to climate change. The central hypothesis is
that alternation of snowpack or rainfall regimes will cause changes in alpine
ecosystem processes and patterns at site and regional scale. The alpine tundra
is often thought to be sensitive to climate change and is known to have
responded to such changes in the 12,000 years since deglaciation. The reasons
for this sensitivity are its low productivity and tight nutrient cycling and its
situation at an extreme for many plant processes. In Phase III of this project
emphasis will be place on further experimental studies of ecosystem processes
and patterns and their modeling as a means of predicting the effects of altered
showpack and summer precipitation patterns. In particular, scale considerations
will be emphasized hierarchical approach. Remote sensing will be used to examine
regional primary productivity along elevational and climatic gradients in the
Front Range and to facilitate extrapolation from the primary study site at Niwot
Ridge to other alpine areas. This theme derives from that of Phase I, which was
based on the premise that present alpine ecosystems reflect past climatic
conditions and Phase II, which focuses on the resilience and resistance of
tundra systems. Many of the databases derived from this earlier work will be
crucial to our Phase III research and will be maintained for the next six years.