* 9011663
* Long-Term Ecological Research on the H.J. Andrews           Experimental Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1991,04/30/1997
* Frederick Swanson, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 04/30/1997
* USD 3,491,499.00

Andrews LTER 1 and 2 programs consisted of long-term field experiments and
observation programs on disturbance regimes, vegetation succession, trophic
interactions, forest/stream interactions, and controls on primary production,
decomposition, and nutrient cycling. These studies will be continued in LTER 3
(1991-1996). In addition, synthesis efforts, initiated in LTER 1 and 2, will be
expanded greatly. Long-term records of climate, stream flow and chemistry, tree
growth and mortality, along with Andrews-wide data on fire history and
geomorphic disturbance regime, will be used to develop and verify models of
stand- and landscape-level response of the forest/stream ecosystem to natural
disturbance (wildfire), land use (conversion of natural to intensively managed
forest), and climate warming. This work, some of its underway, is made possible
by collaboration with other LTER sites (e.g. VCR, CPR, NWT) and Federal agencies
(USGS- Denver, EPA-Corvallis). Emphasis will also continue on data management,
LTER network and intersite activities, and dissemination of research results to
the public. Andrews LTER research is highly relevant to major issues concerning
natural resource management in the Pacific Northwest and in other regions of
rapid land-use change. This is an excellent research team that has assumed a
leadership position in the LTER program. Institutional support for this project
is excellent.