* 9011216
* Harnessing Active Database Abstraction to Support           Distributed Workstation-based Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1993
* Sharma Chakravarthy, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Ashany
* 07/31/1993
* USD 66,441.00

Traditional DBMSs are passive: they execute queries or transactions only when
explicitly requested to do so by a user or an application program. Many non-
traditional applications, such as CIM, process control, hospital monitoring
systems, air traffic control, and office workflow control, which require timely
response to (critical) situations are not well served by these passive DBMSs.
For these applications, it is important to monitor conditions defined on the
states of the database, and then, when these conditions occur, invoke specified
actions. This project advances previous work on active databases by the PI by i)
consolidating earlier research on active databases and ii) extending the active
database paradigm to efficiently support non-traditional applications requiring
distributed workstation configuration. This extension helps in intelligently
staging the data between the database and one or more workstations and also
provides a mechanism for update propagation. Distributed condition monitoring is
investigated to achieve the above. The results of this research will relieve the
application programmer at the workstation from the management of shared data
between the workstation and the database as well as maintaining the consistency
of shared data. This research is aimed at providing 'staging transparency' at
the user level using active database as an underlying abstraction.