* 9011659
* Long-Term Ecological Research Program - Shortgrass Steppe
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1991,10/31/1998
* William Lauenroth, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 10/31/1998
* USD 3,483,858.00

The semiarid Great Plains of North America is an extensive area, and has
particular importance for natural resource production. The Central Plains
Experimental Range (CPER) has an excellent location in the central Great Plains
to represent the important long-term ecological issues of consequence for much
of the region. The organizing concept for this long-term study of the shortgrass
steppe is that the major controls over ecosystem structure and function are
climate, geomorphology, and landuse management. Each of these controls has
important spatial and temporal heterogeneity across a range of scales, and
exerts its influence at a particular combination of levels. It is hypothesized
and that the most important controls at the site level of the CPER are soil
texture and landuse. Soil texture is a major influence over soil water
availability, and thus vegetation structure, net primary production, and
decomposition. Landuse sets the equilibrium state of ecosystems by controlling
potential production and soil organic matter reserves. This project continue
current work and initiate new studies to further examine the influence of soil
texture and landuse over shortgrass ecosystem structure and function using field
experimental research, simulation, and regional analysis.