* 9011091
* Search for Enzymes with Long Recognition Sequences, U.S.- Pakistan Collaboration
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1993
* Richard Roberts, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 01/31/1993
* USD 20,000.00

Description: This project provides support for Dr Richard Roberts of Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory and Dr. Sheikh Riazuddin of the Center for Advanced Molecular
Biology, University of Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan, to continue collaborative
research on restriction endonucleases. The two scientists have been
collaborating for about two years on isolating microbes and searching for the
presence of new Type II enzymes, and determining their sequence specificity.
This project will allow the continuation of this research for isolation and
taxonomical characterization of microbial strains from different local
environment in Pakistan; screening of bacterial strains for the presence of Type
II restriction endonucleases with special attention to enzymes with long
recognition sequences; and the purification and characterization of the new
restriction enzymes, and those with new specificities, with recognition of the
site of cleavage. Scope: This project meets the criteria of the Science in
Developmening Countries Program criteria for research participation by the U.S.
and Pakistani scientists. It allows for training of young scientists from
Pakistan in one of the best U.S. laboratories in molecular biology research, and
the application of modern techniques in that field to research being done in
that country. It also allows for creating a repository, in Pakistan, of
restriction enzymes which are essential for molecular biology research. That
capability is important for research in basic and applied genetic engineering in
Pakistan, and it also provides for increasing the diversity in the available
enzymes for research in the U.S.