* 9011772
* Solar MHD
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1993
* Henry Strauss, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Sherry O. Farwell
* 02/28/1993
* USD 160,000.00

ABSTRACT This is a study of solar and solar wind magnetohydrodynamics (MHD).
Four basic areas will be emphasized; (1) coronal processes of 3D reconnection,
(2) Alfven wave absorption and turbulence, (3) instability and turbulence in
coronal mass ejections, and (4) the theory of fast dynamo action and the
modelling of the alpha-effect. These problems are important for understanding
flares, coronal heating, the solar wind and the solar cycle. Earlier work
concentrated on ideal and resistive MHD instabilities in line-tied solar coronal
loops, and showed, in nonlinear MHD simulations, that the instabilities cause
current sheets to form. Also studied was Alfven wave resonant absorption in
coronal flux tubes driven by photospheric motion. The current work will
concentrate on current sheets, 3D reconnection, and possible singularities of 3D
equilibria in solar coronal magnetic loops. Secondary Kelvin-Helmholtz
instabilities in Alfven waves and other absorption mechanisms will also be
studied. MHD instabilities and dynamics of coronal mass ejection models will be
investigated, and the fast dynamo analyses will be expanded to encompass steady
flows with chaotic webs, and time dependent flows which are close to integrable
flows. The effort will include new methods for calculating transport by chaotic
flow, and the graphical representation of magnetic structures produced by
dynamos. *** //