* 9011268
* Laser Facility for Biomolecular Dynamics
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1991,06/30/1993
* Nicholas Geacintov, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 06/30/1993
* USD 550,000.00

Modern bimolecular research in the time domain requires a broad range of
reliable laser based instruments to cover the wavelengths, pulse energies and
time scales necessary for a comprehensive study. Typically, these instruments
are scattered or not routinely available. Thus, a means of enhancing and
facilitating such biophysical studies is to bring together the needed
instruments into a central facility where researchers can address research
problems in a comprehensive and coherent fashion. We are in the process of
creating such a facility in the Chemistry Department at NYU. Partial support is
requested for instrumentation to help create a state-of-the-art laser
spectroscopy facility, designed for and dedicated to optical studies of
biological macromolecules -- their structures, dynamics and functions. This
instrumentation will be used to investigate a number of problems of current
importance, including: the role of conformational disorder in the control of
protein function; energy and electron transfer mechanisms; protein folding and
denaturation pathways; the structure and dynamics of metal binding sites and
hydration layers in proteins and nucleic acids; nucleic acid dynamics; and
photophysical and photochemical and photochemical processes in molecules of
biological significance. The requested instrumentation includes three laser
systems to provide time resolution from .15 ps to CW and tunability from 200 to
900nm. Spectrometers, multichannel detection, instrumentation for rapid mixing
and cryogenic trapping of samples, will make available a wide range of
experimental options for time resolved and steady state Raman, absorption and
fluorescence using these laser sources. A recent grant from the Kresge
Foundation ($250K) will be used to purchase additional equipment to enhance the
versatility and usefulness of the facility. A condition of this award is that
NYU raise a one million dollar endowment to provide for the maintenance of the
facility, a campaign that is just getting under way. The location and design of
the facility are specifically geared to facilitate biological studies. The
facility, which will be jointly maintained by three of the ten major users, is
to be made available for both collaborative and independent projects, including
provision for use by academic and industrial external users.