* 9011067
* A Tunable IR Laser Source for Remote Sensing
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1990,06/30/1994
* Peter Cheo, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 06/30/1994
* USD 280,900.00

A widely tunable and compact IR laser source emitting in the 9-12 um range
based on very efficient phase modulation of CO 2 lasers at microwave frequencies
will be constructed and characterized. This laser source consists of a line
selecting CO 2 laser, which is stabilized to the 4.3 um emission Lamb-dip, and a
traveling-wave CdTe buffered BaAs microstrip electrooptic modulator. With a 20 W
microwave drive power, it can provide a continuously tunable IR power output of
10 to 50 mW at frequencies 8 to 18 GHz off-set from the laser carrier frequency.
The performance and usefulness of this source will be evaluated and demonstrated
by carrying out both direct saturation absorption and hererodyne measurements.
The saturation absorption measurements can provide individual line profiles of
atomic and molecular transitioons with sub-Doppler resolution. This tunable
laser will also be used as a local oscillator in a heterodyne spectrometer which
can provide a significant improvement in system sensitivity. An ultra-high
resolution and extremely low noise IR heterodyne spectrometer is required for
the study of interesting phenomena in the atmospheres of planets occurring in
low density, low temperature regions, where sub- Doppler spectral resolution are
needed to resolve fully the line shapes and to map spatially the source. The
information retrievable from IR heterodyne measurements can accurately determine
pressure, temperature, excitation, and molecular abundances of planetary
atmospheres. The same technology will find applications in remote sensing
measurements of trace gases in the earth's atmosphere.//