* 9011805
* Use of Scientific Evidence in the Courts
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1992
* Ann Lane, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 07/31/1992
* USD 48,000.00

In February, 1989, Sears, Roebuck and Company was found innocent of the charge
of sex discrimination in a lawsuit brought by the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC). The two major expert witnesses, both respected historians of
women, testified for the case. Since one testified for Sears and the other for
the EEOC, their testimonies evoked very different visions of women's motivations
and women's roles in the work force. In so doing, they contributed to the way
the attorneys defined the significant issues of the case as well as the way the
scholarly and legal communities interpreted the meaning of the trial. The
purpose of this project is to study in depth the Sears case in order to examine
how historical and scientific evidence is used by the Court and to explore the
conflicts between scholarly and legal forms of reasoning. The Sears case itself
took EEOC twelve years to prepare and cost 2.5 million dollars. The trial took
ten months in court and resulted in a transcript of 20,000 pages. In addition to
the case analysis, the legal, institutional, and theoretical issues that emerged
from it will be explored. The analysis will include an assessment of the
competing discourses of social science, statistics, the rhetoric of the court,
and the scholar or expert witness. The trial record will be used to illuminate
how those involved dealt with contemporary events, how they used knowledge and
historical evidence, and how they understood the corporate culture and the
relationship of the law and the academy to it. The official record will be
supplemented with interviews of the participants. The examination of the modes
of legal discourse in the Sears case brings a needed rigor to the study of
theories of discrimination. The project will contribute to our understanding of
the factors which influence legal decisionmaking in affirmative action cases and
will expand knowledge of the legal theory of equality. In addition, the project
promises to make a major contribution to understanding of the role of expert
witnesses and social science evidence in the courtroom. Finally, the research
has important implications for shedding light on the relationship of law and the
academy to corporate culture.