* 9011275
* The Effect of Surface Functional Groups on the Dispersion,  Chemical Properties, and Catalytic Behavior of Carbon-      Supported Pd and Pt-Sn Catalysts Prepared from Metal Cluster
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/1991,07/31/1994
* Jonathan Phillips, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 07/31/1994
* USD 339,600.00

This is a study of the effects of different oxygen-containing functional groups
on the dispersion, sinter resistance, and catalytic behavior of palladium on
carbon and of platinum-tin on carbon. The strategy is to alter, in a controlled
way, the concentrations of carboxyl, lactone, carbonyl, hydroxyl, and phenolic
groups on a high-purity carbon. Historically, attempts to do this have been
frustrated by the difficulty of characterizing carbon surfaces. In this study,
carbon surfaces are characterized by reflection infrared spectroscopy, thermal
gravimetric analysis /mass spectrometry, and differential microcalorimetry after
treatment at 1000> to remove all surface groups and after treatments in air,
nitric acid, and hydrogen peroxide to selectively restore certain groups. Novel
approaches to the preparation of metal/carbon catalysts involve the synthesis
and impregnation of palladium and platinum-tin organometallic complexes that can
be easily reduced at low temperatures. The influence of palladium crystallite
size on magnetic and chemical properties is determined by magnetic
susceptibility measurements, heats of adsorption for oxygen, carbon monoxide,
and hydrogen on the metal, infrared spectra of chemisorbed carbon monoxide, and
solid-state magic-angle-spinning nuclear magnetic resonance of chemisorbed
hydrogen as well as palladium-105. The work addresses directly the performance
of carbon- supported noble-metal catalysts, but the results are also relevant to
production and use of carbon electrodes, coal gasification, and petroleum
reforming. Carbon-supported noble-metal catalysts are widely used in the
specialty chemicals and petrochemicals industries.