* 9011098
* Biosynthesis and Downstream Recovery of Therapeutic Proteinsfrom the Milk of Transgenic Animals
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1995
* Janet Young, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* william weigand
* 12/31/1995
* USD 700,000.00

Therapeutic proteins are an example of high-value proteins whose biosynthesis
and downstream recovery has been limited by low productivity, extreme
contamination, FDA requirements and difficulties due to improper modification or
deleterious altering of the protein structure by the genetically engineered
production system such as tissue culture. These problems have led to an
undesirable mode of treatment available to people such as hemophiliacs due to
cost and limited availability of the replacement protein. A detailed
understanding of the structure and activity of the protein produced by the
recombinant system facilitates the engineering of recovery methods for
appropriate forms of the protein of interest as well as having genetic value for
the recovery of other proteins using that same expression system. Transgenic
mice which express human Protein C that is biologically active have been a good
model for the production of a therapeutic protein by using a mammal as a
bioreactor. Protein C is an anti-clotting protein which has potential for the
treatment of clotting problems associated with septic shock, heart attack, and
hip replacement surgery. The distribution of Protein C products is being
evaluated based upon proteolytic and biosynthetic modifications characteristic
of mammary tissue expression. Proteolysis seems to effect the integrity of the
Protein C produced in murine milk. Pig milk doped with Protein C has also shown
this same problem. Transgenic pigs containing the same genetic information as
successfully used in mice are being evaluated as a large scale bioreactor with
the potential of grams of heterologous protein per day. An immunoaffinity
procedure for isolation of Protein C from murine and pig milk is being
developed. The future use of transgenic animal bioreactors depends upon the
knowledge of the biochemical changes that are affected by the mammary tissue and
milk environments.