* 9011664
* Long-term Ecological Research at the North Inlet Estuary
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1991,12/31/1993
* Fred Sklar, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 12/31/1993
* USD 1,264,362.00

A new emphasis on process-based interactions and feedbacks within the North
Inlet ecosystem will be carried out. The coupling of ongoing long-term sampling
programs will process-based experiments and transect analyses across ecological
gradients is planned. Based upon good descriptions of the long-term temporal
variability in ecosystem structure, project emphasis will shift toward
experiments designed to explain that variation. These process-oriented studies
will concentrate on areas where marsh habitats are encroaching into the coastal
forest. Transects within this watershed will be sampled to monitor spatial and
temporal variations in nutrients, the deposition of organic matter, plant and
animal biomass, fish migrations, and water movements. Select locations along a
transect will provide insights on very long-term processes such as marsh
evolution. These measurements will be combined with experiments on nutrient
cycling, sedimentation, decomposition, primary production, fertilization,
trophic dynamics and recruitment in a coordinated effort that emphasizes
exchange and transformation process. Ecosystem models at a variety of spatial
and temporal scales will be developed. They will characterize and summarize the
complexity of the major structural and functional habitats within North Inlet,
test hypotheses, structure our field experiments, and ultimately, be
incorporated into large landscape/climate models. Models will focus our
attention on general systems dynamics and the chemical, physical and biological
interactions which regulate system level processes. This focus will, in turn,
place the North Inlet LTER project in a strong position to evaluate the impacts
of disturbance events (e.g., hurricanes), global climate change and regional
land-use change on system processes at various scales. Key long-term datasets
will be extended into a second decade. This continuity with the past provides
the measurements of long- term variations in the estuarine structure, the
indices by which change is observed. Statistical analyses of the short-term
variability in these long-term data sets have shown that certain environmentally
controlled parameters, such as chlorophyll concentrations or seasonal fish
migrations, are reasonably predictable, while other more biological controlled
parameters, such as the zooplankton abundance or recruitment success of benthos,
were unpredictable and likely to vary greatly within and between seasons.