* 9011610
* Enhancing Chemical Reactivity with Perfluorinated Oxyanions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1993
* Steven Strauss, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 12/31/1993
* USD 252,600.00

With support from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
Program Dr. Steven H. Strauss will synthesize negatively charged ions (anions)
designed to form extremely weak bonds with the positively charged ions (cations)
of metals. The metal salts of such anions are expected to have unusually high
reactivities, so that they can be used to prepare adducts of metals which cannot
be made by any other route. The goal of the project is to understand the
solvation of metal ions by very weak donor solvents such as chlorocarbons and
hydrocarbons. Metal salts of perfluorinated oxyanions such as
oxopentafluorotellurate(VI) and dioxotetrafluorotellurate(VI), and extremely
large perfluorinated anions such as tetrakis- (oxopentafluorotellurato)borate
will be prepared. By virtue of the electronic and steric properties of the
anions, the metal ions will be rendered extremely reactive and are expected to
coordinate to very weakly basic solvents such as methylene chloride,
nitromethane, hexane and liquid xenon. New synthetic methodologies will be
developed for the preparation, isolation and structural and spectroscopic
characterization of metal complexes containing weakly nucleophilic, weakly
bound, and volatile solvent ligands. Complexes of paramagnetic transition metals
and lanthanide ions will be prepared. The coordination of solvent molecules to a
variety of metal ions in neat solvent will be studied by EXAFS spectroscopy.
Potential applications of the reactive complexes to metalized polymers and new
metastable phases of metal salts will be explored.