* 9011015
* The Role of General Scene Structure in Perceiving and       Remembering Pictures
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1992
* Helene Intraub, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 08/31/1992
* USD 65,000.00

A useful approach to studying the processes that underlie visual cognition is
to study the errors that people make. By examining patterns of errors and the
conditions that predictably cause them, it is possible to infer the principles
that guide visual perception and memory. Two lines of research will test the
effects of viewers' general knowledge about the structure of naturalistic scenes
on their ability to perceive and remember pictures. One series of experiments
will examine a perceptual illusion that occurs during high-speed presentation of
pictures (e.g., 9/sec), in which an object from one picture is frequently
misperceived as having occurred in the immediately preceding or following
display in the sequence. The relationship of the object to the display in which
it actually appears, and to those that surround it, will be manipulated such
that the object either will or will not conform to the observer's knowledge of
real-world scenes. The research will evaluate the effect of such manipulations
on frequency of misperception. The other series of experiments will test a
memory distortion that occurs when viewers try to remember close-up photographs
of objects. Observers tend to recollect seeing information that was not present
in the photograph, but is likely to have existed just outside the camera's point
of view. This suggests that general scene knowledge is important in
understanding pictorial representation and that it alters memory in a
predictable and measurable way. This basic research on picture comprehension and
memory has implications for visual communications (e.g., video displays, control
panel design), particulary under conditions in which errors and brief delays may
be crucial to avoid.