* 9011695
* Critical Problems and Research Frontiers in History of      Science and History of Technology to be Held Oct. 31-Nov 3, 1991 in Madison Wisconsin
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1991,02/28/1995
* Keith Benson, History of Science Society
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 02/28/1995
* USD 84,000.00

The History of Science Society and the Society for the History of Technology are
organizing a Conference to be held Oct. 31 to Nov. 3, 1991 in Madison, Wisconsin
on "Critical Problems and Research Frontiers in History of Science and History
of Technology." This conference is being held in conjunction with the annual
meetings of the two societies. The planning for this conference was supported
under DIR-8912577. The conference will bring together leaders of both fields
from around the world in order to discuss the issues to be addressed at the
meeting. Each society is sponsoring symposia that cut across time periods and
geographic boundaries, and provide important comparative insights on the
development of science and technology. Similarly, sessions devoted to
methodologies should stimulate new kinds of research and shed light on the
boundaries of history of science and history of technology from closely related
fields. Plenary sessions are intended to address issues of common concern to all
historians of science and of technology. The papers are being distributed prior
to the meeting. The discussions at the conference will be transcribed and a
final volume of the papers and salient points of the discussion will be
published.