* 9011807
* Political Eras and Representation
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1990,09/01/1992
* James Stimson, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 09/01/1992
* USD 68,700.00

American politics, it is argued, is representative of the forces of American
public opinion. That representation emerges over time as politicians and other
policy actors sense change in national mood, and respond to it. Public mood is
considered to be a vague and general set of orientations toward public policy.
Not support or opposition for particular policies, or particular variations in
particular policies, it is considered so general that its effects are seen in
each of the domestic policy debates of a particular period. Systematic movement
of such moods produces political eras, times when the public is willing to go
along with particular kinds of policy changes, but to restrict others. The
1960s, for example, is widely considered a time when the public was tolerant
toward liberal sorts of policy experimentation across the board, while the
(early) 1980s is the reverse case. These ideas have wide, almost universal,
currency in political commentary, so much so that many would think their truth
too obvious for research. But in political science there is no role at all for
moods and eras in prevailing conceptions of public opinion. There it is usually
thought that attitudes toward policy particulars arise from the policy debate
itself, are specific reactions to specific questions. Or in political
psychological approaches they arise because they meet needs of the opinion
holder. If moods and eras exist, then because information of this sort is
abundant and cheap, it is likely that policy actors would sense them. It is
likely also that acutal policy choices would be affected, that for example,
those who sensed supportive moods for their positions would take stronger
positions. This would produce a kind of over-time representation of a quite
direct and meaningful sort. Changes in public preference would lead to changes
in policy. This is a conception of "representation" that is a good fit to
democratic theory, but quite different from our usual focus on the concept in
geographical terms - - districts and representatives. "Mood" as a purely mass
phenomenon has been successfully measured in the past by this investigator. The
key is the analysis of policy preference "marginals" - - the percent who chose
one or another response to a question - - over time and issues. The measure uses
the leverage of very large numbers of issues and time points to overcome the
inherent shortcomings of the marginals as data and the biases arising from
highly selective measurement and reporting. A methodology is developed for
measuring the central tendency of time series of such preferences. This project
moves on to the next tasks at hand for the study of mood representation, (1)
exploring whether mood might have more than one dimension (such as "economic"
and "social" components - - widely believed to be the case but without
supporting evidence), (2) developing measures of public policy outcomes on a
left-right scale over time, in order to (3) examine the statistical link, if
indeed it exists, between changes over time in public preferences and changes in
public policy.