* 9011894
* Acoustic Structure of Speech: Hyper &amp; Hypo Patterns
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1991,10/31/1994
* Bjorn Lindblom, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 10/31/1994
* USD 560,000.00

ABSTRACT The aim of the project is to collect descriptive quantitative data on
the acoustic characteristics of American English vowels and consonants. The
speech materials selected will be suitable for studying vowel reduction and
vowel-dependent consonant coarticulation. The phonetic segments to be analyzed
will come from three operationally defined styles of speech providing samples
that range from strongly context-dependent (reduced, coarticulated) forms to
neutral and less context-dependent ("clearly" spoken) tokens. The goal is to be
able to specify how the acoustic parameters change across such forms, to
evaluate the perceptual significance of the changes and to propose numerical
models describing and predicting the observed patterns of variation. Key
questions are: Do speakers change their speech when they try to "speak more
clearly", that is when they adapt to listener needs? If so, what acoustic
modifications do they invoke to disambiguate reduced, coarticulated and
perceptually similar forms? What is the nature of the acoustic transforms that
are communicatively successful? The project will take steps towards discovering
the systematic structure of intra-speaker phonetic variation and should thus
produce results relevant to attempts to resolve the invariance issue (Perkell
&amp; Klatt 1986), a classical topic for general theories of spoken language and
one of the unresolved problems still facing the design of automatic systems for
text-to-speech conversion and speech recognition/understanding.