* 9011854
* Mathematical Sciences: Differential Equations, Continuum    Mechanics and Thermodynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1993
* James Serrin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 01/31/1993
* USD 55,819.00

Work on this project will span areas of mathematical research in partial
differential equations to studies on the mathematical principles underlying of
mechanics and thermodynamics. Included in this effort will be the analysis of
ground states for nonlinear operators. These are solutions of second order
elliptic partial differential equations of divergent type which become small at
infinity. The equations not only have physical significance, but also occur
naturally in geometric studies involving mean curvature of surfaces and their
generalizations. Although ground states are known to exist in many classes of
equations, it is not known whether or not any exist having finite energy. Work
will continue studying this question. On the foundational level, studies will
focus on the principal axioms of classical mechanics relative to the balancing
of linear and angular momenta. The independence and reasonableness of these
axioms will be challenged through the introduction of a modified axiom system in
which neither of the main balance axioms is postulated and in which inertial
frames are not required. Instead, a point of view in which the invariance of
power or generalized work, or the invariance of balance of thermodynamic energy,
should imply the balance of momentum, will be taken. Another line of
investigation continues an extensive study into one of the primary open
questions of thermodynamics: the existence and uniqueness of entropy for a given
thermodynamical system. Only in irreversible processes is this unclear - even
existence can be in doubt. A particular application to this research would be to
that of a compressible Navier-Stokes fluid where entropy is only verifiable
under an additional hypothesis of fiberings of the flow.