* 9011869
* Snow Cover as an Indicator of Climate Change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1994
* David Robinson, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Holly
* 02/28/1994
* USD 94,407.00

Although much of the concern about possible global warming has focused on
changes in temperatures, some climatologists, geographers, and other atmospheric
scientists have noted that substantial changes in the amount, form, and timing
of precipitation also may occur. The extent and duration of snow cover is one
measure by which changing precipitation and temperature patterns may be
identified, and snow cover is a variable for which many nations have historical
data that extends over decades. Analyses of these historical data are essential
to help identify natural variability in snow cover, a pattern that must be
distinguished if changes in snowfall resulting from human activities or other
factors are to be identified. This project will integrate into a single,
coherent database the daily measurements of snow cover and related variables for
roughly 1,000 observation stations in the United States, Soviet Union, Canada,
China, and several European nations. Records in the USA and USSR extend back to
the early years of the 20th Century. These integrated data will be statistically
analyzed to test hypotheses about the spatial and temporal variability of snow
cover and to differentiate random variability from long-term trends. The most
valuable contribution of this project will be the integration of historical data
into a single database, which will be available for use by this investigator and
by other scientists for a wide range of inquiries into climatic variability and
change. The project also will provide analyses of fundamental variations in snow
cover across the Northern Hemisphere during the 20th Century, thereby enhancing
general understandings of changing climatic patterns over the last 100 years.