* 9011353
* Collaborative Research:  Genetic Divergence and Life        History in a Plant Population
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1990,10/31/1994
* Maureen Stanton, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Mark Courtney
* 10/31/1994
* USD 148,100.00

Most natural populations of plants and animals display great genetic
variability, even though many factors reduce genetic diversity within a species.
Plant and animal breeders, as well as conservation biologists, often attempt to
maintain genetic diversity within desirable lines, since such diversity is
thought to reduce the possibility of extinction due to inbreeding depression,
disease, parasites, and new environmental challenges. Understanding how genetic
diversity is engendered and maintained in natural populations is therefore a
major goal of conservation biologists. This project will focus on the ways in
which spatial heterogeneity can bring about genetic diversification within a
single plant population Microgeographic variation due to slope aspect, snow
melt, water evaporation, or elevation can force plants within a single site to
flower at different times and can lead to different selective pressures on early
and late flowering individuals. Population genetics theory suggest that these
conditions will lead to the maintenance of high genetic diversity. In this study
system, variation in snow melt schedule imposes variable growth and flowering
schedules on the alpine plant community. How the temporal and spatial components
of this heterogeneity maintain genetic variation within an alpine population of
Ranunculus will be determined. This research will produce insight into factors
that preserve genetic diversity in economically useful plant and animal breeds,
as well as in threatened populations.