* 9011013
* Haptic Perceptual Instruments
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1994
* Michael Turvey, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 07/31/1994
* USD 275,000.00

The haptic nervous system allows one to know about nearby objects and surfaces
by means of contact with the body. Without having to look at an object, a person
can get an impression of some of its properties by holding it and wielding it.
This research conceptualizes the haptic subsystem in wielding as a measurement
instrument which capitalizes smartly on lawful regularities, such as the
constant pattern of the resistances of an object to rotations in different
directions. The experiments will examine the haptic perception of object length,
angular separation of components, orientations, and shape. They will do so for
conditions where one object or two are held in the hand. People in the
experiments will respond by adjusting (visible) movable surfaces or pointers to
quantify the perceived properties. The experiments will attempt to identify the
mechanical variables that relate uniquely to the perceived geometric properties
of the hand-held objects, and to show that wielding must be done in a definite
though complex way in order for a particular property to be perceived.
Identifying these hand-related capabilities and their physical basis will help
the design of sensory and motor prostheses, robotic limbs, and clever tools.
Understanding the form and function of haptic perceptual instruments will
advance the theory of special purposes cognitive mechanisms.