* 9011339
* Steroid Receptor Mechanisms in Developing Brain
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1992
* Stuart Tobet, Eunice Kennedy Shriver Ctr Mental Retard Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 01/31/1992
* USD 33,988.00

Sex differences in brain and behavior are a result of the perinatal hormonal
environment. Exposure to testicular androgens during critical developmental
periods can permanently alter the anatomy, biochemistry and physiology of the
brain. A major question is how do the gonadal steroids regulate the
differentiation of the brain at the cellular level. Dr. Tobet has identified two
sex-specific monoclonal antibodies which are influenced by perinatal androgen
treatment. He will use these monoclonal antibodies as markers to follow
selective molecular changes in development which are hormonally dependent. Dr.
Tobet will pay special attention to the time course of antigen expression since
it is believed that temporal synchronization between brief increases in gonadal
steroid signals and transient neural changes induce sexual differentiation of
the brain. This work will provide a greater understanding of the early
manifestations of steroid actions which lead to normal brain development.
Moreover, the results could help unravel the abnormal events that underlie major
birth defects involving the sexual differentiation process. Finally, the
importance of these hormonal events is underscored by evidence of sex
differences and androgen influences in the susceptibility to certain syndromes,
learning disorders and neurological disorders.