* 9011927
* Long-Term Ecological Research on the Antarctic Marine       Ecosystem:  An Ice-Dominated Environment
* GEO,OPP
* 10/15/1990,12/31/1997
* Robin Ross, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 12/31/1997
* USD 3,550,650.00

The annual advance and retreat of pack ice may be the major physical determinant
of spatial and temporal changes in the structure and function of antarctic
marine communities. Interannual cycles and/or trends in the annual extent of
pack ice may also have significant effects on all levels of the food web, from
total annual primary production to breeding success in seabirds. Historical
records indicate a six to eight year cycle in the maximum extent of pack ice in
the winter. During this decade, winters were colder in 1980 and 1981, and again
in 1986 and 1987. Winter-over survival in Adelie penguins varied on the same
cycle, higher in winters with heavy pack ice. This Long Term Ecological Research
(LTER) project will define ecological processes linking the extent of annual
pack ice with the biological dynamics of different trophic levels within
antarctic marine communities. The general focus is on interannual variability in
representative populations from the antarctic marine food web and on mechanistic
linkages that control the observed variability in order to develop broader
generalizations applicable to other large marine environments. To achieve these
objectives, data from several spatial and temporal scales, including remote
sensing, a field approach that includes an annual monitoring program, a series
of process-oriented research cruises, and a modeling effort to provide linkages
on multiple spatial and temporal scales between biological and environmental
components of the ecosystem will be employed.