* 9012908
* Transboundary Flows of Capital-Related Income
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1993
* Adam Rose, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/1993
* USD 96,989.00

Income flows across regions are at the core of important theories in Geography
and Regional Science relating to regional capital accumulation and corporate
dominance. Major problems with research relating to interregional income flows
are the lack of a consistent theory about the nature of flows and the lack of an
adequate data base to test hypotheses. The purpose of this project is to
investigate income flows across boundaries Transboundary flows of personal
income and consumption expenditures include the proceeds from the absentee
ownership of capital, commuter salaries, and tourist spending. The investigators
will develop a data base on flows of capital-related income across state
boundaries by refining and reconciling previously unavailable data from the
Internal Revenue Service, the Bureau of Economic Analysis, and the Bureau of the
Census. The data will be used to discern patterns of capital-related income
flows across regions. These patterns will be based on the regression of these
"transboundary" flows on several important variables thought to explain capital
flows. The data will also be used to test a key hypothesis regarding the extent
to which economic characteristics of business operations and regional economic
structure affect capital accumulation. The study will build a data base on
interregional capital flows. It will contribute to regional capital theory,
which has long been constrained by lack of capital flow data, and to other
research that involves the development of nonsurvey methods for the construction
of social accounting matrices at the sub-state level. The study will assess the
explanatory value of regional differences in firm size, character of financial
institutions, and credit policies in the explanation of these flows. By
increasing our understanding of the ways that economic activities expand and
contract, local and regional officials will be better able to anticipate and
plan for these marked multiplier effects.