* 9012586
* High Resolution Paleomagnetic Secular Variation and SedimentHistory in Sediments from the Gulf of California: DSDP Site 480 and Atlantis II Cores
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1993
* Robert Karlin, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 08/31/1993
* USD 90,026.00

Anoxic, varved sediments are accumulating along the margins of the Gulf of
California at especially high rates. The temporal and spatial distribution of
these sediments remains to be determined, and consequently a full understanding
of their origin is uncertain. Dr. Karlin has studied the geochemical and
paleomagnetic character of these materials at DSDP Site 480. The present award
is to resample this Site and to participate on a coring cruise in June '90 to
augment this data set. He has five objectives: 1) refine the paleomagnetic time
scale at Site 480, calibrating to a delta O18 record that will be measured at
WHOI, and to an automated varve-counting technique in collaboration with similar
work by A. Soutar (Scripps) on box cores to be collected in June; 2) reconstruct
the last 250 Kyrs of productivity, ocean circulation , and continental climate
from XRF and LECO geochemical analyses from Site 480; 3) examine the last 20Kyrs
of paleomagnetic secular variation recorded in the upcoming piston cores, dating
with AMS C14, delta O18 and varve counting; 4) combine rock magnetic,
sedimentological and geochemical studies to evaluate the effects of diagenesis
upon the fidelity of paleomagnetic signals recorded in rapidly deposited
sediments; and 5) use similar rock magnetic and geochemical analyses to
characterize the last 20Kyrs of spatial and temporal variations in productivity
and terrigenous input to the Gulf of California.