* 9012737
* U.S.- Jordan Cooperative Research:  Electrical Studies of   Ferroelectric Thin Films
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1991,12/31/1992
* James Scott, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Edward Murdy
* 12/31/1992
* USD 13,350.00

Description: This proposal supports the collaboration of Drs. J.F. Scott and L.
Kazmersky of the University of Colorado at Boulder, Dr. R. Bitar, University of
Jordan, Amman, Jordan and Dr. A. Shawabkah, Birzeit University, West Bank,
Palestine. The purpose of the collaboration is to produce true device equations
for ferroelectric film memories. Project funding will help support Dr. Bitar
during his sabbatical stay at the University of Colorado as well as allow Dr.
Scott to travel to Dr. Bitar's home institution. Existing facilities in Jordan
are capable of carrying out this research, therefore, when Dr. Bitar returns to
Jordan, studies can continue. Scope: The proposed collaboration will bring
together research scientists from the U.S. and Jordan (Dr. Shawabkah is a
Jordanian citizen as well as Dr. Bitar) working in the area of ferroelectric
thin films. It is anticipated that this collaborative research will result in
the development of ferroelectric thin film memories. Dr. Bitar will have an
opportunity to familiarize himself with the techniques utilized by the team at
the University of Colorado and then transfer this technology to facilities at
his home institution. Therefore, this proposal fulfils objectives of the Science
in Developing Countries Program in its exchange and transfer of scientific
knowledge through an international collaboration.