* 9012729
* Development of an Epi-Illuminating Fiber Optic Microprobe   for Analysis of Chloroplast Specialization and Measurement  of Chemical Parameters within Plant Tissue.
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1990,02/28/1994
* Thomas Vogelmann, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 02/28/1994
* USD 280,966.00

This work will develop an epi-illumination fiber optic microprobe that could be
used to analyze metabolic events at microscopic sites within biological tissues.
Monochromatic light from a tunable dye laser will be coupled into an optical
fiber and guided to the opposite end where there is a microscopic tip (5 um
diameter) that can be inserted within a biological target tissue. The light will
be used to stimulate fluorescence of intrinsic molecules, artificial
fluorochromes or to monitor absorbance changes of electron carriers and
metabolic intermediates. We propose to develop and test the instrument within
plants but in principle, the epi-illumination probe could be used in a wide
variety of biological systems. Specific developmental efforts will be directed
toward (1) analysis of the specialization of different absorbance changes of
photosynthetic electron carriers; (2) the development of fiber optic chemical
senors that can be used to monitor metabolic changes, such as CO2 concentration,
within cells and tissues. This will be pursued by attaching polymeric films with
embedded fluorochromes to the probe tip that undergo changes in fluorescence in
response to changes in the probe environment. The epi-illumination fiber optic
probe will provide information both in vivo and in real time within living
tissues. The response time is rapid (ns) and the probe will have high spatial
resolution so that it will be possible to measure events at microsites within
light-scattering tissues, cells and to examine the physiological specialization
of small numbers (3-4) of organelles such as chloroplasts.