* 9012157
* Bacterial Metabolism of Low Molecular Weight Thiols in      Coastal Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1995
* Barrie Taylor, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/1995
* USD 239,004.00

Bound thiols are probably significant microbial substrates, since over 95% of
the 3-MPA and methanethiol fractions recovered from the sediments are bound by
disulfide linkages to sediment particles. In previous research,
3-Mercaptopropionate (3-MPA) was detected as major thiol in the anoxic, coastal,
marine sediments; present at lower concentrations were mercaptopyruvate,
mercaptoethanol and mercaptoacetate. 3-MPA occurred as its oxidized, dithio-
form, in oxic regions of the sediments. Dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP), an
osmolyte in marine plants, was transformed in sediment slurries to 3-MPA by
sequential demethylation with 3-methiolpropionate as an intermediate.
Homocysteine and methionine were also converted to 3-MPA. These transformations
need establishing by the isolation of the micro- organisms that are involved.
Bacteria that demethylate DMSP or 3-methiolpropionate will be isolated, as will
those which dissimilate and assimilate 3-MPA or its methylated precursors.
Sulfate-reducers that incompletely oxidize organic compounds will be tested for
conversions of sulfur-containing amino acids to 3- MPA, mercaptopyruvate,
mercaptoethanol and mercaptoacetate. The ability of sulfate-reducers to oxidize
mercaptopyruvate, mercaptoacetate and mercaptoethanol will also be studied. The
research will reveal biochemical conversions of organic thiols that are
characteristic of, and perhaps unique to, marine sediments.