* 9012963
* Nathiagali Summer College on Physics and Contemporary Needs,June 1990, Nathiagali, Pakistan, Group Travel Award for U.S.Participants.
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1991
* Jack Crow, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 05/31/1991
* USD 15,000.00

Description: This project supports participation by six U.S. scientists in the
Nathiagali Summer College on Physics and Contemporary Needs to be held in
Pakistan in June 1990. That school has been held annually since 1976. NSF has
supported U.S. participation in four of these years. The school has some
impressive features: the continuity of plans and programs, the continuous
support of European scientific organization including the Center for Theoretical
Physics in Trieste, the high caliber of lectures from the U.S. and other
countries and the broad scope of students and faculty members from South Asian
countries who attend. The meetings are evolving into one of Pakistans, and South
Asias, main scientific events every year. Topics typically provide overview of
recent developments in various branches of physics and related fields
(materials, biophysics) and the implications for the society. Lectures,
seminars, and workshops and discussions cover subjects such as energy, condensed
matter physics, lasers, computational physics, nuclear and particle physics,
astrophysics, cosmology and biophysics. The topics to be covered at 1990 meeting
include development of advanced materials, accelerator physics, recent trends in
solar energy and other alternate energy sources, and atmospheric and oceanic
research. The meetings lead to solid interaction between scientists from the
LDC's of South Asia and those from the Western countries with potential for
futher collaboration. Proceedings of these meetings are usually published and
widely disseminated. Scope: This proposal meets very well the objectives of
NSF's Science in Develping Countries Program in providing a strong link with
LDC's to help build lasting relationships in Science and Technology.