* 9012803
* Support for the Systematics Research Collection at the      Missouri Botanical Garden
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1991,08/31/1995
* James Solomon, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Continuing Grant
* James R. Estes
* 08/31/1995
* USD 1,388,609.00

The Missouri Botanical Garden is one of the world's most important centers for
botanical research and for curation of plant specimens. The Curators of the
Herbarium are leading researchers on tropical plants, and the collections
amassed at the Garden represent an enormous and unique resource for research.
Botanists from around the world visit these collections and request specimens on
loan, and access to these collections is critical for hundreds of current
research projects. Unfortunately, the rate at which new collections have arrived
has outpaced the Garden's ability to mount, identify, label, and file specimens
in the collections. More than 300,000 specimens have accumulated in "backlog",
and the research community has expressed strong desire for access to these
specimens. Dr. Solomon will oversee an aggressive three-year campaign to
eliminate this backlog, and to put in place curatorial procedures that will
prevent future backlogs from accumulating. Processing the specimen backlog at
the Missouri Botanical Garden will benefit research collections around the
world. Research into tropical biodiversity, medicinal use of native plants,
ecological and evolutionary studies all rely on these collections, and
processing the backlog into accessible collections will make the Garden's
Herbarium collection a more comprehensive research resource.