* 9012192
* Contextual and Demographic Influences on Judicial           Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1991
* Lettie Wenner, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 07/31/1991
* USD 12,000.00

Background characteristics of judges at all levels of our judicial system are
often used to predict the kinds of decisions they will make on legal questions.
Two rival hypotheses compete to explain policy makers' decisions: (1) values
absorbed throughout their lives as reflected in the demographic profiles of the
individuals and (2) the immediate pressures placed upon them by the social-
political context in which they make their decisions. A criticism of traditional
judicial behavioral research is that scholars often focus on one type of causal
variable to the exclusion of all others. This Research Opportunities for Women
Planning Grant will allow the investigator to do preliminary research prior to
submitting a request for a larger study that will both measure and differentiate
between demographic and contextual variables which influence judges' decisions.
The research will use environmental and natural resource management cases which
deal with economic regulation. During this planning phase, a data base of court
cases on environmental policy will be developed and measures will be created.
The bulk of the investigator's time during this phase will be devoted to various
conceptual and measurement problems which need to be resolved. Little is known
about whether values accepted during the early socialization process continue to
dominate an individual's thinking or whether pressures from the immediate
environment exert more influence. By beginning this investigation in the
judicial arena, we may be able to expand general theory concerning the
socialization process.