* 9012069
* Efferent Control of Visual Sensitivity:  Circadian          Modulation
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1994
* Robert Barlow, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 01/31/1994
* USD 287,000.00

In many animals the brain has some control over its own sensory input. The
horseshoe crab, Limulus, provides a rather simple visual system demonstrating
that what the brain tells the eye can influence what the eye tells the brain.
The incoming visual information is called the afferent signal, and the central
regulatory signal to the eye is called the efferent signal. There is a day-
night, or circadian, rhythm in the brain that transmits efferent nerve impulses
to the eyes during the night, inducing multiple changes in the retina of the eye
that produce a million-fold increase in sensitivity of the eye, for working in
the dark. This project will use anatomy, physiology, behavior, and computational
neuroscience approaches to study how the retinal rhythms of sensitivity relate
to changes in the visual system and the animal's behavior. Long- term
physiological recordings will be made with precise control of efferent signal to
the retina. The retina of this compound eye contains about 1000 nerve cells, and
is the largest network of neurons for which a quantitative description exists.
Its properties will be modeled computationally on the massively parallel
Connection Machine, and the resulting properties will be related to the animal's
visual behavior, particularly the ability to see and respond to the presence of
other animals at night underwater. Results from this unique study, from
molecules to behavior, will have an impact on work in visual neuroscience,
biological rhythms, efferent control of sensory systems, feedback regulation of
engineering systems, and on understanding more about the neural basis of
behavior.