* 9012421
* Mental Models of STS Issues:  A Comparison of Engineering   and Humanities Students
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1994
* Cynthia Atman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 02/28/1994
* USD 82,000.00

In addressing the need for a technologically literate public and for technically
trained people sensitive to the social context, it would be useful to have
information about the values and knowledge already had by people who are to be
further educated. There is scarcely any empirical data about the values and
relevant knowledge with which undergraduates enter courses, such as STS courses,
intended to foster these kinds of literacy. The courses, therefore, derive from
a synthesis formed by specialists and instructors and, at best, superficial
generalizations about the starting points at which students find themselves.
This research project addresses the need for empirical data about the
understanding of STS issues with which both humanities and engineering
undergraduates come into these courses. By interviewing undergraduates from
engineering and the humanities and also specialists in STS studies, the
researchers will gather data to begin to shed light on the needs of students in
STS courses. The findings will also be valuable for gaining a clearer
understanding of how to go about studying these issues in a more comprehensive
way, less burdened by untested assumptions. The findings will be disseminated to
those who can make use of them in STS and engineering courses, and to wider
audiences as well. The investigators are very well qualified; the institutional
resources are very good; the issues are important; results will be appropriately
disseminated. The project is meritorious and recommended for award.