* 9012025
* Renin-Angiotensin System Within the Central Nervous System
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1991
* Judith Kalinyak, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 06/30/1991
* USD 15,080.00

Cardiovascular disorders, such as hypertension, afflicts approximately 20% of
the adult population, and is the prime cause of congestive heart failure, stroke
and renal diseased. The understanding of the development of hypertension is most
adults remains obscure but the research has centered mainly around measurements
of hormones within the blood stream. Angiotensin II is a neuropeptide hormone
that elicits a reproducible complex of behavioral, cardiovascular, neurologic
and endocrine responses when injected into the brain. Given its major influence
on the regulation of blood pressure, it has been suggested that abnormal
regulation of angiotensin II in the brain might be etiologic in the development
of hypertensin. Dr. Kalinyak will examine the sight of synthesis of this peptide
and determine its effects on neuronal activity. Her preliminary data indicate
that non- neuronal cells of the brain, the glial cells, produce the angiotensin
II and the research planning grant will allow to explore this possibility using
cell culture systems. This work will help clarify the function of neuropeptides
in glial cells and neurons. Moreover, it could lead to a better understanding of
the importance of brain angiotensin in the development of hypertension in
adults.