* 9012791
* Political Pressure and Fiscal Federalism:  A Model of State Mandates on Local Government Expenditures
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1992
* William H. Hoyt, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1992
* USD 25,641.00

Studies in federalism have traditionally examined whether certain goods or
services are best provided at the local, state, or federal levels of government.
Inefficiencies in local provision of goods and services can be addressed in a
federalist system by shifting either the production or financing of the local
public good to higher levels of government . A much less discussed alternative
is the imposition of mandates by higher levels of government on subordinate
units. Mandates are quantity constraints on the subordinate units of government
that require an increase or decrease in the provision of the good depending on
the direction of the spillover. This research project develops a political
economy model of federalism that focuses on mandates. For empirical purposes,
the model emphasizes local and state government relationships but it could be
easily extended to state and federal relationships. The model is empirically
tested using expenditure data for various categories of locally provided goods
and services. The significance of this project lies in combining the political
process with the normative economic models of local public goods. Attempts to
analyze intergovernment policies cannot be successful without a positive model
of fiscal federalism. This project takes a first step in answering very
important policy questions regarding the determinants of which levels of
government provide particular goods and analyzing the nature of the interaction
between levels of government.