* 9012311
* Technological Innovation as a Cognitive Process
* BIO,DBI
* 11/15/1990,10/31/1991
* W. Carlson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 10/31/1991
* USD 82,430.00

In the history of technology, nothing is more mysterious yet more central that
the act of invention. Technological historians, however, have yet to develop a
precise interpretation of how an inventor identifies an opportunity, develops a
new idea, and manifests it in a physical device. In response to this conceptual
lacuna, Drs. Carlson and Gorman are comparing how Alexander Graham Bell, Thomas
A. Edison, and Elisha Gray developed the telephone from 1870 to 1880. They have
chosen to focus on these inventors because their work is well documented by
notebooks, sketches, and artifacts and because their efforts to perfect this
invention have received limited scholarly attention. To analyze and compare the
works of these inventors, they are drawing on recent work in cognitive science.
In particular, they are considering three elements of the cognitive process of
invention: how an inventor conceptualizes an invention (mental model); the
strategies he or she uses to develop an invention (heuristics); and the specific
technical devices he or she uses to construct an invention (mechanical
representations). Through this research, they expect to enrich the history of
technology with a new conceptual framework and a detailed study of a major
invention, suggest to cognitive scientists how technological creativity may be
effectively studied, and help interested laymen see inventors not as mysterious
geniuses but as individuals with specific talents and skills.