* 9012818
* Spectral Stratigraphy of DSDP and ODP Cores from the        Equatorial Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1993
* Timothy Herbert, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 08/31/1993
* USD 86,494.00

The most widely used methods of high-resolution marine stratigraphy rely on the
record of changes in delta-018, paleontology or paleomagnetics. Unfortunately,
these techniques are limited to sediments either rich in carbonate- or silica-
bearing fossils, or from magnetically oriented cores. Dr. Herbert will develop
techniques for using GRAPE (Gamma Ray Attenuation Porosity Evaluator) bulk
density measurements to identify orbital frequencies in 5 DSDP and ODP cores
from the equatorial eastern Pacific. These "Milankovitch" signals are known
within 2% precision back through the Neogene, and the author intends to "tune"
the sedimentation rates to fit these frequencies. Preliminary work has shaon
that a "moving window" scheme will result in 5% precision and 100 Kyr resolution
of sedimentation rates back to 17 MY. As this is a developmental experiment, he
proposes several validation checks against existing biostratigraphy and
paleomagnetic calibrations, as well as inter-site consistency checks. If found
to be valid, this technique will not only provide much improved chronologies at
these and other cores, but will also: 1) make possible equally improved mass
accumulation rate estimates for CaCO3, Corg, SiO2, and aeolian dust; 2) provide
the first chance of finding paleoceanographic periodicities longer than 500
Kyrs; and 3) lead to better understanding of the mean and variance of orbital
forcings back to 17 MY.