* 9012193
* U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research on the Hydrodynamic       Stability of a Resuspended Layer
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1993
* Andreas Acrivos, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 09/30/1993
* USD 11,062.00

This award supports Professor Andreas Acrivos of the City College of New York to
collaborate with Professor Uwe Schaflinger of the Institute of Fluid Dynamics
and Heat Transfer, Technical University of Vienna, in a study of the
hydrodynamic stability of a resuspended layer. Several graduate students and
postdoctoral associates of Dr. Acrivos will participate in the project. It has
recently been established that under laminar conditions an initially settled bed
of solid particles is resuspended due to action of shear. Further experiments
have shown that the interface between the resuspended layer and the clear fluid
becomes unstable due to interfacial waves. The aim of the proposed cooperative
research is to combine numerical calculations with carefully directed
experiments in order to verify the theoretical prediction of a transition from a
spatially to an absolutely unstable flow and to gain insight into the mechanisms
responsible for the creation and the breakup of the waves. The research will use
an experimental setup designed and built by Dr. Schaflinger to study the basic
resuspension flow in a two dimensional channel. He and his group in Vienna are
very experienced with experimental techniques, analytical and numerical methods
in fluid dynamics and specifically in two phase flows. Complementing this is the
internationally recognized expertise of the group at CCNY in the fields of shear
induced migration of particles, hydrodynamic stability and rheology. Their
ongoing theoretical investigation of viscous resuspension will be greatly
enhanced by this experimental collaboration. Resuspension plays an important
role in most sediment transport phenomena, including industrial problems such as
cross flow microfiltration. The conditions under which a settled layer of
negatively buoyant particles will resuspend are not well understood and are
usually associated with turbulence at high Reynolds numbers. Resuspension can
also occur at low Reynolds numbers for which inertial effects are insignificant
and the flow is laminar. This project will produce a systematic study of the
instabilities at the interface of two superposed stratified fluids by adjusting
the parameters of the flow in accordance with the ongoing analytical and
numerical investigations at CCNY. It should result in fundamental insights into
viscous resuspension and the stability of multiphase flows.