* 9012669
* Light-Dependent Oxygen Cycling in Marine Systems Measured   by 18o Tracer Techniques
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/1990,02/28/1993
* Todd Kana, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/1993
* USD 304,536.00

Dr. Kana will address the general question of "light respiration" in marine
waters. Considerable direct and indirect evidence indicates that light can
significantly affect oxygen consumption: in some cases elevating the rate up to
10 times the rate of dark respiration. What this stimulation of oxygen
consumption means in terms of organic cycling is very poorly understood due to
the historical difficulty in measuring the fluxes and the simultaneous occurance
of at least 5 distinguishable oxygen uptake processes. Recent development in Dr.
Kana's laboratory of two isotope (180) methods capable of measuring oxygen
cycling in the light provide the basis for tackling this problem. The research
coordinates field measurements of light-dependent oxygen uptake and evolution in
an estuarine habitat with controlled laboratory studies of oxygen cycling in
phytoplankton species isolated from the study site. The major variables of
interest are phytoplankton composition, defined by seasonal cycles, and light
intensity. Field experiments center around characterizing the effects of
seasonal and event scale phenomena on oxygen cycling, especially as mediated by
the phytoplankton. Laboratory experiments center around the identification of
the physiological processes responsible for light-dependent oxygen uptake. In a
related study, Dr. Kana will continue collaboration with Drs. Carpenter and
Capone in the study of oxygen cycling in Trichodesmium.