* 9012471
* Attentional Mechanisms of Feature Integration
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/1990,05/31/1994
* Asher Cohen, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 05/31/1994
* USD 150,000.00

A large variety of evidence suggests that processing of visual objects is done
in two separate stages. The visual system first parses the scene into visual
features such as color, line orientation, and direction of motion. At this early
stage of processing there is no distinction between features that originate from
different objects in the scene. The particular visual features of each object in
the scene are conjoined at a later stage. The analysis of the visual features at
the early stage of processing creates a serious problem for the visual system.
Given that there is no distinction at the early stage between features of
different objects, how does the visual system correctly conjoin features of one
object without confusing them with features of other objects in the scene? What
is(are) the mechnism(s) for feature integration? This research follows from the
hypothesis that the visual system uses two different mechanisms for feature
integration. One mechanism, the coarse location mechanism, is based on the
notion that visual features are perceived at the early stage with coarse
location information. The coarse location mechanism integrates features with
overlapping location information. This mechanism, however, is not useful when
objects are located spatially near each other. In these situations, a second
mechanism, the attentional binding mechanism must be used. The attentional
mechanism works by marking an area in space and conjoining the features present
in that area. Separate sets of experiments will examine properties of the two
mechanisms. The first set of experiments will explore some of the basic
characteristics of the coarse location mechanism and will show its applicability
to everyday situations. For example, can the coarse location information detect
two targets in parallel? Does it use a simple (linear) activation rule for
integrating features? Can it ignore irrelevant features? The second set of
experiments will examine several spatial properties of the attentional binding
mechanism and will look at possible connections between the operation of this
mechanism and some of the Gestalt grouping principles. This research may lead to
mechanisms for simulation of human object recognition by an artificial system.