* 9012585
* A Formalism for the Electromagnetic to Hadronic Signal Ratio (e/h) and the Energy Resolution of Hadron Calorimeters
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/1990,02/29/1992
* Elliott Treadwell, Chicago State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/29/1992
* USD 12,000.00

The investigator proposes a formalism which will express (e/h) in terms of the
longitudinal deposition of high energy hadrons, the number of radiation lengths
in the calorimeter, the number of absorption lengths, relative weight of the
electromagnetic core of the shower and the relative weight of the hadronic part
of the shower. The data sample will represent lepton and hadron energies from 10
Gev to 150 Gev; and Bock's logarithmic energy dependent functions alpha, betha,
delta and w, will be used to parametrize the hadron shower profiles. The
formalism will be tested with data taken in calorimeters using 238U, Pb or Fe
absorbers and plastic scientillator, liquid argon, or silicon readout. The PI
plans to add several students to the research project at Chicago State
University and therefore have developed a mathematics workshop/tutorial in that
regard. The workshop incorporates individualized instruction with extensive
problem solving sessions for students pursuing bachelors degrees in engineering
and physical sciences. The preliminary plan will: 1) develop mathematical skills
in undergraduate students; 2) assess the significance of the research and
identify the analytical techniques that will be used, and 3) apply the formalism
to experimental data from colliding beam experiments at CERN and Fermi National
Accelerator Laboratory.