* 9012540
* Pathogenesis in a Widespread, Estuarine Copepod:  Etiology  and Demographic Effects
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/1990,02/29/1992
* Darcy Lonsdale, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/29/1992
* USD 45,699.00

Factors influencing the dynamics of aquatic populations have been studied for
decades. Understandably, physical and biological factors that are best
quantified are those that have received the most attention. A factor that has
been severely neglected by investigators is disease. It is inarguable that
disease may affect organismic performance and reduce ecological potential. In
this research, Dr. Lonsdale will examine an affliction at the level of its
effects on individual organisms and the demography of populations. Her research
will focus on Scottolana canadensis, a widespread, estuarine copepod. An
affliction in S. canadensis that can render females unable to reproduce. Dr.
Lonsdale's experience with the ecology and culture of this copepod will permit a
variety of experiments designed to determine the cause of the affliction and its
potential for affecting the abundance of this species. The methodology includes
histological examinations of healthy and afflicted copepods with light and
electron microscopy and life-table experiments using anti-biotics to help
characterize the agent responsible for pathogenesis. To test the hypothesis that
the affliction negatively impact copepod growth, Dr. Lonsdale will conduct bi-
weekly sampling of S. canadensis from environmentally "stressed" and "pristine"
estuaries on Long Island.