* 9012315
* Molecular Analysis of the Teopod Mutations in Maize
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1994
* R. Poethig, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 12/31/1994
* USD 150,000.00

During shoot growth all plants progress through morphologically and
physiologically distinct juvenile and adult developmental phases. The mechanism
regulating the expression of these phases and the transition from one phase to
another is poorly understood, particularly in herbaceous plants where the
juvenile phase is often brief. The Teopod (Tp) mutations of maize prolong the
expression of juvenile traits, and thereby provide an opportunity to study the
genetic basis of phase change in a herbaceous species. To determine the function
of these genes it is necessary to identify their products and study how they are
expressed during shoot growth. Ac-induced mutations of Tp2 will be identified
and used to clone this gene. The structure and the sequence of this gene will be
determined and transcribed regions of the locus will be used as probes to study
its expression in both normal and mutant plants. These experiments will
initially be performed by Northern analysis and later by in situ hybridization.
To facilitate the cloning and genetic analysis of both this and the other Tp
genes, an RFLP map of the region surrounding each gene will be constructed. The
function of the Tp loci will also be studied by determining their effect on the
expression of genes whose expression is normally limited to either the juvenile
or adult phase of shoot growth. These latter studies will reveal whether the
character of the shoot is determined by a series of sequential programs, or in a
combinatorial fashion by parallel developmental programs.