* 9012333
* Global Models of Chemical Fluxes in the Oceans
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/1991,01/31/1995
* Jorge Sarmiento, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger W. Baier
* 01/31/1995
* USD 579,039.00

Chemical fluxes from the ocean's surface into the deep sea vary over the ocean
in response to the supply of nutrients, the availability of light, and the
dispersion of newly-produced material by local turbulence and sinking. Funding
is requested to continue the development of global scale models which integrate
biological and chemical components into three- dimensional ocean general
circulation models (GCM's) that simulate the major features on the ocean's
physical forcing. Towards this end we have already developed a series of
component models describing the upper ocean ecology and water column
transformations, and carried out a first series of three-dimensional simulations
in which these components have been included separately in ocean GCM's. Our
Atlantic Ocean GCM model of upper ocean ecology, while reproducing the gross
features of ocean biology, such as the spring bloom, low productivity in the
subtropical gyre, and high productivity in the equatorial region, has numerous
problems, some of which can be traced to the GCM, and others of which are due to
the ecology model. We propose to carry out a series of new experiments with
higher resolution, more realistic GCM's; and to work on the continued
development of our ecosystem model, with the inclusion of 2 size classes of
phytoplankton and zooplankton being our first priority. We also propose to enter
a new phase in our work of working closely with JGOFS investigators in analyzing
the results of the North Atlantic Bloom Experiment, and planning future studies
such as the Pacific Equatorial Experiment. Our world ocean GCM model of water
column transformations shows an improved fit to observations when the formation
and regeneration of dissolved organic matter is included in addition to
particulate organic matter. In addition to continuing our effort to improve our
understanding of the production and regeneration of dissolved organic matter in
the water column (a process which will be greatly helped by additional
measurements), we propose to proceed on development of a more detailed model of
particle dynamics which makes use of the ecosystem approach we have employed in
the upper ocean and the observational constraints obtained by reactive trace
metals radioisotopes. We also propose to complete an ongoing reanalysis of
Redfield ratios which thus far suggests that as much as 1/4 of the organic
nitrogen sinking below 1000 m may be getting denitrified.