* 9012492
* National Conference and Clearinghouse on Computer Ethics,   New Haven, CT, August 12-16, 1990
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1992
* Terrell Bynum, Southern Connecticut State University
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 07/31/1992
* USD 135,628.00

Major developments in science and technology often have important social, legal
and ethical implications. This is clearly true of new developments in computer
science and technology. Computer professionals, philosophers, social scientists
and public policy makers have responded to these issues in a variety of
promising ways. Some professional organizations and governments, both state and
federal, have begun to address some of the problems. This project will build on
these efforts by sponsoring a national conference on computer ethics in the
summer 1991. This inter- professional, four day event will bring together
persons from these different disciplines and organizations, who generally have
little opportunity to interact. They will hear cross-disciplinary perspectives
in keynote addresses and participate in heterogeneous working groups to discuss
and explore six major themes: (1) privacy, (2) system security, (3) equity and
access, (4) software ownership, (5) values in the computer curriculum, and (6)
values in academic computing. The conference is the initial event in the agenda
of the Research Center on Computing and Society at Southern Connecticut State
University. Much of the administrative framework for the center is in place. The
center will help to provide long-term, institutional assistance for a cross-
disciplinary network of people, organizations and materials on this topic. The
center will support faculty development, research activity, publication and
distribution of materials, major international events, curriculum development,
case studies, training sessions and tutorials. The books, journals, reports,
articles, data bases, software, films, videos and other materials contributed
to, or prepared for, the conference will yield the core of a research library
that the center will maintain and expand to provide a resource for studies in
computing and values. The conference itself will generate model curriculum
materials, proceedings, reports, and a "Resource Directory on Computing and
Values," all of which will be widely available in paper and electronic form.
This proposal grows from a successful EVS planning grant that brought together
individuals representing the range of professions and professional associations
and journals involved in issues of computer ethics. It also generated press and
policy interest. The conference is timely and appropriate; it is likely to be
well attended; outcomes will be widely disseminated; evaluation and follow-up
activities are planned. Institutional support is very good and the principal
investigators and associates highly qualified. The proposal is recommended for
support with high priority.