* 9012696
* Sulfide Flanges: Geological, Chemical and Biological        Energetics of Active, Exposed Hydrothermal Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/1991,01/31/1994
* Marvin Lilley, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 01/31/1994
* USD 385,000.00

The formation of submarine sulfide deposits and the activities involved in
chemosynthetically-based hydrothermal food webs are two processes that are
energetically interdependent and spatially coincident. Most of the important
reactions occur in the subsurface and are therefore generally inaccessible to
direct observation. Recently discovered high-temperature pools of buoyant
hydrothermal fluid trapped beneath overhanging massive sulfide flanges in the
Endeavor vent field on the Juan de Fuca ridge offer an opportunity to document
the physical and chemical processes occurring within well-exposed, nearly self-
contained, miniature hydrothermal systems that span the temperature range from
350 C to ambient. The project will mount a combined field, laboratory, and
theoretical study of a number of these flange-pool systems. The intent is to map
thoroughly the geological, geochemical, thermal, and biological relationships
within a selected group of flanges, then place a variety of instruments in, on,
and around the flanges to collect continuous information about temperature and
flux variations over a period of 8 to 10 days. TLhe flanges studied on the
bottom will be retrieved for laboratory dissection and analysis involving 3-D
mapping of the porosity, permeability, mineralogy, structure, texture, fluids,
and microbial distributions.