* 9012964
* Advances in Structural Testing Analysis and Design; Inter-  national Conference, July 29-August 3, 1990 Bangalore, India
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1991
* I. Raju, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/1991
* USD 28,500.00

Description: This project is for support of U.S. participation in the
International Conference on Advances in Structural Testing, Analysis and Design,
scheduled for July 29-August 3, 1990 in Bangalore, India. The conference aims to
bring together scientists, engineers and designers of modern structures to
review perceptions for synthesis and integration of design, analysis and
testing. Topics will include: composite structures, fatigue and fracture
mechanics, CAD/CAM/CAE, expert systems and artificial intelligence, finite
element/boundary element methods, experimental stress analysis, non destructive
testing, static and dynamic testing, structural dynamics and model analysis,
aeroelasticity and structure-control interactions, fluid-solid interaction and
non-linear mechanics. The proceedings are expected to be published by McGraw
Hill by the conference dates. Participants are expected from the major West
European countries, the USSR, China, Japan and Australia as well as the U.S. and
India. Scope: The meeting is expected to be one of the main conferences in the
field in India with a broad scope covering many areas of interest to civil,
mechanical and aeronautical engineers, and to scientists in mathematics,
artificial intelligence, computer applications and in materials science. The
wide participation from major countries of Europe, Japan, Australia as well as
the U.S. and India provide for an important forum for exchange of information
and for increasing collaboration.