* 9012272
* Progress in Pteridology, a Conference at University of      Michigan 23-27 June 1990
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1990,05/31/1991
* Christopher Haufler, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 05/31/1991
* USD 4,000.00

Ferns and their spore-producing allies the lycopods and horsetails are unique
among land plants in having two free-living generations, both usually
photosynthetic, one with half and one with a full complement of chromosomes. The
complete life cycle of a fern requires an alternation between the small haploid
stage, at which sexual reproduction is effected, and the larger sporophyte or
"frond" stage at which spores are produced, for dispersal by wind. Recent
technical advances in the laboratory culturing of the small haploid generation,
the gametophyte stage, have opened the way to molecular studies of fern growth
and development and made possible the manipulation of environmental cues
affecting the timing of egg and sperm maturation, fertilization, and crossing
within and among populations of fern gametophytes. Molecular analyses of
enzymatic proteins and of nuclear and chloroplast DNA have also opened the way
to direct measurement of gene differences within and among fern species. A new
set of technical tools is now available for the estimation of phylogenetic or
genealogical relationships among ferns, for the tracking of geographical
migrations, and for measuring genetic impoverishment in declining populations of
endangered fern species. Drs. Florence Wagner and Chris Haufler have organized
an international conference to focus on these new technical advances in fern
biology, to be hosted by the University of Michigan and involving scientists
from 20 countries. This will be the second such international gathering, since
the first in 1983 in Edinburgh. NSF support will help bring collaborators from
Europe, Australia, and Japan to attend the five days of meetings. Direct
discussions among researchers working in otherwise separate laboratories around
the world will be an additional benefit of the conference, and will facilitate a
clearer focus on major problems in fern biology now amenable to solution.