* 9012759
* Soil Degradation, Migration, and International Security
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1993
* Karl Zimmerer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/1993
* USD 47,500.00

Humans instigate and respond to rapid changes in natural environmental
conditions in a complex set of ways. The process of soil degradation, for
example, traditionally has been studied largely in natural and physical terms,
with emphasis placed on the loss of soil material, declining fertility, and
changing vegetative sustainability. Complete understanding of the process of
soil degradation also involves the study of human activity, however, because
much of the loss and deterioration of soils results directly from human
activity. Furthermore, as soils degrade, agriculture and other human endeavors
must change. This project examines not only those direct links among human,
natural, and physical systems; it also looks interactions one step removed on
order to determine how human and environmental forces relate to each other. The
project will consist of a comparative study of soil degradation in three
districts of eastern Bolivia. Soil erosion will be estimated using direct
measurements in sample plots and through analysis of aerial photographs. These
photographs and field observations also will be used to measure changes in land
use, which will be analyzed in conjunction with the soils data in order to
evaluate associations between land-use change and soil erosion. Complementary
analyses will integrate socio-economic data for the last few decades and
information gathered from interviews and oral histories to assess social causes
of practices that have promoted soil degradation and the degree to which soil
degradation has become an important political issue within Bolivia and in terms
of its dealings with other nations. The results of this project will be valuable
at a number of levels. Specific information gathered in the study area will
increase understandings of human-environmental interaction in this politically
volatile region. The broader conceptual base within which this study is set is
global in nature, however, and the Bolivian conclusions will complement results
from related studies conducted elsewhere, thereby enhance our broader knowledge
of the human dimensions of global environmental change.