* 9012551
* Adaptive Stabilization Theory
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1990,02/28/1993
* A. Morse, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 02/28/1993
* USD 162,698.00

Adaptive control theory lacks a conceptual framework which is sufficiently
simple to help qualified nonspecialists to understand the current theory without
making an inordinately large time investment and which might also serve as the
basis for further development. We propose to continue our recently initiated
research program aimed at constructing such a framework. Existing adaptive
algorithms for which 'global' stability can be proved without requiring
sufficient excitation are either applicable to process models satisfying
assumptions which recent results show are unnecessary restrictive or perform
inefficiently and consequently are of limited practical value. The underlying
reason for this is that to be applicable to "large" classes of process models,
the parameter design models upon which certainty equivalence control is based,
almost always have points in their parameter spaces at which the design model is
not stabilizable--and at such points, certainty equivalence control is
impossible. We propose to deal with this problem in two fundamentally different
ways. First, we propose to develop and utilize new parameterized design models
which are stabilizable on their parameterized spaces and, in addition, are
applicable to "large" classes of process models. Second, as an alternative
approach we propose to exploit the concept of "implicit tuning" which does not
require a design model to be stabilizable at every point in its parameter space.
In both cases we shall rely heavily on computer simulation to rule out
unacceptable algorithms and to guide us in the development of acceptable ones.