* 9012746
* SGER:  Assessing Patchiness of Aquatic Organisms with       Remotely Operated Vehicles
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1990,10/31/1991
* Craig Williamson, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Jethro Moorefield
* 10/31/1991
* USD 24,000.00

The patchiness of natural populations is of fundamental importance to many
aspects of ecological theory. In aquatic environments the lack of vegetational
structure and low visibility compared to terrestrial environments combine with
continuous mixing processes to make assessment of patch size, structure, and
function particularly difficult. Yet the importance of top-down control of
aquatic communities suggests that the spatial and temporal distribution of
predator and prey populations may be a primary regulator in community dynamics.
Recent developments in remotely operated vehicle (ROV) and video imaging
technologies provide the potential to resolve spatial and temporal patchiness of
plankton and fish populations on much finer scales than could ever be obtained
with traditional sampling methods. The primary objectives of the SGER project is
to apply recent advances in ROV and video imaging technologies to quantify the
distribution and abundance of invertebrate and vertebrate predators and their
prey in lakes of different trophic status. As part of the multiinstitutional
Pocono Comparative Lakes Program, the project will be carried out in a highly
interactive research and educational environment that maximizes the exposure of
students and investigators to these new technologies. Transfer of information on
ROV and video sampling will be facilitated by a symposium/workshop to be
conducted after testing the ROV