* 9012105
* Sixth National Power Systems Conference, Bombay, India,     June 4-7, 1990, Group Travel Award in U.S. and Indian       Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1990,03/31/1991
* Arthur Bergen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 03/31/1991
* USD 21,850.00

Description: This project supports participation by eight U.S. scientists and
engineers in the Six National Power Systems Symposium to be held in Bombay,
India, June 4-7, 1990. The Symposium is organized by the Indian Institute of
Technology, Bombay, and jointly sponsored by the Maharashta State Electricity
Board and the Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research as well as the
Central Power Research Institute in Bangalore. The conference theme is Power
Systems for the year 2000. It is expected to be widely attended by scientists,
engineers, consultants and manufacturing representatives from India, and by
academicians and scientists from around the world. Major topics to be covered
include large power systems, control systems, and decentralized systems. The
conference will be cocurrent with a tutorial symposium to be given by invited
experts from the U.S and other countries. Scope: India is embarking on a large
expansion of its power network, with an increase from 60 Million kilowatt (KW)
capacity to about 200 million KW within the next 25 years. For India, as well as
for most developing countries the focus in this growth is expected to be on
energy conservation, environmental consideration as well as reliability. Sources
for fuel, both renewable and nonrenewable, have to be considered. The proposed
conference provides a forum for discussions and exchange of information on the
important issues related to the planning, design, construction, operation and
maintenance of electric power systems. It is likely that the conference will
identify specific scientific problems that may be of particular importance to
India, and other LDC's, as well as to the U.S.