* 9012972
* New Approaches to Seismological Problems at Nevado del Ruiz Volcano, Colombia
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1992
* Vindell Hsu, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 01/31/1992
* USD 12,120.00

This Science in Developing Countries Program Award will support Professors
Vindell Hsu and Stanley N. Williams of Louisiana State University in a research
collaboration with several Colombian seismologists from the Colombian Volcano
Observatory (OVC). The researchers intend to study the Nevado del Ruiz volcano
by deploying 5 portable digital seismographs to supplement existing analog
stations. The digital instruments will enhance the location capability of an
existing network so that seismic sources can be better assessed for both their
level of activity and their relations to magma chambers. Another important phase
of the cooperation is to deploy digital instruments directly above several
seismically active areas that have been detected by the existing network. By
doing so, the researchers expect to record digital data for analysis of source
and/or path effects that may be responsible for the various types of seismic
signals recorded at Nevado del Ruiz. The researchers will work closely with
Colombian seismologists who will supply manpower as well as local logistical
support. The recorded data should help in the effort of modeling the various
types of volcanic seismic events observed before and after the 1985 eruption of
Nevado del Ruiz and also surrounding the September 1, 1989 eruption. Most
important of all, the researchers will accumulate data about Ruiz which is quite
unique and not yet thoroughly studied. The effort should help in characterizing
the seismicity associated with the volcano and, therefore, be useful in the
future in terms of predicting eruptions at Ruiz and other andesitic volcanoes.