* 9012417
* Social Biology of Ropalidia Montana, Award in Indian        Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1991
* James Hunt, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/1991
* USD 1,500.00

Description: This project partially supports field expenses for two U.S.
scientists, Dr. James Hunt and Dr. Robert Jeanne of the Department of Biology,
Universiy of Missouri, St. Louis, while conducting research in India in
collaboration with Dr. R. Gadagkar of the Indian Institute of Science in
Bangalore. In the research, work will be done on Ropalidia montana, one of the
social wasps of the tropics. It is of considerable interest as one of very few
species of social paper wasps to have discrete queen/worker dimorphism. The
research will address the following questions: 1. does the species have an alarm
pheromone and what is its source, 2. do the wasps use chemicals to mark trails
during swarm emigration, 3. do male and female larvae yield different quantities
of saliva during food exchange with adults, 4. how do larvae escape their pupal
cells, and 5. what is the apparent pattern of task partitioning by forager
worker wasps?. This work will involve selection of a wasp colony and removing it
from its natural habitat on high trees to an area of shrubs where observations
can be made more easily. Scope: This small grant will provide funds for the two
U.S. scientists to conduct research of interest, to the U.S., in the area of
population biology and with the collaboration of their host at one of India's
prestigeous academic and research institutes. Funds for travel to India were
made available to the scientists from other sources. This research complements
work being done by Dr. Hunt under a grant BSR8805971 from the Population Biology
Program on "Nourishment, Trophallaxis and Caste in Primitvely Social Wasps".