* 9012423
* Agricultural Production and Climatic Variation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1993
* Diana Liverman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Holly
* 02/28/1993
* USD 106,949.00

Agricultural practices throughout the world have been revolutionized within the
last half-century. New crop hybrids, chemical fertilizers, herbicides, and
pesticides, and irrigation and drainage systems have substantially increased
production. In many areas, land reform and changing land-use patterns also have
boosted yields. The degree to which new technologies and socioeconomic changes
have affected agricultural responses to climatic extremes has not been studied
in detail, however. This project will examine this relationship by focusing on
the degree to which climatic fluctuations, especially drought, have affected
agricultural production in Mexico during the 20th Century. Meteorological
records, data from agricultural censuses and reports, and accounts in popular
publications will be used to reconstruct and map dynamic patterns of production
and to relate those patterns to changing technological and socioeconomic
conditions. Statistical analyses will assess the correlation between climate and
crop yields, the degree to which new technologies have buffered the agricultural
system against climatic variability, and the differences in drought impacts
among different land-use regimes. These general analyses will be complemented by
four case studies of vulnerability to drought that will rely on local records
and interviews with local residents. These case studies will try to show how
environmental, technological, and socioeconomic changes have altered the impacts
of climate on local agricultural systems. This project will contribute to our
general understandings of the ways that altered forms of social and economic
activity affect human responses to changing natural conditions. It will also
enhance our insights about the degree to which technological change makes
societies more or less resistant to environmental fluctuations, and it will
provide valuable information about the dynamics of agriculture in Mexico, a
nation that is representative of others that have been strongly impacted by the
"Green Revolution."