* 9012966
* Flowing Solids Reactor A New Concept for NH3 Synthesis
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1991,03/01/1994
* Octave Levenspiel, University of Novi Sad Inst for Petrochem Gas Oil & Chem Engrng
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 03/01/1994
* USD 0.00

The objective of this three-year U.S.-Yugoslav cooperative research project in
chemical engineering between Aleksandar Dudukovic of the University of Novi
Sad's Institute for Petrochemistry, Gas, Oil and Chemical Engineering and Octave
Levenspiel of Oregon State University is to investigate applications of three
phase flowing solid contactors and engineering reactors applied to ammonia (NH3)
synthesis. Particular attention will be given to the feasibility of employing
flowing solid adsorbents in removing ammonia and improving its synthesis.
Ammonia is a key material (fertilizer) in world agriculture, yet the original
1912 method of synthesizing ammonia, which consumes much energy and is somewhat
expensive, is still being used today. Through their research on the gas-solid
contactors, Dudukovic and Levenspiel will explore energy-saving methods of
ammonia synthesis. This project was approved by the U.S.-Yugoslav Joint Board on
Cooperation in Science and Technology and is supported through a Joint fund
consisting of matching contributions from the U.S. and Yugoslav governments. The
U.S. contribution is provided annually by the Department of State. No NSF funds
are involved. The award, except for funds for U.S. scientist travel, is made to
the Yugoslav institution. NSF's goal to advance scientific knowledge will be
promoted through the joint efforts and complementary expertise of the Yugoslav
and U.S. investigators.