* 9012252
* Introducing Ethics Case Studies into Required Undergraduate Engineering Courses
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1990,11/30/1992
* Michael Rabins, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 11/30/1992
* USD 107,730.00

To exercise leadership, engineering educators need to provide their students
with the tools to identify and respond appropriately to engineering problems
with ethical dimensions. This pilot study will test an approach for introducing
ethical decision problems into required undergraduate engineering courses. The
study has a dual purpose: to develop and test a case study approach to
sensitizing engineering students to the ethical issues involved in their
engineering decision making, and to provide them with conceptual tools for
thinking about these problems in a clear and responsible manner. These goals
will be achieved by collecting and cataloging relevant case studies which
include both technical and ethical issues. These cases will provide the basis
for the development of aproximately 10 modules that will be integrated into the
syllabi of selected required engineering courses. The case will transcend
traditional departmental disciplinary lines and will cover such topics as
environmental impact, product quality, safety and structural design. They will
be tested om selected classes in the Civil, Chemical, and Mechanical Engineering
departments. The study will also develop a resources book of annotated and
catalogued case studies complete with classroom use guidance material. The use
of the material in classroom sessions, some of which will be recorded on
videotape, will be evaluated by students and faculty, and by a carefully
selected national advisory committee. Results will be widely reported at
professional society meetings, particularly the annual meeting of the American
Society of Engineering Education. This proposal focuses on an important area in
Ethic and Values Studies. The team of investigators is very well qualified; the
plan is thoughtful and feasible; university support is extremely good. Results
are likely to improve the teaching of engineering ethics on this campus and in
undergraduate curricula nationwide. Based on the merits of the proposal and the
generally positive review, support is highly recommended.