* 9012598
* Corporate Takeover Gains and Unionized Labor
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/1990,05/31/1993
* Brian Becker, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/1993
* USD 135,471.00

The last ten years have witnessed a significant restructuring in much of the
American corporate sector, with the economic value of merger and acquisition
activity totalling nearly $180 billion for both 1985 and 1986. The magnitude of
these activities has attracted considerable attention and the empirical evidence
clearly indicates that the shareholders of target firms benefit substantially
from successful takeovers, with virtually no gains for the shareholders of
acquiring firms. An important aspect of this phenomenon is the source of these
gains. Specifically are these the synergistic gains of economic efficiency or do
they represent at least in part a redistribution of firm value from
organizational stakeholders to shareholders? This study provides a direct test
of the hypothesis that some of these shareholder gains come at the expense of
unionized labor. Given prior work establishing that union wage and benefit
premia come at the expense of shareholders, a change in corporate control is one
more issue that enters the relationship between labor and management over the
distribution of firm value. The first part of the study will test the hypothesis
about the distribution of shareholder gains based on the merger and acquisition
experience of 468 publicly traded firms from 1982-86. A unique unionization
database is developed at the firm level based on information available from the
U.S. Treasury/ Department of Labor. The second part of the project will include
a case study of 5 - 10 firms in the sample.