* 9012780
* Market Uncertainty and Government Policy
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1990,06/30/1994
* Karl Shell, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1994
* USD 160,270.00

This project continues research on market uncertainty, the uncertainty generated
by the economy itself. In particular, the project analyzes the stability of
sunspot equilibria from various models (1) in the face of more general lottery
devices and (2) in the face of the possibility of the formation of coalitions of
cooperating individuals. The initial phase of this research effort will be an
outgrowth of the analysis of stochastic equilibria in economies with indivisible
commodities. The project also continues the analysis of the role of government
tax policies in the intertemporal allocation of resources, including their role
in economies in which there is market uncertainty. Economic actors must make
decision in face of uncertainty. Some of this uncertainty is the result of
uncertainty about economic fundamentals-- tastes, endowments, production
possibilities, and even government policies. This type of uncertainty is
successfully modelled by conventional general economic equilibrium theory. This
project addressed another, significant source of uncertainty which individuals
actually face. This is market uncertainty, uncertainty generated within the
economy itself, uncertainty about the economic outcomes (such as prices, net
trades, employment, and the inflation rate) given the fundamental parameters.
Businessmen, for example, wonder whether consumers' confidence will be high or
low, whether credit will be loose or tight, whether the dollar will be strong or
weak, and so forth. Market uncertainty is a subject of obvious social
importance. Macroeconomists, for example, ask what policies should the
government take to counteract disturbances generated by the economy itself. When
we design organizations -- or, more generally choose mechanisms -- we shall want
to know how uncertainty is created and transmitted by these new organizational
forms. This project contributes to our understanding of this type of uncertainty
by extending formal models of market uncertainty, i.e., the so-called "sunspot
equilibrium" models pioneered by the investigator.