* 9012473
* Remineralization of Biogenic Material at the Seafloor:      Temporal and Spatial Variability
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/1990,11/30/1995
* Frederick Sayles, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger W. Baier
* 11/30/1995
* USD 922,244.00

Remineralization of Biogenic Material at the Seafloor: Temporal and Spatial
Variability Temporal variability of fluxes across the sediment-water interface
at the GOFS Bermuda Time Series Site will be measured to characterize the bentic
cycles of biogenic sediment components of an oligotrophic gyre. Data collected
to date demonstrate that there is large temporal variability, and that the cycle
closely parallels that of particulate fluxes. The relationship between particle
fluxes, fluxes across the interface and the amplitude of variability will be
used to characterize the occurrence, reactivity and significance of "labile"
organic carbon remineralization at this site. In addition, experiments seek to
define the stoichiometry, rates, and location in the sediment column of
diagenetic reactions affecting organic matter, CaCO3, and biogenic SiO2. The
data should uniquely define the response of benthic processes to varying
conditions in the water column and surface ocean. Studies of organic matter
degradation and CaCOO3 dissolution will be extended to a regional scale with a
transect of the Western North Atlantic continental margin. This research seeks
to define the amounts and rate of diagenetic dissolution of CaCO above the
lysocline, as well as the factors that influence this aspect of the CaCO3 cycle
in the oceans