* 9012180
* A Spectrophotometric Investigation of the Evolutionary      History of the Inner Asteroid Belt
* MPS,AST
* 12/01/1990,05/31/1993
* Michael Gaffey, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 05/31/1993
* USD 100,000.00

The goals of this research by Dr. Gaffey are to improve our understanding of
inner Solar System planetesimals by investigating: (a) the evolutionary history
of the inner belt asteroids; (b) the nature of the early post-accretionary
heating event which effected these bodies as well as the meteorite parent
bodies; (c) the collisional evolution of the inner belt; (d) the nature of
magmatic differentiation in small planetary objects; and (e) the nature of the
planetesimal population in the early inner Solar System which accreted to form
the large terrestrial planets. The asteroids and the meteorites are the sole
inner Solar System remnants of the period during and just after the formation of
the Solar System. Asteroids provide a "map" of the conditions and processes in
the early inner Solar System while the meteorites provide a "calendar" of the
events occurring during this period. Earth-based telescopic observations can be
used to determine the surface mineralogies of these minor planets. The
mineralogical composition records the conditions of formation of that asteroid
including its thermal evolution, metamorphism or magmatic differentiation, and
collisional history. Dr. Gaffey will derive histories of individual asteroids to
investigate the compositional variations of the original solar nebula, the
pattern of thermal and collisional processes within the asteroid belt, the early
evolution of the Sun, and the nature of the early Earth which accreted from a
similar population of planetesimals.