* 9012534
* NCSA Institute on Scientific Visualization
* CSE,OAC
* 03/15/1991,08/31/1992
* Dan Brady, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Richard Hirsh
* 08/31/1992
* USD 74,943.00

This award supports a two week Summer Training Institute in scientific
visualization at the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA).
NCSA is an NSF supported supercomputing center providing access time, education,
training and consulting services to scientific researchers. The summer workshop
will have two basic components: an awareness component, and applications
component. Students will be provided with a historic profile of the evolution of
computer graphics into scientific visualization. Perspective will be given to
systems and methodology in this evolution. After learning the nature of the
field, participants will look at the current sate of the art by taking an
abstract approach to current visualization methodology. This methodology will be
placed in the context of actual visualization tools and highlighted by case
studies and practical examples. The applications component will focus on
visualization tools that are available to the researcher. This will be a "hands-
on" approach experienced in various NCSA laboratories. Participants will work
with some of the applications available through NCSA, as well as with some
resources NCSA does not have, through vendor participation. Courses will also
include a survey of graphics system (hardware and software), introduction to 3D
graphics and the use of color in visualization. Discipline specific experiences
will include chemistry fluid dynamics, and engineering. Media output options
(videotape/film) will be available. An evaluation of the institute will be done
following completion of the two week session.