* 9012916
* Gender Differences in Commuting Among Whites, Blacks, and   Hispanics
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/1990,09/30/1992
* Sara McLafferty, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/1992
* USD 35,428.00

Studies of employment and commuting patterns in American metropolises have
disclosed that women generally work at jobs closer to their homes and spend less
time commuting than men. Most of these studies as considered women as a
homogeneous group. The degree to which other economic, social, and ethnic
factors may explain these general variations therefore is not well understood.
This project will focus on an analysis of differences in work locations and
commuting patterns among women from different racial and ethnic groups. The
focus of the project will be development of a path-analytic model that
distinguishes the effects of economic, household, and transportation
characteristics on commuting time among people in different gender and
racial/ethnic groups. The model will then be tested using statistical analyses
of Public Use Microdata Sample census data for the New York Consolidated
Statistical Area. This project will contribute to our specific knowledge about
the dynamics of commuting patterns within the New York metropolitan area, a
region of exceedingly complex economic, social, racial, and ethnic interaction.
More importantly, it will add to our general insights about the factors that
influence commuting and the relationships between the locations of jobs and
homesites in modern metropolises, and it will enhance our understandings about
the impact of gender on the spatial activity of individuals and groups.