* 9012135
* Dynamic and Thermodynamic Structures of Convective Storms   in Northern Taiwan Determined from Doppler Data
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1994
* Yeong-Jer Lin, Saint Louis University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 09/30/1994
* USD 152,800.00

Flash floods are major meteorological disasters which occur around the globe.
Understanding of this phenomena is a challenging problem because it is necessary
to understand both complex dynamic and microphysical processes at scales of
motion that are smaller than typically measured by conventional weather
networks. This scale of motion is termed mesoscale by meteorologists. The
National Science Council of Taiwan has established a Multiple Hazards Mitigation
Project whose meteorological component is focussed on improving flash flood
predictions. A major field project to study the systems that cause flash floods,
entitled the Taiwan Area Mesoscale Experiment, was held in the Spring of 1987.
The project was cosponsored by the National Science Council with participation
of the National Science Foundation and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration of the United States. The Principal Investigator participated in
the field expedition and his preliminary research on the data has revealed the
structure of subtropical mesoscale convective systems and the differences and
similarities with mid-latitude systems. Such comparisons have not received much
attention in the past. The Principal Investigator will continue this research
with special attention to comparing the dynamic and thermodynamic
characteristics of two convective systems that possessed very different
precipitation characteristics.