* 9012584
* The Rising Importance of Skill
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1992
* Finis Welch, Unicon Research Corporation
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1992
* USD 161,720.00

The project continues empirical work concerning the dynamics of relative wages.
Wage inequality within groups classified by gender, age and education increased
enormously during the 1970s and 1980s. Relative wage differentials between
groups increased during the 1980s, although patterns for the 1970s are mixed.
The rise in returns to a college degree since 1979 and the rose in overall male
wage inequality since the late 1960s are two of the most important examples of
changing relative wages. Previous work suggests that changes in age and school
completion distributions associated with the job market entry of the baby boom
cohorts affected wages between groups. After accounting for such effects, the
data show a consistent picture of rising skill differential. The three major
tasks involve an effort to distinguish between alternative explanations. The
first task is to generate additional evidence on relative wage patterns by
extending the previous analysis to include females, male/female differentials,
to decompose changes into permanent and temporary components, and to attempt to
identify those skills that have become more valuable. A second major task is to
examine the effects on wage inequality of generalized and sector-specific demand
shifts. The third major task includes an extension from wages per se to the
interaction between wages and labor force participation. The familiar trends
towards decreased participation of men and increased participation of women are
coincident with wage changes that support traditional notions of positively
inclined labor supply functions. The analysis will be based on a supply and
demand framework. Several major data sets will be used in the various subparts
of the study - the Current Population Survey, the Panel Survey on Income
Dynamics and the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth.