* 9012168
* Effects of Vegetative Reproduction on the Distribution and  Abundance of Benthic Marine Invertebrates
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1993
* Howard Lasker, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/1993
* USD 92,900.00

Colonial species unlike aclonal species of ten generate new colonies a sexually
through fission or fragmentation. This form of vegaetative reproduction plays an
important role in determining species abundances and community structure. Thus,
an understanding of vegetative reproduction and the conditions under which it is
successful is a necessary component of the study of marine communities.
Vegetative reproduction also has important effects on population genetics and
these effects may control the resilience of species to changes in climate.
Previous work on vegetative reproduction has focused on quantifying the effect
of vegetative propagation on short term population dynamics within single
populations. That work has not considered the effects of clonal growth on the
production of new clones nor the selective pressures for propagules which can
disperse between habitats. In the proposed research I will complement work on
vegetative reproduction among Caribbean gorgonians with new data on larval
production, dispersal, survival and settlement. These data will allow me to
determine the interaction between vegetative reproduction, sexual reproduction
and the dispersal of larvae to new habitats. The data will provide a
quantitative basis for understanding the effects of vegetative reproduction on
marine communities.