* 9012185
* Sharing Data with Social Scientists at Teaching             Universities
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1993
* Joan Sieber, California State University, East Bay Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 02/28/1993
* USD 99,179.00

Research funding agencies are now insisting that investigators make research
data developed with their support accessible to others. The goals are to
encourage openness and integrity in science, to ensure efficient use of research
funds, and to provide training resources. This project examines data sharing
behavior by creating a field experiment in which shared data are requested,
used, and archived in a large and divrse teaching university. The project
investigates how social scientists respond when asked for their data, what
problems (e.g., ethical, attitudinal, financial) inhibit data sharing and how
these may be mitigated; and what impact data sharing has on the interests,
openness, and research activity of students and faculty who request and use
data, and attend the workshops that are part of the project. The project will
produce findings on data sharing and non-sharing behavior, findings on the uses,
benefits, problems and teaching of data-sharing, particularly in primarily
teaching universities, and models for university support for data sharing.
Project results will be useful to science policy makers who seek to improve the
effectiveness of data sharing, to faculty who want to use shared data in
teaching research values and skills, and to university service and
administrative staff who want to improve faculty and student skills in data use.
This study grows out of the successful completion of a planning phase, which
resulted in a session on data sharing at the AAAS annual meeting in 1989, in
several articles published in IRB and elsewhere, and in a collection of papers
under review for publication. Co-principal investigators are very well-
qualified; institutional support is very good; the field research plans are good
and should provide rich information about opportunities for and constraints on
data sharing. Results will be widely disseminated and relevant to both
researchers and educational policymakers. Support is recommended.