* 9012574
* Protein Separations with Microporous Immunoaffinity         Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1995
* Clark Colton, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 02/28/1995
* USD 261,359.00

Despite the utility of immunoaffinity adsorption on the laboratory scale, it has
had little application in large- scale downstream processing of therapeutic
proteins because available support matrices have poor mechanical properties and
immunoaffinity ligands are costly and often deactivate upon exposure to elution
conditions. Recently available microporous hollow fiber membranes suitable for
bioprocessing promise advantages of high throughput rates and short residence
times that may preserve the useful lifetime of labile ligands. The potential of
these materials in immunoaffinity separations is untested and principles for
design and scaleup undeveloped. The goal of this research is to develop a
fundamental understanding of the phenomena that determine the performance of
microporous immunoaffinity membranes in protein separations. Membranes will be
activated and used to bind three ligands for further study: Protein A, which
binds to most immunoglobulins, and two monoclonal antibodies - anti-bovine serum
albumin and anti-Factor VIII. The immunoaffinity membranes will be fully
characterized in terms of physiochemical properties. Measurements will be made
of (1) ligate adsorption and elution breakthrough curves, (2) equilibrium and
reaction rate parameters, (3) axial dispersion coefficients, and (4) ligand and
ligate localization within the membrane. A theoretical model will be developed,
validated by comparison with experimental data, and used in simulations to
explore design and optimization. The ability of bound ligand to retain
functional activity will be explored with successive adsorption-elution cycles
using automated equipment.