* 9012236
* Organoboranes - New Chemistry and Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1991,07/31/1994
* Herbert Brown, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 07/31/1994
* USD 301,900.00

The Organic Synthesis Program is funding the research of Dr. Herbert C. Brown to
continue his pioneering development of new chiral chemistry based on
organoboranes. The work will lead to the development of new methods for the
stereospecific synthesis of special groupings of atoms called functional groups.
These are important for the development of new efficient routes to the complex
materials needed in our economy. Research on organoboranes has extended the
applicability to the synthesis of cyclic, polycyclic and various partially
alkylated organoboranes. The reactions of organoboranes proceed predominantly
with complete retention of configuration. This development makes it highly
desirable to discover new reactions leading to other valuable compounds not now
available from organoboranes. The utility of various homologating agents
generated in situ in the presence of an organoborane will be explored for the
homologation of boracyclanes, vinyl-and alkynylboronate esters, bi- and
polycyclic boracyclanes and tertiary alkylboronate esters. The synthetic utility
of a new three-carbon homologation procedure will be investigated for the
preparation of alpha-vinyl boronate esters, medium- and large-ring boracyclanes
and as well as their conversion to the corresponding medium- and large-ring
ketones, amines and ethers. New reactions will be sought that will lead to
valuable compounds not now available from organoboranes, such as mercaptans,
nitriles, organophosphorous compounds, etc. The synthesis of various
stereodefined vinyl organoboranes and their utility in the synthesis of
stereodefined dienes, enynes and gamma, delta-unsaturated ketones will also be
investigated.