* 9012744
* U.S. Japan Long-Term Research Visit: Diesel Combustion      Modeling and Inlet Port Geometrical Effects on Flow and     Combustion
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1991,08/31/1993
* Jay Martin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cassidy
* 08/31/1993
* USD 85,910.00

This award will facilitate cooperation between Professor Jay Martin of the
University of Wisconsin, and Professors Tadashi Murayama and Takemi Chikahisa at
Hokkaido University in Sapporo for one phase of the project. The second phase
involves collaboration between Professor Martin and Yasuv Takagi a senior
researcher with the Central Engineering Laboratories of Nissan Motor Company,
Ltd. The computational research with Hokkaido University will focus on the
development of an improved diesel combustion model for use in the
multidimensional fluid-mechanics code KIVA-II. The experiment- al research with
Nissan Motor Company will involve the set up of a Particle-Image-Velocimetry
(PIV) system for measuring the velocity fluid in the intake part of a
reciprocating engine. Both studies are likely to contribute substantially to the
design of advanced combustion engines in important areas of modeling and
incylinder flows. All of the researchers involved are highly qualified in their
areas of expertise. Professor Martin has extensive experience in laser
velocimetry in engines and a solid base in engine modeling using KIVA which is
the most widely used code for incylinder engine modeling. Both the University of
Wisconsin and Hokkaido University are two of the world centers of diesel
combustion research. In addition, both Hokkaido University and Nissan Motor
Company have an international reputation for quality research. It is anticipated
that the close ties developed between the researchers will continue long after
the formal project has been completed.