* 9012239
* Neuroendocrine Regulation of Memory Storage
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1993
* Paul Gold, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Winner
* 12/31/1993
* USD 302,030.00

ABSTRACT Recent findings from this laboratory indicate that increases in blood
glucose levels can enhance the formation of new memories in rodents and humans.
Preliminary findings indicate that glucose effects on the brain appear to
interact with central nervous system neurotransmitter actions. In particular,
glucose effects are somewhat analogous to those of brain acetylcholine agonists
and opiate antagonists. This research project examines the pharmacological bases
by which modest increases in circulating glucose levels alter memory and other
brain functions. One set of experiments will attempt to demonstrate that direct
brain injections of small amounts of glucose have effects on the brain similar
to those observed after increases of blood glucose levels. Such findings would
support the view that behavioral effects of increases in circulating glucose
levels reflect direct glucose actions on the central nervous system. A second
set of experiments will compare glucose effects with those of opiate
antagonists, to explore the analogous actions of these treatments. Further
experiments will examine the interactions of glucose with specific central
acetylcholine systems to begin identification of anatomical loci of glucose
actions on the brain. Together, the experiments in this project will provide
additional characterization of the mechanisms by which relatively small changes
in blood glucose levels regulate the functions of the brain.