* 9012549
* Probabilistic System-Level Fault Diagnosis in Multiprocessor/Multicomputer Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/1991,05/31/1994
* Kang Shin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* J. Robert Jump
* 05/31/1994
* USD 159,176.00

Due to their potential for high reliability and throughput via the multiplicity
of components, distributed computing systems are being increasingly used for
reliability- and time-critical applications. However, the probability of having
one or more component failures in a distributed system increases with the number
of components used. Thus, the ability of locating faulty components, isolating
them, reconfiguring the system, and resuming the computation is a key to the
success in realizing the potential of any distributed system. As part of the
global goal of designing fault-tolerant distributed systems, this project is
concerned with system-level fault diagnosis for large
multiprocessor/multicomputer systems. A thorough survey of the currently
available methods for diagnosis of large systems has led to a conclusion that a
probabilistic approach is the most promising. A probabilistic diagnosis approach
allows for the diagnosis of multiprocessor/multicomputer systems with both
intermittent and permanent faults, using high-level tests which have imperfect
fault coverage and/or are executed on-line. The first step of this project is to
develop optimal solutions to the probabilistic diagnosis problem using single or
multiple fault syndromes. The second step is to efficiently implement these
solutions as distributed algorithms. This task is non-trivial since the identity
of faulty communication links and processing nodes cannot be assumed to be known
"a priori". Finally, the probabilistic diagnosis will be implemented and their
performance will be measured on an experimental multicomputer system, called
HARTS, which is currently being built at the Real-Time Computing Laboratory
(RTCL), The University of Michigan.