* 9012270
* Bispectral Analysis of Nonlinear Couplings Within the       Geologic Record of Global Climate Change
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/1991,07/31/1993
* Nicklas Pisias, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 07/31/1993
* USD 77,531.00

A major finding 15 years ago was that various oceanographic parameters respond
to orbital ("Milankovich") forcings in a linear manner. This means that 1)
marine sediments faithfully record the frequencies of orbital patterns, shifted
only in amplitude and phase; 2) interaction of the several known orbital
frequencies results in marine patterns that are the sum of all these
frequencies. The P.I. has recently discovered that Pliocene sediments from the
eastern equatorial Pacific (DSDP) Site 572) show non-linear couplings to the
Milankovich band. This means that the marinere cord shows evidence of: 1)
harmonic distortion, i.e. orbital frequency fO is recorded at fO,2fO,3fO, etc,;
2) intermodulation distortion, i.e. various orbital frequencies both add and
subtract to give a complex array of frequencies in the marine record. Funds have
been awarded to expand this search for non- linear responses. Because commonly
used techniques of time series analysis cannot detect anything other than linear
response signals, bispectrum analysis and auto regressive moving average models
will be explored as alternative techniques. Sensitivity studies will be
conducted, and the final techniques will be applied to the analysis of any of
several candidate ODP and DSDP records, using delta O18, delta C13, CaCO3, SST,
eolian dust of magnetic susceptibility as the parameter to examine for orbital
forcings.