* 9013044
* Technology, Power, and Culture in China
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1991,12/31/1991
* Francesca Bray, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 12/31/1991
* USD 49,768.00

Technology has transformed the world. Yet technology affects society differently
in different cultures. One needs only to examine the differences in housing, in
heating systems, in appliances (even in toilets, as illustrated in the novel
"Fear of Flying"), in order to see how society shapes as well as is shaped by
technology. In order to understand this interaction of technology and society,
it is critical that we see these forces at work in a number of different
settings. In this project, Professor Bray is investigating specific ways in
which technological systems relate to various types of power relations and
cultural features within a society, taking pre-modern China as an example. She
stresses the role of technology as a cohesive force embodying relations of
production as well as interacting processes of technological processes of
technological, social, and cultural change. Historians of Western technology
have brought considerable sophistication to such analyses, but these methods
have not as yet been systematically applied to China. She is also applying
approaches to technology developed by social and cultural anthropologists. Under
this grant, the principal investigator is examining a restricted number of
topics grouped around three thematic headings: divisions of labour (e.g
significance of the household as the predominant unit of production; the
contributions of women to production); culture mental and material (e.g. the
implications of scarcity; how architectural forms reflect cosmological beliefs
and social practice); forms of control and the exercise of power (e.g. water
control; the importance of standardized measures; access to medical expertise).
Eventually, Professor Bray hopes to develop this approach into a systematic
treatment of technology in Chinese society and culture.