* 9013934
* U.S.-UK Cooperative Research:  Investigation of Dense       Z-Pinch and X-Pinch Plasmas Using Time Revolving Optical    Diagnostics
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1990,11/30/1991
* David Hammer, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 11/30/1991
* USD 15,400.00

This award will support collaborative research between David Hammer, Cornell
University, and Dr. Malcolm Haines, Plasma Physics Group, Imperial College,
London, England. The objective of the proposed project is to carry out a series
of experiments designed to determine conditions in detail as a function of time
in dense z-pinch and x-pinch plasmas. Such plasmas are produced by first using
the initial portion of the current from submicrosecond "pulsed power" generators
to explode fine wires (0.0025-0.025 cm. diameter), and then magnetically
"pinching" the resulting plasma to very small diameters with the field produced
by the peak current. These experiments will be performed at Imperial College
because of the availability there of a unique set of advanced electro-optical
diagnostic instruments for use with any of several pulsed power devices. It will
be possible to obtain time and space-resolved measurements of z-pinch and
x-pinch plasma densities, ionization states, implosion speeds, and locations and
durations of x-ray bright spots, using x-ray and visible light-sensitive
intensified image converter "streak" and "framing" cameras with nanosecond
resolution, nanosecond pulsed lasers, and a variety of visible and x-ray
spectroscopic instruments. The ultimate goal of this project is to achieve an
improved understanding of the dynamics of dense z- and x-pinch plasmas, so that
applications to x-ray lithography, pumping short wavelength lasers and
controlled fusion might be confidently evaluated. This project will benefit from
the complementary expertise of the two investigators in gas pinches and laser
plasma research.