* 9013931
* Modification of an Isotope Dilution GC/MS System for        Atmospheric Chemistry Experiments on Ships and Aircrafts    Under Turbulent Conditions
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/1991,09/30/1992
* Alan Bandy, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 09/30/1992
* USD 90,800.00

The PIs developed a gas chromatograph/mass spectrometer (GC/MS) under NSF grant
ATM-8717861 and coupled it with isotopically labeled internal standards for near
real-time determinations of sulfur dioxide (SO2), dimethyl sulfide (DMS), carbon
disulfide (CS2), and carbonyl sulfide (OCS) in the atmosphere. In its present
configuration, the GC/MS can be used for measurements in relatively mild
turbulent conditions such as those encountered in the marine mixed layer. These
four compounds can be measured with an average frequency of one per 8 minutes
using simultaneously collected air samples. The PIs plan to modify the sample
handling and calibration systems to achieve response times of three minutes with
detection limits of 1 part-per-trillion by volume (pptv) with a precision of 1
pptv. They also plan to install a turbomolecular pump that will allow
uninterrupted use of the GC/MS under the turbulent conditions that occur in
aircraft in the continental boundary layer and on ships under a wide range of
sea states. With this added capability the GC/MS could be used to conduct
atmospheric chemistry experiments which are designed to evaluate fluxes and
budgets of sulfur gases, to measure ocean-atmosphere exchange of sulfur gases,
to study sources and sinks of OCS and CS2, and to study chemical transformation
of dimethyl sulfide and sulfur dioxide and their role in affecting climate via
aerosol formation in the troposphere.