* 9013190
* The Sevilleta Field Station: Development of a Regional      Research Center in New Mexico
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/1991,07/31/1993
* Donald Duszynski, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* David Schindel
* 07/31/1993
* USD 140,000.00

The Sevilleta Region of Central New Mexico is a large and ecologically area, and
is utilized extensively by a growing number of research scientists. The region
includes latitudinal, longitudinal and elevational transition zones among
numerous biomes, including Great Plains Grassland, Chihuahuan Desert, Great
Basin Shrub-steppe, Interior Chapparal, Mogollon (Pinyon-Juniper) Woodland, and
Montane Forest. Additional biotic assemblages within these biomes include Rio
Grande "Bosque" (Riparian Cottonwood Forests) and Wetlands, Subalpine Forests,
and Subalpine Grasslands. Current scientific research in the region focuses on
biotic responses to climate changes at various time scales (seasonal, annual,
and long-term), biodiversity issues, and ecosystem restoration following natural
and anthropogenic disturbances. At present, the University of New Mexico
maintains a small research field station on the Sevilleta National Wildlife
Refuge (a 100,000 ha, centrally located study area), designed to support up to 6
field researchers. However, the recent user population of the station had
dramatically increased. In the last five years, the Sevilleta has served as a
research site for 125 researchers, representing 17 universities, 9 U.S.
Government agencies, 3 New Mexico State Government agencies, 2 private
institutes, and 1 foreign country. The 1989 station population included 57
researchers (plus technicians and graduate students), with up to 35 scientists
and technicians operating simultaneously out of the station during peak summer
research months (April through October). This project will expand the station's
facilities and significantly increase station capacity. The benefits of a
centrally located, expanded Sevilleta Field Station to the scientific community
included: 1. ready access to the many populations and ecosystems present in the
area; 2. improve logistical support for field research projects; 3. enhanced on-
site analysis and data processing capabilities, GIS and data management systems;
and 4. an intellectual environment derived from the wide variety of scientists
from numerous disciplines and institutions.