* 9013334
* National Information Service for Earthquake Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1991,12/31/1994
* Jack Moehle, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* William A. Anderson
* 12/31/1994
* USD 1,380,655.00

This award provides renewed support for the National Information Service for
Earthquake Engineering (NISEE). The purpose of NISEE is to disseminate
information on earthquake engineering and allied fields to practicing engineers
and related professionals, academic researchers, government agencies and the
general public. The NISEE program at the Earthquake Engineering Research Center,
University of California, Berkeley, includes the EERC Library, Earthquake
Engineering Abstracts and Computer Applications. During the last two year grant
cycle, the EERC Library acquisitions and public service transactions continued
to increase. Earthquake Engineering Abstracts completed the conversion of its
software to an in-house publication system. The NISEE database was made
available to users. Computer Applications continued its distribution of
microcomputer and mainframe computer software at the same level as recent years.
The program provides a central collection point for reports on NSF and other
sponsored research as well as other developments in earthquake engineering.
NISEE will continue to take advantage of new information handling technology to
increase the efficiency of current operations, to broaden the spectrum of
services provided and to expand the audience served. The Abstract Journal and
NISEE database will continue to expand their audience and bring the Abstract
Journal to a current publication schedule. The EERC Library will begin to
convert existing manual records into machine-readable form. Computer
Applications will expand capabilities for software which runs on a 386 class
machine. This branch of NISEE complements the activity of a second branch at the
California Institute of Technology.