* 9013065
* Dissertation Research:  Exchange of Vanport Flint Bladelets Among Hopewell Groups
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1994
* James Foradas, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1994
* USD 11,995.00

Flint (a microcrystalline quartz rock) is highly resistant to weathering and
fractures to produce a sharp, durable cutting edge. It was utilized by
prehistoric peoples to manufacture tools for the processing of plant and animal
materials. Its availability was directly linked to the survival of many
prehistoric human populations, and it was widely exchanged in prehistoric
economic systems. However, the patterning of this exchange is poorly understood
largely because existing methods of sourcing flint are unreliable. Under the
direction of Drs. Richard Yerkes and Gunter Faure, Mr. James Foradas, a graduate
student at Ohio State University, will develop sourcing criteria from samples
derived from Vanport flint which is exposed in a number of Ohio outcrops. The
project will consist of four main stages. Mr. Foradas will first collect
specimens from a series of outcrops. He will then conduct analyzes to
characterize each. These will include trace element determinations using X-ray
fluorescence, petrographic, and SEM analysis. On this basis he will then examine
flints recovered in archaeological context from a number of Scioto River Valley
Hopewell culture sites. Finally, he will use these data to reconstruct Hopewell
exchange patterns. This research is important for several reasons. It will serve
to develop a non-destructive analytic technique for the analysis of chert which
can be used, hopefully, in a wide range of archaeological situations. This
should prove a valuable tool. Archaeologists are interested in how complex
societies evolve, and the Hopewell culture marks one of the earliest
manifestations of such a large scale development in North America. It has been
postulated that the regulation of trade in such valuable objects as high grade
flint served as an integrating mechanism, and Mr. Foradas' work will allow
testing of this hypothesis. Finally, this project will assist in the training of
an extremely promising young scientist.