* 9013202
* Dissertation Research:  Neurophysiology of the Amygdaloid   Complex Using Ethologically Significant Stimuli
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1992
* NONE NONE, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 08/31/1992
* USD 10,000.00

A major effort in modern neuroscience has been directed at understanding how
the brain accomplishes sensory perception. Research on the visual system has
found that different brain regions are specialized for the perception of shape,
color, motion, and other aspects of the visual world. Much less is understood
about the perception of emotional aspects of visual stimuli. It is not clear,
for example, how animals or humans are able to differentiate an angry or
threatening facial gesture from a friendly one. Monkeys, like humans, are highly
visual creatures and use subtle facial gestures for communication.
Electrophysiological studies have shown that neurons in the amygdaloid complex
respond selectively to the presentation of static images of faces. The previous
work did not determine whether or not these neurons differentiate the emotional
content of the facial expressions. However, monkeys with lesions of the
amygdaloid complex are indifferent to positive or negative events and are unable
to appropriately interpret signals of dominance or submission by other monkeys,
suggesting that the amygdaloid complex may mediate the perception of species-
specific emotional stimuli. In Frederick K. Nahm's doctoral-dissertation
research, videotapes of the facial expressions of socially interacting monkeys
will be made. These images will then be transferred to a digital optical-laser-
disk system. Epochs of monkey facial expressions will be catalogued and divided
into 1-second segments. Series of these 1-second dynamic stimuli covering all
forms of monkey expression will be used as stimuli for electrophysiological
studies that will survey neuronal responsivity in all portions of the monkey
amygdaloid complex. These studies will contribute to an understanding of the
neural basis of normal emotional perception and expression in the human brain.
Moreover, since the amygdaloid complex has the highest density of benzodiazepine
receptors (through which the antianxiety drugs such as librium have their
effects), these studies will also pave the way to an understanding of anxiety
and inappropriate emotional states such as phobias.