* 9013424
* A Workshop on the Integration of Numerical and Symbolic     Computing Models, Saratoga Springs, New York, July, l990.
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/1990,10/31/1991
* Deepak Kapur, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 10/31/1991
* USD 28,000.00

Over the last decade, there has been considerable development in investigating
methods of symbolic mathematics in many application areas of computer science
and artificial intelligence, for example, engineering design - solid and
geometric modeling, robotics and motion planning, and machine vision. Most of
this research, however, has been theoretical, and its application to real
problems has been limited because of the slow progress made in applying the
combinatorially expensive symbolic techniques to real problems. Also there are
no mechanisms in computer algebra and other symbolic techniques to handle issues
of data error and computational precision. Typically such problems are addressed
in practice by using numerical methods to approximate the underlying
mathematical models. This workshop will focus on approaches for systematic
integration of symbolic techniques with numerical techniques. Symbolic methods
can provide insight into the structure and stability of problem solutions while
numerical methods are efficient for handling the thousands of data elements
which arise in practical applications. The workshop will bring together experts
from numerical computation, symbolic computation, and application areas using
such methods. Some possible topics of discussion are: methods for solving
nonlinear equations, homotopy methods, nonlinear optimization, exploitation of
geometric invariants, differential theories.