* 9013428
* Exploratory Visit in USSR on Indicators of Public Attitudes Toward Science and Technology
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1990,07/01/1990
* Linda Lubrano, American University
* Standard Grant
* Gerson Sher
* 07/01/1990
* USD 0.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) wishes to investigate the possibility of
adding the Soviet Union to the list of foreign countries in which data on
science and engineering are collected so as to be comparable to U.S. data
compiled by the NSF and published in Science and Engineering Indicators. One of
the key areas of interest is survey data of public attitudes toward science and
engineering. In order to explore the possibility of undertaking cooperative work
with the U.S.S.R. in this area, it is necessary to identify and make contact
with appropriate researchers in the U.S.S.R., to establish their willingness to
perform a national opinion survey in that country in coordination with a future
Science and Engineering Indicators survey to be performed in the United States,
and to obtain the necessary resources. Professor Linda Lubrano of American
University is an expert on Soviet social science research and on the general
state of the organization and management of science and engineering in the
U.S.S.R. Through her extensive contacts in the Soviet scientific community she
will initiate exploratory contacts on behalf of the NSF in this area. It is
envisioned that subsequent cooperative work would take place under the auspices
of the NSF-U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences Memorandum of Understanding in the Field
of Basic Scientific Research.