* 9013087
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on Relativistic Atomic    Collisions
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1994
* Walter Meyerhof, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 09/30/1994
* USD 14,170.00

This award supports Professor Walter Meyerhof of Stanford University for
collaborative research in physics with Professor Joerg Eichler of the Hahn-
Meitner Institute, Berlin, Germany. Professor Meyerhof and his group at Stanford
have been studying atomic collision processes at high energy, mainly
experimentally, in order to understand inner-shell electronic and radiative
processes occurring during an atomic collision. They have collaborated for many
years with specialists in Europe and Latin America. The main line of their
experimental research is shifting now from the intermediate velocity to the
extreme relativistic domain, in partnership with Dr. Harvey Gould of Lawrence
Berkeley Laboratory. In parallel with this experimental work, collaboration with
theoretical physicists will be essential to provide the deep understanding
necessary for relativistic processes. Professor Eichler offers crucial
theoretical expertise in the mechanisms of electron capture and in atomic
collision processes at relativistic velocities. To provide a good basis for
their future work, Professors Eichler and Meyerhof are collaborating on a
monograph that will discuss the theoretical approaches which have been used to
date to treat relativistic atomic collisions and provide details about
experimental techniques and results.