* 9013177
* U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research on Anisotropy             In Grain Aligned Superconducting (123)-Compounds
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1992
* Douglas Finnemore, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 08/31/1992
* USD 17,080.00

This award supports collaborative interactions between scientists in the
Department of Physics, Iowa State University, led by Professor Douglas K.
Finnemore, and Professor Harald W. Weber and colleagues of the Atomic Institute
of the Austrian Universities, in Vienna. The two groups have been studying the
anisotropy of the magnetic properties and current carrying capacity of high
temperature superconductors. Their goal is to develop bulk superconducting
materials which will carry a high critical current and thus be suitable for
conductor material in large magnets. Their cooperative work plan relies heavily
on their complementary expertise and facilities. The Iowa State University group
is very experienced in the theory of anisotropic superconductors, in sample
preparation for grain oriented materials, in measure- ments of the vortex line
energy and in the study of pinning potentials for vortex motion. The Austrian
group has great experience with radiation damage in superconductors and highly
accurate studies of the fundamental magnetization properties of these highly
anisotropic materials The U.S. group at Iowa State University will prepare the
grain oriented crystal samples, measure their basic properties and arrange for
their irradiation at several U.S. accelerator facilities. The Austrian group
will measure the magnetic and structural properties of these materials using
different magnetization instruments (including their 17 tesla magnetiza- tion
apparatus.) There will also be a thorough study of the damage done by the ion
tracks using transmission electron spectroscopy. The development of an
understanding of anisotropy effects for flux pinning in high temperature
superconductors would have both fundamental and practical implications.
Classical superconductors are highly isotropic compared to the high temperature
materials, so the experiments proposed here are in a new regime where
dimensionality and topology play a more important role. In addition, there is a
large payoff for the development of new materials and new processing methods to
produce conductors with higher critical current density values. There is at
present no satisfactory conductor material for magnetics because the mechanical
properties and the transport critical currents are so poor. Thus, any
improvement in the critical current carrying capacity of the high temperature
bulk superconductors would have a large impact on the availability of new
magnets and new shielding materials.