* 9013888
* Collaborative Research:  Coupling Ecosystem Processes and   Vegetation Pattern Across Environmental Gradients
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1996
* Thomas Kirchner, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* John R. Gold
* 08/31/1996
* USD 1,219,622.00

This research will continue and extend the analysis of the relationship between
vegetation pattern (species or lifeform composition, size structure) and
ecosystem processes (nutrient cycling and water relations). This project has as
its nucleus a set of interacting models that couple ecosystem processes to
vegetation dynamics through growth, mortality, and regeneration of individual
plants. The models will be implemented and tested at several sites, each a
member of NSF's Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) network, which represent a
range of forests and grasslands arrayed along continental-scale temperature and
precipitation gradients. Analyses will focus on two goals that are fundamental
to ecosystem science and developing global environmental concerns: (1) to
account for existing patterns in vegetation and ecosystem processes under
current environmental regimes; and (2) to assess the potential responses of
ecosystems to environmental variability, especially anthropogenic climate
change. This project will contribute substantially to ecosystem science by
further elucidating the "pattern-process" paradigm as applied to feedbacks among
plant-demographic mechanisms, water relations, and nutrient cycling; and by
providing a synthesis of these relationships over a broad spectrum of ecosystems
but within a common framework. The project will also further develop networking
capabilities among collaborating scientists.