* 9013232
* 8th Biennial Meeting of the International Society for       Evolutionary Protistology; College Park, MD; July 1990
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1991
* Robert Andersen, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 06/30/1991
* USD 14,700.00

The protists are a diverse group of eucaryotic organisms, including the algae,
fungi, and protozoa, united by their intermediate level of organization between
the procaryotes (bacteria and blue-green algae) and the more highly organized
groups of plants and animals. Protists are commonly used as experimental
organisms in laboratory studies of cell biology. Understanding the evolutionary
relationships among protists groups has been impeded by the fact that algae,
fungi, and protozoans are studied by separate communities of investigators.
During the past few years, however, several Task Forces have been organized to
study the similarities and differences across the three groups, and to establish
standard nomenclature for structures that are shared by them. This careful study
should allow investigators to separate similarities that are due to common
ancestry (homologies) from similarities due to common function (analogies). The
first such effort to be completed is the Task Force on the Flagellar Apparatus
and the Cytoskeleton. The results will be presented at the 8th meeting of the
International Society of Evolutionary Protistology, in College Park, Maryland.
The proposed Task Force meeting and its associated proceedings volume will have
wide impact. This synthesis will open new discussions between cell biologists,
evolutionary biologists, and systematists working of algae, fungi, and
protozoans. These findings will help to clear the path leading to a better
understanding of the ancient diversification of higher organisms.