* 9013076
* Processing of Visual Information in the Compound Eyes of    Fireflies
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1995
* Abner Lall, Howard University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 07/31/1995
* USD 214,000.00

Fireflies emit bioluminescent light signals for visual communication. Since the
light emitted is dim, the visual system of fireflies offers a model for
investigating how to optimize detection of low-intensity optical signals. Work
to date has allowed proposing an optimization model for the colors of firefly
bioluminescence, based largely on the sensitivity of the eyes of different
species for light of different colors, or spectral sensitivity. This project
will investigate how some neurophysiological mechanisms can optimize functioning
in ecological settings called "photic niches" at times related to ambient light
levels, such as dusk versus late night. Studies will examine if visual
sensitivity and flashing rhythm may change with time of day, if the spectral
sensitivity of the photoreceptors is different in different parts of the
compound eye, and what particular role the different photopigments in the cells
of the eye play in modifying the photoreceptor responses. This project is a
model multidisciplinary approach to understanding how a sensory system has
become adapted in response to evolutionary selection pressure on both the
signalling system and the receiver. Results will bear on ecological and
evolutionary biology, on insect science and animal behavior, as well as
neuroscience. The research environment will provide excellent opportunities for
training students, particularly minorities, in current neuroscience.