* 9013105
* Improvement in Data Base and Visitor Services, Archbold     Biological Station
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1990,02/28/1993
* John Fitzpatrick, Archbold Expeditions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 02/28/1993
* USD 14,938.00

Archbold Biological Station (ABS) is an independent ecological research
facility located in south-central Florida. ABS conducts and promotes long-term
ecological research. In 1988 ABS became proprietor of the 10,200 acre Buck
Island Ranch, 8 miles east of the main ABS property on the Istokpoga Prairie,
and established the John D. MacArthur Agro-ecology Research Center. Dr. John
Fitzpatrick, Executive Director of ABS, proposes installation of a Geographic
Information System (GIS), which is a combined database manager and mapping
computer system. ABS has hired a full-time GIS technician to computerize a
variety of maps and geographically-referenced datasets (including the history of
fires on the property) and to help resident and visiting scientists utilize this
new facility in their research. The proposed GIS installation will have an
important impact on research activities at the Archbold Biological Station. Many
new investigators will establish research programs at ABS because of this new
computing capability, and the current group of resident and visiting
investigators will be able to explore their data and design new studies at new
levels of sophistication. For example, distribution maps of plant and animal
species will be digitized and analyzed relative to soil type and the recency of
fires in each habitat. Biological data will be integrated with hydrologic,
topographic, geochemical, and historical data, yielding many new insights into
ecological processes.