* 9013122
* U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research:  Characteristics of the   Work Environment Affecting Occupational Stress
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1991,04/30/1994
* Gary Evans, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 04/30/1994
* USD 12,550.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Gary Evans,
University of California, Irvine and Professor Gunn Johansson, Department of
Psychology, University of Stockholm, Sweden. The objective of the project is to
determine characteristics of the work environment that affect occupational
stress and the etiology of cardiovascular disease. The specific research
proposed will evaluate an experiment in environmental and job re-design being
conducted by the Stockholm Public Transit District. The intervention aims to
reduce traffic congestion for bus drivers and improve passenger service. A
before/after quasi-experimental design with a non-equivalent control group will
evaluate the experimental intervention. Multi-methodological assessments of
occupational stress will include psychophysiological indices, self-reports and
trained observations of drivers while on the job. Detailed assessments of the
physical and psychosocial bus driving environment will be carried out. This
collaboration brings together a Swedish work psychologist experienced in
psychophysiological measurements of the impacts of psychosocial work
characteristics, with the US investigator, who is an environmental psychologist
with expertise in stress research and quantitative methods.