* 9013942
* Dissertation Research: Biological Affinities of Late        Pleistocene through Modern African Aboriginal Populations:  The Dental Evidence
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1991,06/30/1993
* NONE NONE, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan S. Friedlaender
* 06/30/1993
* USD 8,495.00

The timing and site(s) of appearance of modern humans is of central interest to
physical anthropologists. This research seeks to help clarify the relationships
of sub-Saharan populations through the analysis of dental traits. As many recent
theories postualte a recent, African origin for our species, clarification of
population relationships on this continent are a key aspect of resolving the
larger question. Lately, much research has utilized nucleic acid technology to
seek answers to these questions, but not without challenge. For instance, some
of the results appear to be at odds with archaeological evidence. The dentition
evidences a number of independent, genetic traits which can be used to help
clarig=fy population relationships. To date, however, the dental anthropology of
African poulations has been minimal. The proposed study will involve the scoring
of a sizable number of human, African dentitions which are housed in several
museums. A number of computer algorithms can be used to assess similarities
between populations, both within Africa and in contrast to non- African groups
for which data already exists. By such techniques a clearer picture of human
movements and evolution should emerge.