* 9013252
* Models of Decisionmaking Among Sentencing Jurors
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/1990,10/31/1994
* William Bowers, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 10/31/1994
* USD 182,968.00

Twenty years ago, the Supreme Court adopted new statutes with explicit
sentencing guidelines for jurors in capital cases in an attempt to remedy
arbitrariness in sentencing decisions. Since then the Supreme Court and lower
courts have been basing decisions on the assumption that jurors can and do base
their penalty decisions on the guidelines provided. Studies of the outcomes of
jury decisions in capital cases suggest that impermissible factors (notably
race) still influence jury decisions of life or death even under sentencing
guidelines approved by the Court. To date, there are very few studies of how
death penalty jurors actually arrive at these decisions. This study will
illuminate how jurors make decisions by seeking to develop a clearer
understanding of the exercise of discretion and of the sources and extent of
arbitrariness in capital sentencing decisions. Extensive interviews will be
conducted with 120 jurors from 30 capital trials in each of 8 states. Judges,
prosecutors, and defense attorneys in these cases will also be interviewed. The
study adopts an integrated theoretical approach which examines what decision
models jurors employ, what forms of arbitrariness and/or discrimination occur,
and how the two are linked. Several alternative models will be tested. Formal
rational algebraic decision models of jury sentencing behavior will be used.
Also, theoretical formulations labeled "story" and "matching" decision models
will be employed. Finally, labeling and conflict theories will consider the role
of social agents as dominant groups in applying the law against subordinate
groups. Individual jurors are the primary units of analysis. This study is
unique in its interdisciplinary approach and in its linkages between
statutory/procedural aspects of the law and the actual decision models jurors
adopt. Not only does the research promise to enhance our understanding of the
way in which decisionmakers exercise discretion and arrive at legal judgments,
but also it will provide information helpful in improving the administration of
justice in criminal cases.