* 9013181
* A Laboratory for the Culture of Oceanic and Deep-Sea        Organisms
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1990,08/31/1993
* Kevin Eckelbarger, Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institution, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 08/31/1993
* USD 47,979.00

With its state-of-the-art submersibles and ROVs, Harbor Branch Oceanographic
Institution (HBOI) is in a unique position to conduct biological research in
deep midwater habitats and at continental shelf depth too great to reach by
SCUBA. The submersibles are used by scientists funded by NOAA, NSF, ONR,
Seagrant and other agencies in addition to staff scientists. Because the two
HBOI support ships, both have walk-in environmental facilities for maintaining
deep-water organisms, specimens can be transported to port for additional work
following cruises. However, the institution's shore-based facilities for
controlling temperature, pressure, spectral irradiance and other environmental
parameters are inadequate. To remedy this situation, the Division of Marine
Science at HBOI is currently renovation a laboratory to serve as a culture and
experimental facility for work with midwater and bathyal organisms. This
facility, which has been given the acronym COOL (Culture of Oceanic Organisms
Laboratory) will allow researchers to conduct shore-based physiological,
behavioral, embryological and ecological research with organisms collected from
deep waters. This project will provide partial funding for some of the capital
equipment needed to outfit the laboratory, namely environmental rooms,
circulating water baths, and a small hyperbaric chamber with associated
hardware. The culture laboratory is to be located in the same building as a
newly designated visiting investigator laboratory. Both facilities will be
available as common-use research space for graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows, and staff scientist from the national and international scientific
community.