* 9013948
* U.S.-Netherlands Cooperative Research on Nitrate Uptake in  Membrane Vesicles of Escherichia Coli
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1991,05/31/1992
* John Rowe, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 05/31/1992
* USD 14,400.00

This award provides partial support for a long term sabbatical visit by
Professor John J. Rowe, University of Dayton, to the Department of Microbiology,
University of Groningen, the Netherlands, where he will collaborate with
Professor Wil Konings. They will apply new techniques to study the process of
nitrate transport during anaerobic nitrate respiration. Their long term
objectives are to define the mechanism(s) for nitrate uptake, and to develop a
data-based model for the regulation of nitrate uptake by oxygen and nitrite.
Professor Rowe has experience in the area of procaryotic nitrate reduction, and
nitrate metabolism in general, and has recently become interested in nitrate
transport and its regulation by oxygen. Professor Konings possesses expertise in
the complementary areas of bioenergetics and transport of solutes in
procaryotes. He has developed an energy transducing proteoliposome system that
is applicable to the nitrate transport problem and that will allow definitive
studies of this system for the first time. Dr. Rowe will initiate joint research
in the Netherlands during his sabbatical, and learn these new techniques to
enable him to continue such experimentation back in Dayton. Anaerobic nitrate
respiration is common to a great number of bacterial genera including organisms
of agricultural, environ- mental, and medical significance. As the concluding
step of one turn of the nitrogen cycle, it is of major significance to nitrogen
cycling from a global to a microniche level. Nitrate respiration is coupled to
the expulsion of protons across the cytoplasmic membrane thus generating
respiratory energy under anaerobic conditions. Very little information is
available about the mechanism of nitrate transport across biological membranes
during nitrate respiration. In part this was due to the need to use complex,
whole cell experimental systems which yielded ambiguous results; there also has
been a lack of suitable radioisotopes of nitrogen and oxygen for such studies.
These problems have recently been overcome by the development of sensitive
nonradioactive methods for analyzing nitrate and nitrite and also the creation
of more defined experimental systems comprised of proteoliposomes fused with
biological membranes. Thus the time is right for these investigators to join
forces to tackle a very important problem in microbial physiology.