* 9013074
* Workshop on Opportunities and Challenges in Crystallization Research to be Held at the Engineering Research Institute atIowa State University in November 1990
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1990,02/29/1992
* Glenn Schrader, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/29/1992
* USD 28,000.00

This project supports a 3-day workshop entitled "Opportunities and Challenges in
Crystallization Research" to be held at the Engineering Research Institute at
Iowa State University in November 1990. A great deal of progress has been made
in the last three decades following the development of techniques for modeling
crystal size distribution and relating the distribution to process design and
crystallization kinetics. As a result of the analyses facilitated by these
modeling techniques, much has been learned about the nature of crystal growth
and nucleation in mixed suspensions such as those common in the process
industries. The effects of the phenomena of secondary nucleation and growth
dispersion and the effects of trace quantities of additives or impurities have
been delineated. Progress has been made toward fundamental understanding of
these phenomena. This past work has opened the door for additional research that
has the potential to vastly increase knowledge about crystallization from
solution. This workshop will assess this progress and determine the potential
for future work to increase our understanding of this important phenomenon. The
participants for this workshop are chosen from both industry and academia, and
they will include the leading researchers involved in research and development
of applications of crystallization from solution. A final report will be
provided to the National Science Foundation. A summary of the findings will be
submitted for publication.