* 9013282
* Enhancement of Rensselaer Fresh Water Institute Laboratory  Capabilities on Lake George, New York
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1994
* Charles Boylen, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 02/28/1994
* USD 105,000.00

This project will provide partial funding for improvement of the laboratory
capabilities of the Lake George biological field station of the Fresh Water
Institute (FWI) of the Rensselaer Polytechnical Institution. NSF funds will
provide approximately 15% of the total estimated cost of construction of the
laboratory facilities. With its present facilities, FWI has developed a core of
research programs focusing on water resources and aimed at understanding
ecosystems undergoing change through anthropogenic perturbations. The
northeastern US contains many different stressed aquatic ecosystems, including
those suffering from acid precipitation, toxic contamination, nutrient
enrichment, and the introduction of exotic vegetation. The Lake George field
station is a major regional environmental research facility serving the
limnological needs of researchers lacking such facilities at their home
institutions. The current use of the field station by FWI staff and
investigators affiliated with numerous academic institutions and government
agencies within the eastern New York and western New England region has placed a
heavy demand on the field station's physical resources, requiring the use of a
variety of temporary laboratories. Consolidating these into one properly
equipped facility will provide improved year-round lakeside use, allowing
enhanced laboratory experimentation and fully-seasonal sampling capabilities.