* 9013407
* Meeting on Development of Physical Methods to Sequence the  Human Genome, June 10-13, 1990, Mt McKinley Park, Alaska
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1991
* Jack Griffith, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 11/30/1991
* USD 10,000.00

A central emphasis of the human genome project is at the present time on the
development of novel physical and biochemical technologies for genome mapping.
Such methods will involve not only means of obtaining direct base pair by base
pair sequences but also the generation of lower resolution large scale physical
maps that will make it possible to arrange the individual blocks of sequences
into a single map. The purpose of this meeting is to bring together experts from
Europe, Japan and the United States in order to examine and evaluate new
approaches and needed developments of genome technologies and methods. Areas
which will specifically be examined include the use of various imaging
technologies for the generation of genomic maps. Light and electron microscopic
imaging will be examined as well as scanning tunneling EM to directly map DNA.
These methods will be compared to others such as the semi-automated gel
electrophoretic methods. Nucleic acid tagging methodologies will also be
examined. The hope is that critical examination of the advantages and
disadvantages of these different methods will lead to a consensus on which
should be pursued further. The combination of overview presentations, talks on
specific areas, and workshops, all of which will occur in this meeting, should
provide a much clearer picture of where the current focus of mapping is and how
individual efforts as well as the study of other animal and plant genomes fit
into the larger picture. Given the international character of this meeting,
Alaska, which is easily accessible and attractive for American, European and
Japanese researchers and policy makers, is an ideal setting for this conference.