* 9013059
* Small-to-Gigantic Transition Metal Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1993
* Lawrence Dahl, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 05/31/1993
* USD 514,000.00

The focus of this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic
Chemistry Program is the the chemistry of transition metal cluster compounds.
The project involves the synthesis of new cluster compounds, characterization of
their structures and bonding, and studies of their electrochemical and chemical
reactivity patterns. A major objective of the research is to provide a unified
correlation, based on molecular orbital theory, between molecular geometries and
electronic configurations for various kinds of metal clusters, many of which
gain and/or lose electrons without rupture of their atomic frameworks.
Transition metal cluster compounds comprise an important class of industrial
catalysts, and some very large clusters are of intense current interest because
they display anomalous magnetic behavior ("quantum size" effects) not seen in
small clusters or bulk solids. The main thrust of the project will be the
synthesis, isolation and characterization of platinum, nickel and mixed-metal
cluster anions, with emphasis on the design of rational synthetic routes to
high-nuclearity metal clusters and the development of appropriate separation
techniques to enable the isolation and crystallization of pure species for
structural and physical studies. Another overall goal is to bridge the gap
between discrete and extended solid-state clusters via appropriate
oligomerization/condensation reactions. New metal clusters will be synthesized
which contain main-group ligands with S, Se, Te, N, P, As or Sb atoms. New metal
phosphorus clusters will be prepared by the photolysis of molecular
tetraphosphorus. An attempt will be made to use the parameter-free Fenske-Hall
model to provide a quantitative electronic basis for the results of
crystallographic and spectrocopic analyses of small metal clusters.