* 9013883
* Spatial Gradients in Nutrient Recycling and Their Effect on Stream Ecosystem Stability
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1991,09/30/1994
* Jerry Elwood, Oak Ridge National Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Richard F. Dame
* 09/30/1994
* USD 1,287,292.00

This research will investigate the response of stream ecosystems to nutrient
limitation and the response of nutrient-limited stream ecosystems to different
types of environmental disturbances. Specific objectives are to (1) determine
the role of in-place recycling of a limiting nutrient within the benthic
boundary region of natural stream reaches, (2) determine the spatial variation
in recycling both among streams and longitudinally within a stream, and whether
recycling varies in a predictable way, and (3) test some theoretical predictions
about the relationship between ecosystem resilience/resistance and in-place
nutrient recycling in natural streams, including the effect of longitudinal
nonuniformities in nutrient availability and recycling due to spatial
heterogeneity in nutrient input and within-stream nutrient uptake. The overall
goal is to better understand the factors regulating the structure and
productivity of benthic communities in lotic ecosystems, including their
resistance and resistance to disturbances that include scouring, toxicant
pulses, and changes in nutrient input. The proposed work will be achieved by
combining theoretical analyses using mathematical models with empirical studies
using both natural and laboratory streams that can be experimentally manipulated
and to which releases of radiotracers can be made to quantify nutrient cycling
processes under ambient conditions. The network of large-scale laboratory
streams and the ability to use radiotracers in natural streams are unique
capabilities for conducting stream ecosystem research at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory.