* 9013274
* Inquiry Into Chaotic Routing
* CSE,EIA
* 02/01/1991,07/31/1992
* Carl Ebeling, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Maguire
* 07/31/1992
* USD 224,837.00

A chaotic router is a non-minimal, adaptive message router that uses
randomization in routing and derouting decisions. The use of randomization
simplifies the router sufficiently that it's conjectured chaotic routing can be
competitive with oblivious routing, achieving equivalent or better average-case
performance, greatly improved worst-case performance and fault tolerance. Though
the principles of chaotic routing apply to some degree to any topology with
multiple paths between nodes, chaotic routers for binary n-cubes are presently
under investigation. The goal of the research is to establish a compelling case
for constructing an experimental version of a hypercube chaotic router. Towards
that end a series of studies are presently underway. 1. The idealized router of
the proposal is being converted to practical engineering designs; the details of
the chaotic routing logic are being specified. Alternatives include sequential
and parallel channel match algorithms, a virtual cut-through alternative to the
store-and- forward of the proposal, various alternates for asynchronous
channels, various queue sizes, etc. 2. A detailed simulator (with a granularity
of approximately a half-dozen gate delays) has been created. Experiments are
being run on a 256 node hypercube to compare the different chaotic router
designs with various alternative routers, such as oblivious and priority
routers. 3. Simulations are being run to analyze the effect of multiqueue size
on the latency and throughput of the network. The role of message length on
latency and throughput is also being analyzed. 4. Probabilistic analysis,
completed last summer, shows that an idealized hypercube chaotic router is
deterministically deadlock free and probabilistically livelock and starvation
free. The new engineering designs are being abstracted and analyzed to assure
that they are consistent with the idealized model of this theory. 5. The first
version of a custom CMOS channel design is back from fabrication and is being
tested. 6. Alternate implementation strategies, besides custom CMOS, are being
investigated. 7. The generality of the chaotic routing principles are being
analyzed in the context of different topologies. In particular, various forms of
the mesh topology are being studied as alternates. 8. The role of clocked and
self-timed logic in chaotic routing is being analyzed in light of the fact
theoretical foundations are independent of the timing policy.