* 9013280
* Investigation of the Effects of the QBO and the Solar Cycle on the Extratropical Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1993
* Mark Baldwin, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Sherry O. Farwell
* 02/28/1993
* USD 83,222.00

Recent results show a sun/climate relationship subject to modulation by
equatorial stratospheric winds, viz. the quasibiennial oscillation (QBO). These
results show responses of the atmospheric meteorological parameters to solar
activity from the mesosphere down to the troposphere seem to be dependent on the
QBO phase. This relationship will be examined in the context of atmospheric
variables with emphasis on the link between the QBO and the extratropical
atmosphere. This involves a two-fold effort: the investigation of the
statistical significant of the solar/QBO/weather (climate) relationship, and the
study of dynamical links between tropical and extratropical variability. The
statistical testing will involve the use of data from the surface to 10 mb, in
all seasons. Particular attention will be paid to details such as definition of
the QBO phase, selection of averaging periods, and possibilities of QBO
modulation in either or both QBO phases. The investigation of dynamical links
will involve examining atmospheric data from the surface to 1mb for evidence of
QBO modulation of the extratropical atmosphere. Since a mechanism for the
QBO/extratropics connection may involve modulation of planetary wave
propagation, emphasis will be given to the propagation of planetary waves and
their interaction with the mean flow.