* 9013331
* Acquisition of a Geographic Information System for the      Adirondack Ecological Center
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1993
* William Porter, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 08/31/1993
* USD 50,000.00

The State University of New York, College of Environmental Science and Forestry
continues to strengthen the research program and support capabilities of the
Adirondack Ecological Center (AEC). Recent improvements have emphasized
additional personnel support, enhancement of comprehensive environmental
monitoring programs, improvement of work and living spaces for researchers and
students, and development of more effective description and documentation of the
station and its associated research. Research program goals call for greater
emphasis on integrative studies to investigate ecological processes on a large
scale, with a spatial context and long-term perspective. The development of a
Geographic Information System (GIS) for the station and immediate surroundings
is a key component of this effort. This project provides matching funds to
purchase computer hardware and software which will form the core of a
data/information management and advanced spatial analysis system, to complement
the excellent ecological research qualities of the AEC. These qualities include
a strategic location and a broad historical data base pertaining to biological,
chemical and physical variables, dating to the 1930's. The GIS will capitalize
on these assets, faculty and graduate student strengths, and visiting scientist
programs to advance synergism in ecological research and account for spatial
variables in biological research. Automation in the collection, storage,
display, and analysis of data and information gained from past, current, and
future research at the AEC will substantially advance the research, improve the
management, and increase the utilization of the station.