* 9013123
* AEROCE Management
* GEO,AGS
* 10/15/1990,09/30/1994
* Joseph Prospero, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 09/30/1994
* USD 685,350.00

This proposal covers two types of activities: 1) the management of the AEROCE
scientific program; 2) the management of operations at the Secondary Network
stations at Barbados and Izania. The PI carries out his management duties in his
capacity as chairman of the AEROCE Executive Committee which is comprised of
three PI's from the AEROCE program. A Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC)
composed of independent scientists provides oversight. The SAC reviews ongoing
activities and assesses the future direction of the program. The SAC meets with
all PI's at least once a year at the AEROCE annual meeting. As Chairman of the
Executive Committee, the PI: 1) serves as the spokesperson for AEROCE when
dealing with foreign governments; 2) is the principal liaison with cooperating
research groups; 3) is the primary interface with international programs such as
IGAC and JGOPS. The University of Miami (UM) manages the stations in the
Secondary Network. At present, the UM is operating Barbados, Mace Head and
Izania. As network operator, the UM is responsible for all aspects of
maintaining the network station operator, the UM is responsible for all aspects
of maintaining the network station operations. This includes equipment design,
maintenance and repair, maintaining liaison with the station operators, ensuring
QA/QC, distribution samples to other PI's and archiving station data.