* 9013967
* U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research:  Partition of Low-Copy-   Number Plasmids in Escherichia coli
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1991,06/30/1995
* Stuart Austin, Advanced BioScience Laboratories Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 06/30/1995
* USD 17,850.00

This award will support collaborative research in genetics between Dr. Stuart
Austin, Advanced Bioscience Laboratories, Inc., Frederick, Maryland and
Professor Kurt Nordstrom, Department of Microbiology, University of Uppsala. The
objective of the proposed project is a study of the dynamics of plasmid
partitioning in bacteria and of partition-specific incompatibility. Low-copy-
number plasmids are responsible for many economically important phenomena, such
as drug resistance and bacterial pathogenicity. In addition to highly accurate
replication controls the plasmids are subject to a partition mechanism that, at
least superficially, resembles mitosis in eukaryotic cells. Using components of
two model systems, the plasmids R1 and P1 of Escherichia coli, the investigators
seek to understand how partition is accomplished, and how the partition systems
are integrated into an overall strategy which ensures the remarkable fidelity
with which these plasmids are maintained in nature. The collaborative effort
will focus on the question of how plasmid copies are recognized for partition
and, to this end, will concentrate on studies of the distribution of plasmid
copies in situations where two plasmids are competing with each other during key
events in the cell-cycle (partition-mediated incompatibility). They will also
develop a theoretical treatment of plasmid distribu- tion based on existing and
new models for plasmid maintenance and on their detailed knowledge of the
characteristics of the replication systems of these plasmids. Dr. Austin and
Nordstrom are leading investigators in the field of plasmid biology and their
combined expertise is an important factor in the successful outcome of this
project. The results of this research are expected to yield data that can
significantly advance understanding of the mechanisms of P1 and R1 partitioning.