* 9013361
* Dissertation Research:  Functional Articulation in          Diglossia:  A Case Study of Grammatical and Functional      Correspondences in Sinhala
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1990,04/30/1992
* Elizabeth Traugott, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 04/30/1992
* USD 8,610.00

ABSTRACT Diglossia poses a particular challenge to both grammatical and
variation theory. Parametric theories of grammar must be compatible with the
varieties of language in a diglossia, and statements of the variation in a
diglossia should also integrate with the parametric properties of grammatical
theory. As an approach to this problem, this research proposes a notion of
"functional articulation", which allows a formal theory of grammar to be
informed by language use patterns, by associating different grammatical features
with different communicative attitudes. This notion will be developed in a
detailed study of Sinhala diglossia. Sinhala has been chosen since it exhibits
theoretically significant differences between its two main varieties, and
intermediate varieties of language required to test hypotheses based on
functional articulation. The study will examine samples of the language found in
a wide range of contexts (e.g. textbooks, newspapers, broadcast news,
advertising, personal and formal letters, sermons, speeches, literatures, etc.).
Comparison and cross-referencing of selected texts will be facilitated by
HyperCard. The distribution of several grammatical features over the different
contexts will be analyzed in terms of their functional correlates and current
grammatical theory, focusing on the relationship between agreement and case. The
study will address the implications of functional articulation for modern
theories of grammatical universals, and the implications for other diglossic
language situations, education, and language teaching.