* 9014724
* Time Series Analysis of Phytoplankton Population Dynamics atTwo Stations off Bermuda
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/1991,02/28/1995
* Robert Olson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/1995
* USD 171,098.00

This project will examine the phytoplankton population dynamics at the Bermuda
Atlantic Time Series Station (BATS) and Station S, south of Bermuda using flow
cytometric analysis. The structure of these communities influences the amount of
net community production (new production) produced by the system, and thus it is
important that we understand the factors that regulate them. This work will be
done as a part of the US JGOFS Time Series Study (monthly samples), and the
Bermuda Biological Station's regular sampling program at Stations S (biweekly
samples). Specifically, we propose to measure the abundance, light scatter
properties (which reflect cell size and/or structure), and pigment
autofluorescence of the following components of the phytoplankton community: the
cyanobacteria - Synechococcus, prochlorophytes, eukaryotic ultraplankton,
coccolithophores, pennate diatoms, cryptophytes, and the total remaining cells
(except for those that are too rare to be caught in a 100 ml sample). These time
series data sets will be interpreted in the context of the other physical,
chemical, and biological parameters being measured at these stations. They will
help us: - Identify the key environmental factors that regulate food web
structure in mid-latitude oligotrophic waters; - Determine the time scales of
change in these communities; - Determine the spatial variability in population
dynamics, and estimate the "island effect" at the BATS station and Station S; -
Interpret the HPLC pigment data that is already being analyzed at these sites; -
Refine remote sensing algorithms, and - Assess the feasibility and utility of
collecting these types of data over very long time frames.