* 9014094
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on Stress-Induced         Transformation and Crack Growth in Partially-Stabilized     Zirconium Oxide-Based Ceramics
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1994
* Arthur Heuer, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 06/30/1994
* USD 13,522.00

This award will support collaborative research in ceramics between Dr. Arthur
Heuer, Case Western Reserve University, and Dr. Rolf Steinbrech, Institut fur
Reaktorwerkstoffe, KFA, Julich, Germany. The objective of the project is to
investigate stress-induced transformation and crack growth in zirconia.
Transformation toughening in zirconia-containing ceramics has been an area of
intense scientific and technological interest during the past decade, in view of
the potential industrial applications of these materials in demanding conditions
of fatigue and high temperature exposure. One of the major findings during this
period has been the importance of "resis- tance-curve" (R-curve) behavior. In
this project, monotonic and low cycle fatigue, environmental effects on natural
crack behavior at room temperature, and pre-cracking ("far-field") stress-
induced transformation will be studied. The fracture mechanics testing will
largely be conducted in Julich. The work in Cleveland will emphasize
microstructural characteri- zation of the fracture mechanics test specimens and
the determination of transformation zones after testing, both specialties of Dr.
Heuer. In addition, in situ tests will be carried out involving transformation
in the absence of microcracking, using low voltage SEM, optical interferometry,
and micro-Raman spectroscopy. The project will benefit from the past history of
successful collaboration between the two investigators and their complementary
expertise in fracture mechanics and microstructural characterization.