* 9014970
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research:  The Effects of Water  Movement on Zooplankton Capture by Corals
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1991,09/30/1992
* Kenneth Sebens, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Milsap
* 09/30/1992
* USD 24,190.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Kenneth Sebens of
Northeastern University and Dr.J.E.N. Veron of the Australian Institute of
Marine Science (AIMS). Coral reefs are among the world's most diverse and
scientifically intriguing marine habitats. They are also endangered by human
activities such as coastal modification, pollution, overfishing and global
warming. Research on coral reef ecology and the current status of coral reefs is
extremely importantant at this crucial time in the world's biotic history. This
project extends ongoing research on water flow effects on corals to field sites
along the Great Barrier Reef in Australia. The region offers the world's most
extensive reef system, a great variety of waterflow conditions, and extensive
diversity of coral growth forms and species. The hypothesis to be tested is that
water motion has a positive effect on particle (prey) capture by corals, and
thus on growth rates, and that these processes are strongly affected by coral
growth form and polyp size. Knowledge of water flow effects on corals is
important as basic information on coral biology, and may also help explain why
coral reefs change when shorelines are modified, and what flow conditions are
optimal for reef growth. The project represents excellent U.S. and Australian
collaboration. AIMS is the world center for research on corals because of its
proximity to the Great Barrier Reef,its excellent ship and laboratory
facilities, and its expertise in coral biology. Dr. Veron is one of the world's
leading authorities on coral taxonomy, biology, and ecology. Dr. Sebens brings
to the project results and hypotheses generated by his studies on Caribbean
coral reefs of the effects of water movement on zooplankton capture by corals.
The project represents a coordinated and cost-sharing research approach with the
potential to significantly advance understanding of coral ecology.