* 9014554
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional    Science
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1992
* NONE NONE, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/1992
* USD 5,985.00

The interrelationships among politics, ideology, and the economics of
industrial organization have direct relevance to focal issues in industrial
geography: the spatial location of industrial enterprise, the constraints on
decision making imposed by various ownership patterns, and decisions about the
introduction of new technology. Within the country of Israel, a remarkable
diversity of production structures coexists. Production structures are
characterized by the way in which the labor process is organized and by the
distinct political and ideological structures that regulate the production
process. This doctoral dissertation project will apply recent theoretical
insights in the field of industrial geography to compare the organization of
production and the location of industry in four distinct production structures--
the kibbutz, Histadrut (labor federation), government, and private industry.
This research will relate the industrial restructuring taking place at the level
of the firm in Israel to the distinct economic, political, and ideological
characteristics of each production structure and to the economic, political, and
ideological restructuring taking place at the national level. The doctoral
student will conduct twenty firm-level analyses, five for each production
structure, and the validity of the findings from the individual firm-level
analyses will be tested and compared to empirical findings of the contribution
of each production structure to the Israeli economy in general over the last
thirty years. This project will contribute to our understanding of the extent to
which organization and location of industry in these production structures is
constrained and motivated by political and ideological elements in the use of
space, labor supply and demand, the application of technology, organizational
structure, and the availability of capital. It will expand our understanding of
location theory as it applies to capitalist economic development, and it will
add the dimension of space to the study of industrial restructuring. The project
also will provide an excellent opportunity for a promising young scholar to
continue to develop independent research skills.