* 9014015
* U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research on Narrow Bandgap IV-VI   Semiconductor Microstructures
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1995
* Bennett Goldberg, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 01/31/1995
* USD 19,998.00

This award will support collaborative research on the topic of semiconductor
microstructures. The US investigators are Dr. Arto Nurmikko and Dr.Phillip
Stiles, Brown University, and Dr. Bennet Goldberg, Boston University. The
Austrian collaborator is Professor Gunther Bauer, Institut fur Physik,
University of Linz, Austria. The goal of the project is to explore novel
semiconductor microstructures, based on Narrow bandgap IV-VI compounds. A range
of sophisticated experimental studies are proposed, with emphasis on lower
dimensional electronic phenomena in quantizing magnetic fields. Specifically,
compositional and doping superlattices, hetero- junctions and other
microstructures of column four and column six elements will be grown, fabricated
and studied by optical and transport experimental probes. The emphasis on PbTe-
based systems is due to the inherent high carrier mobilities, ease of doping,
and large dielectric constant unavailable in other materials. The study will
concentrate on determining the unusual many body properties of systems when the
Coulomb energy between carriers is of the same order of magnitude as the kinetic
energy. They will also examine the reduced dimensional aspects of this
interaction, by creating compositional and doping heterojunctions which confine
the carriers in two dimensions. The experimental tools to be applied are
magneto-transport, interband and intraband magneto-optics, and transient optical
probes. Samples will be grown in Austria and patterned at Boston University and
Brown University. The project will benefit from the complementary expertise of
the US and Austrian investigators and their past history of successful
collaboration.