* 9014102
* US-Sweden Cooperative Research:  Biochemical Studies of     Pheromone Perception in Agrotis Segetum
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1991,12/31/1994
* Glenn Prestwich, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 12/31/1994
* USD 16,975.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Glenn Prestwich,
State University of New York at Stony Brook and two Swedish researchers from the
University of Lund, Sweden: Professor Christer Lofstedt of the Ecological Center
and Professor Tommy Liljefors of the Chemical Center. The objective of the
proposed project is to investigate mechanisms of pheromone detection. Chemists
and biologists have developed considerable sophisti- cation in the elucidation
of pheromone structures, industrial- scale pheromone synthesis, and in the use
of pheromones for mating disruption and integrated pest management, since the
publication of the first pheromone structure over thirty years ago. In contrast,
current understanding of how pheromones work on a molecular level is still very
rudimentary. Dr. Prestwich and his Swedish colleagues have worked together over
the past few years on the chemistry, biochemistry, ecology, behavior and sensory
physiology of pheromone perception in the turnip moth Agrotis segetum. Using
pheromones prepared at Stony Brook, the investigators now propose to conduct: 1)
biochemical studies of pheromone receptor and binding proteins, 2) computer
simulations and electrophysiological evaluations of pheromone analogs, and 3)
behavioral testing of physiologically active analogs. Dr. Prestwich will use
molecular graphics programs at the University of Lund to evaluate conformations
of pheromone analogs synthesized at Stony Brook, and will also use the routinely
available supply of Agrotis segetum pupae and adult moths at Lund for
biochemical experiments requiring live, staged insects. In addition, he will
establish as routine a variety of biochemical techniques in the Lund
laboratories and provide new structures for calculations and model testing by
the Swedish groups. This research will benefit from the complementary expertise
of Dr. Prestwich and his Swedish collaborators in the chemistry of pheromone
structure. The results of this research will have important applications for
future uses of pheromone technology, such as pest management.