* 9014843
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research:  Novel Video Methods inMicrovascular Research
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1992
* Annmarie Surprenant, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Milsap
* 08/31/1992
* USD 12,200.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Annmarie Surprenant
of the Oregon Health Sciences University and Dr. Timothy O. Neild of Monash
University, Australia. In the vascular systems of the body (blood and lymphatic)
it is the smallest muscular vessels that play the greatest role in physiological
regulation. It has been extremely difficult in the past to make quantitative
studies of the behavior of these vessels because they are too small to allow the
attachment of mechanical devices to measure their contractions. It is possible
to measure their movement by computer imaging but this approach had not been
exploited because of the high cost of the equipment and the lack of suitable
software. Computer image processing equipment is no longer prohibitively
expensive and Dr. Surprenant's research team has developed a simple but novel
algorithm for the measurement of small vessel diameter in real time. In an
existing grant to Dr. Suprenant from the National Science Foundation, she is
developing the software required for video-tracking of microvessels. In this
project, U.S.-standard video, image processing and computer hardware will be
brought to Dr. Neild's laboratory to determine the combination of hardware and
software to use in designing new systems based on a video tracking software
program to monitor the diameter of arterioles embedded in connective tissue,
developed in Dr. Neild's laboratory. The overall objective of the project is to
develop systems that will be compatible and available in both countries.