* 9014986
* Mathematical Sciences: NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the  Mathematical Sciences -  K-homology and Index Theory,       August 5-10, 1991; Boulder, Colorado
* MPS,DMS
* 12/01/1990,11/30/1991
* Jeffrey Fox, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 11/30/1991
* USD 24,808.00

To stimulate interest and activity in mathematical research, the National
Science Foundation each year supports a number of NSF-CBMS Regional Research
Conferences in the Mathematical Sciences. Each five-day conference features a
distinguished lecturer who delivers ten lectures on a topic of important current
research in one sharply focused area of the mathematical sciences. The lecturer
subsequently prepares an expository monograph based upon these lectures, which
is normally published by the American Mathematical Society or the Society for
Industrial and Applied Mathematics, or jointly by the American Statistical
Association and the Institute of Mathematical Statistics. Certain features
differentiate these conferences from typical research conferences. These are:
(1) Focus on a single important and timely area of research by a leading
practitioner, (2) Continued effect and local stimulation through regional
emphasis, (3) Panel review for quality, breadth, and timeliness, and (4)
Published monographs for a wider audience. This project will support an NSF-CBMS
Regional Research Conference in the Mathematical Sciences on K-Homology and
Index Theory to be held August 5-10, 1991 at the University of Colorado at
Boulder. Professor Paul Baum of Pennsylvania State University will be the
principal lecturer.