* 9014545
* Dissertation Research:  Development of Signature Whistles inFree-Ranging Bottlenose Dolphins
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1992
* Peter Tyack, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 08/31/1992
* USD 9,095.00

Bottlenose dolphins produce individually distinctive vocalizations called
signature whistles. The main objectives of Ms. Laela Sayigh's doctoral-
dissertation research are to examine factors influencing the development of the
signature whistle by dolphin calves, and to learn the social functions of
signature and non-signature (variant) whistles. It may be possible to correlate
sex differences in whistle production with the different roles males and females
play in the social structure of the community. The dolphins to be studied are in
a group of about 100 free- ranging bottlenose dolphins in waters near Sarasota,
Florida. Data on age, sex, and matrilineal relationships are available from
previous research on this group. Ms. Sayigh will observe and record undisturbed
mother-calf pairs in order to study the process of whistle development directly
in young calves. To test for signature-whistle recognition between mothers and
older (independent) offspring, Ms. Sayigh will play back recorded whistles while
dolphins are temporarily corralled in a large net. These observations should
reveal whether or not the behavior of the mother contributes to a previously-
observed difference in whistle development in male and female calves. The
research should also elucidate the social functions of signature and variant
whisles, and perhaps provide additional insights into the social relationships
of bottlenose dolphins.