* 9014961
* Digital Measurements of Power System Quantities               in Non-Sinusoidal Condition
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1992
* Elham Makram, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Vijay Vittal
* 07/31/1992
* USD 47,135.00

This is a Career Advancement award in the Research Opportunities for Women (ROW)
program. The advancement and wide applications of electronic devices and
microprocessors in many areas significantly contribute to electrical waveform
distortion. This created the need for basic research on principles and methods
of instrumentations of electrical quantities in non-sinusoidal situations. Also,
there are many situations in large scale systems, where a disturbance cause
fluctuation in many fundamental frequency and nominal voltage. The measurement
of such fluctuations from highly distorted waveforms will certainly contribute
to the fast detection of the disturbance. Therefore, this proposal includes
three major tasks to be achieved. First, to establish the proper definition of
the quantities to be measured in non-sinusoidal situations. The confusion and
discrepancy of distorted power, active power, reactive power, and power factor
in non-sinusoidal waveforms will be addressed in a scientific and experimental
manner. The second task will be concerned with the development of
microprocessor-based optimal estimation techniques for the measurement of:
waveform effective value, fundamental component RMS value, time domain active,
reactive, apparent and distorted power. Also the development of microprocessor
based techniques for recursive estimation of frequency deviation will be
investigated. The third task deals with a hardware implementation, a laboratory
testing and an investigation of the measurement technique for active, reactive,
and apparent power. The errors in each approach will be evaluated.