* 9014168
* U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research: Spectroscopy of Faint Cataclysmic Variables
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1990,05/31/1994
* Steven Howell, Leidos, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 05/31/1994
* USD 14,450.00

This award will support collaborative research in astronomy between Dr. Steven
Howell, Planetary Science Institute, Tucson, Arizona and Dr. Keith Mason,
Mullard Space Science Laboratory, University College London. The objective of
the proposed project is to investigate a previously unstudied group of
cataclysmic variable stars which may be members of the Galactic halo. The
standard picture of a cataclysmic variable (CV) is a close binary system
consisting of a late type main sequence star which transfers mass to a white
dwarf companion. The material that leaves the secondary forms a disk around the
primary star. The intersection of this stream and the disk gives rise to a "hot
spot", which can provide a large fraction of the system light. If the white
dwarf has a sufficiently strong magnetic field, the transferred material will be
disturbed and even the formation of the disk can be retarded. The only direct
method of finding the true location of these cataclysmic variables is through
distance determination. The investigators are analyzing spectroscopic data,
using software which they developed jointly at the Mullard Space Science
Laboratory, to model and deconvolve the contributions to the data from the
various systems components. This procedure will allow them to derive a distance
for these stars. If these binary systems are really located in the Galactic
halo, they should have very different properties from their well studied
counterparts located in the disk. The results of this study will make an
important contribution to understanding the true nature of cataclysmic variables
and how these populations differ, as well as to understanding the structure and
evolution of our Galaxy in general. The project will benefit from the
complementary expertise of the two investigators in the area of theoretical
interpretations of binary stars.