* 9014814
* Small Grants for Exploratory Research:  Rapid Heat Transfer Coefficient Measurement in a Computer Integrated            Manufacturing Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1991
* John Eaton, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 12/31/1991
* USD 31,680.00

Determination of heat transfer coefficients for manufactured objects subjected
to a flow field is an important engineering consideration for stress analysis
and useful life prediction. A new measurement technique to obtain pointwise heat
transfer coefficients over complex geometric objects is proposed. The method
represents an alternative procedure to the traditional and time-consuming
experimental technique which uses distributed heaters and temperature
transducers implanted in a design prototype of a manufactured object to set and
measure the thermal field at the surface of the object. The new method has the
potential to provide rapid determination of the heat transfer to, and
temperature distribution on engineering devices, subjected to various flow
regimes without the need for expensive and time-consuming instrumentation of the
devices. It is proposed as an integral step in a Computer Integrated
Manufacturing scheme based on Computer-Aided-Design (CAD) of prototype
engineering stems. The new method involves existing measurement tools and/or
technology (CAD, multiple-event liquid crystals, a robotically controlled hot-
air jet for the application of surface temperatures, and numerical thermal
regime modeling), and these tools are applied iteratively to obtain the heat
transfer coefficients. In sequence: 1) a prototype engineering object is
designed and manufactured via CAD; 2) the object is coated with liquid crystals
so that optical measurements of surface temperature may be obtained; 3) the
object is "painted" with a prescribed temperature distribution using the
robotically-controlled hot jet; 4) the object is subjected to a flow field; 5)
the new surface temperature distribution is determined optically; 6) a numerical
model is used to calculate the surface temperatures using an estimated (best
guess) distribution for the surface heat transfer coefficients; 7) if the
numerical model predicts the same temperature distribution as that measured,
then the estimated heat transfer distribution is correct. If not, the sequence
returns to step 3, and finally, after several iterations, the correct
distribution of heat transfer coefficients over the object is obtained.