* 9014120
*  U.S.-Nigeria Cooperative Research on Patterns of Predation  and Taxonomic Diversification in Cenozoic Gastropod         Assemblages
* O/D,OISE
* 10/15/1990,06/30/1993
* Alan Kohn, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 06/30/1993
* USD 18,595.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Alan J. Kohn, Department of Zoology,
University of Washington, and Dr. Ingela Arua, Department of Geology, University
of Nigeria, to pursue, for a period of 24 months, a program of cooperative
research on patterns of predation and taxonomic diversification in Cenozoic
gastropod assemblages. The research will address the question: How did the
complex communities in which Conidae are so prominent develop in time? The
collaborators will utilize material collected by the PI under prior NSF grants
from assemblages ranging in age from latest Miocene to latest Pleistocene in the
Ryukyu and Fiji Islands. Their methods will include (1) multivariate analysis of
morphometric and other shell characters and (2) species determination by
reference to the analysis of type specimens and discriminating within-species
variation from between-species differences. This project focuses on one of the
largest families of marine gastropod molluscs, the Conidae. This family of
mainly tropical marine snails is important because of its very high diversity,
the broad geographic range of many of its species, its ecological role as a
dominant predatory group, primarily in the shallow tropical seas of the Indo-
West Pacific region, and its unusual danger to man. Its neurotoxic venom,
normally used to overpower prey, can be fatal to man. This project adds an
international cooperative dimension to Dr. Kohn's research supported under NSF
Grant No. BSR-8700523. Dr. Arua's expertise gained during her studies of
gastropod predation patterns in the Eocene of Nigeria will greatly benefit the
project. This project is relevant to the objectives of the Science in Developing
Countries Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S.
scientists and engineers and their counterparts in developing countries through
the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and
through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.