* 9014032
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Equilibrium and    Dynamic Behavior of Systems Containing a Zwitterionic       Surfactant
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1991,04/30/1995
* Clarence Miller, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 04/30/1995
* USD 8,250.00

This award supports Professor Clarence A. Miller of Rice University to
collaborate with Professor Heinz Hoffmann of the Physical Chemistry Department
of the University of Bayreuth, Germany. They will carry out joint research on
equilibrium and dynamic properties of surfactant systems that will build on and
enhance their ongoing independent work on surfactant dynamics.. The two
laboratories will share the work of determining equilibrium phase behavior of
systems containing a particular zwitterionic surfactant in pure form plus
various hydrocarbons and straight-chain alcohols. Then each laboratory will
conduct experiments suited to its specialized equipment to elucidate other
behavior in systems containing the same zwitterionic surfactant under different
chemical and physical conditions. Dr. Miller's laboratory will use
videomicroscopy to investigate the dynamic behavior that occurs when surfactant
solutions contact oil. Dr. Hoffmann's laboratory in Germany will measure
rheological, electric birefringence and other dynamic response properties of
pure phases for a number of systems. Such techniques have never been applied to
the L3 phase. Comparing the results with theoretical models is sure to advance
fundamental understanding of the microstructure of this phase. The general
objective of this joint work is to obtain a better understanding of certain
phases in surfactant systems, especially the so-called L3 phase, an isotropic
liquid phase which occurs in a variety of surfactant systems under conditions
quite different from those where ordinary micellar solutions are found. The
collaborators will also examine the lamellar liquid crystalline phase, which
exists over a wide range of water content and presumably has a wide range of
rheological behavior. Relating the morphology of this phase to the data on
physical properties from the German measurements should provide a better
understanding of the manner in which new phases, such as the lamellar liquid
crystal, form at the initial interface between aqueous surfactant solutions and
oil. Such knowledge will have a variety of practical applications.