* 9014746
* Administrative Support for Soviet Participants in US-USSR   Joint Committee Meeting (April 14-20, 1990)
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1990,05/01/1990
* N. Laverov, Travel Award
* Standard Grant
* Gerson Sher
* 05/01/1990
* USD 0.00

This proposal supports the local costs for the foreign participants at the
first meeting of the US-USSR Joint Commission for Cooperation in the field of
Basic Scientific Research to be held in Washington, DC on April 19-20, 1990. Dr.
Bromley, OSTP, and Dr. Nikolay Laverov, Chairman of the USSR State Committee for
Science and Technology will chair the proceedings. The Joint Commission was
created by the January 1989 intergovernmental Agreement on Cooperation in the
Field of Basic Scientific Research. That agreement, in turn, provides the
framework for subordinate agency-level memoranda of understanding through which
the cooperative activities are actually implemented. It is under this umbrella
that the NSF signed a Memorandum of Understanding last May with the Soviet
Academy of Sciences. This agreement has given us, for the first time, a direct
link with the Soviet Academy of Sciences and the ability to support
investigator-initiated, competitively reviewed cooperative research proposals.
The Commission's main task is to review the implementation of this new
cooperative program. It will discuss issues and problems, such as the
difficulties of bridging barriers in the Soviet Union between the Academy and
the universities, new research topics and emphases, and coordination of the
global change research between the two countries. This project fulfills the
program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading
researchers in the United States and the U.S.S.R. to combine complementary
efforts and capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and competence in
the field of basic scientific research on the basis of equality, reciprocity,
and mutuality of benefit.