* 9014688
* Research Careers for Minority Scholar in Condensed Matter   Physics
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/1990,09/30/1996
* George Dixon, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* William E. McHenry
* 09/30/1996
* USD 549,365.00

Oklahoma State University will establish a Research Careers for Minority
Scholars project to increase the representation of Blacks, American Indians, and
Hispanics in the field of Condensed Matter Physics. The project will consist of
three mutually supporting phases. (1) An undergraduate research internship for
students in the summer between their Junior and Senior years. This will
introduce them to the excitement of a research career on the forefront of
knowledge. (2) A "bridging summer" immediately following their completion of the
baccalaureate degree to provide a continuous path from undergraduate to graduate
study, continue their involvement in research, and give them a head start toward
completion of a thesis problem. This continuity is important since many U.S.
students are lost to research careers because they enter the job market at the
B.S. level. (3) Support for their first year of graduate study including
opportunities for them to serve as role models for minority undergraduates. The
project will emphasize research in the properties of optical materials, an area
with great industrial, as well as academic, interest. Oklahoma State University
is one of the leading American research centers in optical materials. All phases
of the program will provide, through attendance at scientific conferences and
colloquia, the opportunity to interact with the larger scientific community as
well as OSU faculty, staff and students. This will aid the Minority Scholars in
building their network within the physics community that is so important in
becoming successful and productive research physicists. Over the five years
covered by this proposal the program will approximately double the number of
students from the targeted groups who are preparing for research careers in
Condensed Matter Physics.