* 9014952
* El Chichon Aerosol Studies Based upon SME Radiance          Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1994
* David Rusch, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 02/28/1994
* USD 80,000.00

A program of analysis of Solar Mesosphere Explorer (SME) global radiance data
sets will be used to investigate the El Chichon stratospheric aerosol cloud.
Global observations at wavelengths of .44, 1.27, 1.87, 6.8, and 9.6 microns were
returned by SME limb sounding experiments over the 1982-1986 period, providing
complete temporal coverage of the El Chichon event. The extensive latitudinal
(global) and vertical (18-50 km) breadth of the SME observations leads to a
comprehensive data set for definition of the evolution of the El Chichon
aerosols. The project will analyze the multi-wavelength SME observations to
constrain the aerosol mass and particle size distribution throughout the growth,
maturity, and decay stages of the El Chichon aerosol cloud. Aerosol mass can be
determined directly from the thermal-IR radiances (6.8 and 9.6 microns). Strong
aerosol scattering signatures in the visible and near-IR data sets will provide
the particle size distributions as a function of time. Available ground-based,
aircraft, and balloon observations of El Chichon aerosols will be incorporated
into the analysis for the purposes of validation. A key aspect of the proposed
investigation is the involvement of a graduate student, towards the completion
of a PH.D. thesis.