* 9014939
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research:  Southeastern          Australian Test of the Role of Eustasy in Development of    Small-Scale Upper Devonian Cycles
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1992
* Edward Cotter, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Milsap
* 08/31/1992
* USD 14,050.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Edward Cotter of
Bucknell University and Dr. Patrick Conaghan of Macquarie University, Australia.
The proposed research will attempt to determine whether small-scale (fifth- or
sixth-order) sea-level fluctations were experienced worldwide during Late
Devonian time, thereby contributing to the debate concerning whether such cycles
in North America and Europe were caused by eustatic (world-wide) or more local
tectonic processes. The basic approach is to investigate marine and marginal-
marine sedimentary sequences in the Upper Devonian succession (Lambie Group) of
the Lachlan Fold Belt in southeastern Australia to determine whether they
contain rhythmic patterns, one to ten meters thick, showing cyclically
alternating changes of depth. If such rhythmic alternations of water depth are
found, calculation of the periodicities of such changes will permit comparison
with the periodicities determined for contemporaneous (Fransnian-Famennian)
sequences in the Appalachian Basin of North America. Should the southeastern
Australian periodicities center around 100,000 years, as is the case in North
America, not only will this support a eustatic control of cycle development, but
it reinforces the idea that eustasy was related to Milankovitch- type orbital
variations. However, if small-scale cycles of change in relative water depth are
not in the Lambie Group and its correlatives in southeastern Australia, it will
be much more difficult to argue for eustasy as the control on the cycles in
North America. This project represents excellent collaboration between the New
Zealand group which has made major contributions to knowledge of the patterns of
sedimentation that result from interaction of tectonic plates and the Cotter
work on whether small-scale sea fluctuations during Late Devonian time were
eustatic. This is important work which will contribute to the debate concerning
whether such cycles in North America and Europe were caused by eustatic or more
local tectonic processes.