* 9014670
* 1990 Midwest Regional Developmental Biology Conference:     May 23-25, 1990; Purdue University                          Lilly Hall of Life Sciences, West Lafayette, Indiana
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/1990,10/31/1990
* Joseph Vanable, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 10/31/1990
* USD 2,000.00

The 1990 Midwest Regional Developmental Biology Conference at Purdue University
will provide an opportunity for established investigators, graduate students and
postdoctoral students in the midwest to meet in a congenial setting to exchange
ideas, both informally and by presenting their most recent findings on the
platform and by means of posters. A balance will be struck in the platform and
poster programs between presentations by senor and by junior persons.
Opportunities will be provided for graduate and postdoctoral students to present
their own work, often for the first time, and to observe examples of excellence
for them to emulate. To ensure the latter, there will be an invited keynote
speaker for each of the four sessions (Sherri Brown, Plant Development; Don
Ready, Cell Architecture and Development; Mark Muskavitch, Genomic Control of
Development; and David Stocum, Regeneration and Repair), as well as a keynote
address by Carol Erickson, who will describe her investigations of neural crest
cell migration. There also will be scheduled visits to laboratories within the
Department of Biological Sciences (those of Robinson, Asai, Ready, and Vanable),
to enable conferees to learn first hand the approaches taken by these
investigators, and to see some of the major techniques used in their labs. The
extensive interaction among students, faculty, and invited speakers will promote
the exchange of new information and an enthusiasm for teaching and research in
developmental biology.