* 9014242
* U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research on Population Genetic Models for Symbiont-Induced Speciation and Coevolution
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1991,03/31/1992
* Michael Moody, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 03/31/1992
* USD 15,280.00

This award provides partial support for a sabbatical visit by Professor Michael
E. Moody of Washington State University to the University of Vienna, Austria, to
collaborate with Professor Reinhard Buerger of the Institute of Mathematics and
other experts in mathematical genetics. They share an interest in the
mathematical approaches to examining fundamental problems in population
genetics. They will develop mathematical models to examine more precisely the
population genetics implicit in a qualitative theory concerning the mechanism of
one type of speciation. Specifically, they propose to test the theory that
symbiont-induced speciation could result from differential coadaptation between
habitats along an environmental gradient. Such a gradient could give rise to
alternative outcomes of the coevolutionary interaction. Professor Moody has
considerable experience modeling population genetics problems such as
coevolution and population structure through analysis of gene flow at a single
locus in geographically structured populations. The University of Vienna has
several faculty possessing a variety of complementary expertise in mathematical
genetics, including multi-locus models. The most striking aspect of biological
evolution is the radiation of species into the vast array of forms observed in
every corner of the earth. Understanding species evolution was the goal of
Darwin's original theory, and, to this day, elucidating the mechanisms of
speciation remains the central challenge of evolutionary biology. One of several
conjectures is that coevolution between species may contribute directly to
speciation; the interaction between symbionts and their hosts is one likely
mechanism. However, the genetic and ecological conditions under which symbiont-
induced speciation will occur are poorly understood. The proposed collaborative
research should provide theoretical insights into the genetic consequences of
symbiont-induced speciation and therefore contribute toward improved
understanding of evolutionary divergence.