* 9014521
* U.S.-Australia Joint Seminar on Enhanced Thermal Contact    Conductance in Microelectronics; Melbourne, Australia;      March 1992
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/1991,10/31/1993
* T. Nejat Veziroglu, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 10/31/1993
* USD 29,470.00

This award will support the participation of ten U.S. researchers in a joint
seminar on "Enhanced Thermal Contact Conductance in Microelectronics," to be
held in Melbourne, Australia, March 1992. Dr. T. Nejat Veziroglu, Director of
the Clean Energy Research Institute, University of Miami, will chair the
seminar. Co- chairpersons will be Dr. John W. Sheffield, University of Missouri-
Rolla, and Dr. Arthur Williams, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.
The seminar takes place under the U.S.-Australia Cooperative Science Program.
Thermal contact conductance plays an important role in many practical
applications where heat transfer is a significant operational factor. Examples
are to be found in microelectronic devices, rotating machinery, cryogenic fluid
containers, the fuel-cladding interface in nuclear fission reactors, and
aircraft structural joints subject to aerodynamic heating. For cooling
microelectronic devices, most research has been on improving active convective
systems for removing heat, such as cooling jets and through-flow. However, new
technologies developed for the application of thin films offer opportunities for
utilizing thermal conductance as a means of transporting heat away from "hot
spots" in electronic and other systems. U.S. and Australian scientists and
engineers are among those doing significant research in thermal contact
conductance. Participants at this seminar will share their research results in
this field, describe various novel surface preparation techniques (such as
metallic vapor deposition onto contact surfaces) to optimize surface heat
transfer behavior, discuss applications to microelectronics and other
technological areas of industrial importance, and make recommendations regarding
future cooperative research activities that should prove mutually beneficial. A
one- volume report of the proceedings will be prepared that will give broader
dissemination of the information presented at the seminar.