* 9014948
* Mathematical Sciences: Proposal for an NSF CBMS Regional    Conference on Harmonic Analysis and Partial Differential    Equations; June 3-7, l991, St. Louis, Mo.
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/1990,10/31/1991
* Grant Welland, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 10/31/1991
* USD 27,595.00

To stimulate interest and activity in mathematical research, the National
Science Foundation each year supports a number of NSF-CBMS Regional Research
Conferences in the Mathematical Sciences. Each five-day conference features a
distinguished lecturer who delivers ten lectures on a topic of important current
research in one sharply focused area of the mathematical sciences. The lecturer
subsequently prepares an expository monograph based upon these lectures, which
is normally published by the American Mathematical Society or the Society for
Industrial and Applied Mathematics, or jointly by the American Statistical
Association and the Institute of Mathematical Statistics. Certain features
differentiate these conferences from typical research conferences. These are:
(1) Focus on a single important and timely area of research by a leading
practitioner, (2) Continued effect and local stimulation through regional
emphasis, (3) Panel review for quality, breadth, and timeliness, and (4)
Published monographs for a wider audience. This project will support an NSF-CBMS
Regional Research Conference in the Mathematical Sciences on Harmonic Analysis
and Partial Differential Equations to be held June 3-7, 1991 at the University
of Missouri - St. Louis. Professor Carlos Kenig of the University of Chicago
will be the principal lecturer.