* 9014263
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research (Geography):  Modeling and  Measuring the Bidirectional Reflectance of Forest and Crop  Canopies Using Boolean and Geometric Optics
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1990,05/31/1993
* Alan Strahler, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 05/31/1993
* USD 96,907.00

This is a two year collaborative project between Alan H. Strahler of Boston
University and scientists from three institutes of the Chinese Academy of
Sciences: the Institute of Remote Sensing Application in Beijing; the Institute
of Optics and Fine Mechanics in Changchun, Jilin Province; and the Jilin
Institute of Geography and its Jingyuetan Remote Sensing Experimental Site in
Changchun. The project is sponsored by NSF and the Chinese Academy of Sciences.
The proposed study will develop models that will enable remotely sensed images
of forest and crop canopies to be measured and evaluated more effectively. The
modeling activities will be conducted in the United States and the radiometric
measurements made in China at the Jingyuetan site. The net effect of the
proposed research will be to test an important class of models for the
interaction of plant canopies with light that emphasizes the geometric,
three.dimensional nature of the canopy. The expertise and equipment available at
the Jingyuetan site provide a unique opportunity to validate these canopy
models, which have been under development during the past several years. If they
prove sufficiently accurate, these models could supplement or supplant other
models in ecosystem studies, agricultural monitoring activities, and remote
sensing applications.