* 9014042
* US-France (INRIA) Cooperative Research:  Semantics Driven   Compiler Synthesis
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1991,01/31/1995
* David Schmidt, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 01/31/1995
* USD 14,570.00

This award will support collaborative research in computer science between Dr.
David Schmidt, Kansas State University, and Dr. Daniel Le Metayer, French
National Institute for Computer Science and Automation (INRIA), in Rennes,
France. The project addresses the problem of analysis and efficient compilation
of functional programming languages. Research at KSU has focused on automated
transformation techniques for implementing languages defined by denotational
semantics definitions. The emphasis has been on using the data typing
information of a program's denotation to transform the expression that
represents the denotation into an easily implementable form. Work by the INRIA
group at Rennes has focused upon the application of transformation techniques
for the compilation of functional programs. A methodology has been developed for
the time and space-complexity analysis of functional programs, which has been
implemented in the framework of a European ESPRIT project. In this collaborative
project, the KSU group wishes to benefit from the expertise of INRIA in
compiler-oriented program transfor- mations, in particular in the formation of
abstract interpre- tations of language definitions. Since type inference is just
a simple-minded form of abstract interpretation, and since some abstract
interpretations can be coded as type inference problems, significant gains will
be made, once the KSU group learns how to adapt its type inference-bases
analysis method to describe both storage sharing analysis and other general
abstract interpretation-based analyses. This award will fund the travel of Dr.
Schmidt and his postdoc- toral to INRIA to carry out this research.