* 9014924
* Structure and Function of D- and L-Aminotransferase
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1991,10/31/1993
* Dagmar Ringe, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 10/31/1993
* USD 185,000.00

Aminotransferases (also called transaminases) are a class of pyridoxal-
phosphate-depending enzymes that are known to be at the core of amino acid
metabolism in all organisms. Because of their central metabolic position, they
have been demonstrated to be involved in a number of diseases that are
characterized by inborn errors of metabolism. The best studied of all of this
class of enzymes is the aspartate aminotransferase, which equilibrates aspartic
acid and glutamic acid through the corresponding a-keto-acids, ketoglutarate and
oxalaoceate. The enzyme is a dimer of two identical subunits, each of overall
molecular weight about 40,000. The crystal structure of E.coli enzyme shows that
each subunit consists of two domains, and that the active site lies at the
domain and subunit interfaces. There is a large conformational change, involving
the movement of over 100 amino acids in the smaller of the two domains, when
substrate binds. Another less well-characterized transaminase is the bacterial
D-amino acid transaminase, which does not handle L-amino acids at all but does
have s wide specificity for the D-counterparts. Both are crystalline, and both
bind substrates in the crystalline state. A third transaminase which will be
studied is the alanine specific one from beef heart. The goal of this project is
to understand the specificity and catalytic mechanism(s) of these transaminases
in terms of their structures. Structural comparison of the aspartate and alanine
specific transaminases will give insight into the side-chain specificities of
these enzymes. Comparison of the L-and D-specific transaminases will give
insight into the chiral specificities of these enzymes. Mutants of the bacterial
enzymes and structures of complexes with substrates and inhibitors will
giveinsight as to the roles of specific amino acids at the active sites and the
structural basis for changes in catalysis (mechanism). The causes of the
substrate-dependent conformational change in the aspartate enzyme (and possibly
in others) will be probed in detail through the combined use of crystallography
and site-specific mutagenesis.