* 9014971
* U.S.-Australian Cooperative Workshop:  The Nature of        Embryonic Signals Which Influence the Maternal Endocrine    System; 1-3 July 1991, Honolulu, Hawaii
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1991,03/31/1992
* Fuller Bazer, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Alan Milsap
* 03/31/1992
* USD 7,598.00

This award will support a joint U.S.-Australia workshop "The Nature of Embryonic
Signals Which Influence the Maternal Endocrine System; 1-3 July 1991 in
Honolulu, Hawaii. The U.S. and Australian organizers of the workshop are Dr.
Fuller Bazer of the University of Florida and Dr. Robert J. Fairclough, Animal
Research Institute, Werribee, Victoria, Australia. The principal objective of
the workshop is to review published and unpublished results of research from
1989-1991 indicating major and important breakthroughs in understanding of the
implantation process of embryos and the nature and mode of action of conceptus
signals responsible for implantation and establishment of pregnancy in several
mammalian species. The major discussion will focus on early pregnancy factors,
including platelet activating factor (PAF) and conceptus interferons, their
mechanism(s) of action, their endocrine control and their effects during early
pregnancy in both livestock and women. It is anticipated that this knowledge
will ultimately lead to new methods for reducing embryonic mortality in animal
agriculture and increasing fertility in both livestock and women. The scope of
the meeting will be limited to factors affecting establishment of pregnancy
during the peri-implantation period. Because of significant activities in this
area of research by scientists in Australia and the United States, the seminar
will provide a forum for the exchange of published and unpublished results, as
well as for establishing areas for future U.S.-Australian cooperative research.