* 9014701
* Fundamental Limits to the Performance of InP-Based          Monolithic Integrated Receivers
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/1991,07/01/1992
* Stephen Forrest, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 07/01/1992
* USD 42,816.00

This grant is for numerous optical system architectures for transmission and
manipulation of data require common device structures which have been difficult
to attain because of stringent demands such structures place on the materials
growth capabilities presently available. Chief among these devices are
photoreceivers which combine a photodetection element, such as a photodiode or
photoconductor, with a preamplifier. Success with such "building-block" circuits
is essential if more sophisticated, more highly functional monolithic integrated
optoelectronic circuits are to be realized. In this award a program will be
aimed at systematically addressing several of the most fundamental issues
involved in fabricating high-performance, monolithic photoreceivers and receiver
arrays based on InP and related materials. High bandwidth, highly functional
monolithic photoreceivers will be designed, fabricated, and tested for use in
both high density and wide bandwidth system architectures. Several transistor
and circuit configurations will be optimized for these applications using both a
theoretical and empirical approach. The completed monolithic receivers will be
utilized in optical system experiments. This project is a renewal of a previous
three year NSF funded program, and significantly extends prior results toward
the understanding of the limits of receiver performance.