* 9014862
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research:  Investigation of the  Methanol Synthesis Mechanism on Raney Cu-Zn Catalysts
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1991,08/31/1995
* Glenn Schrader, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 08/31/1995
* USD 21,775.00

This award supports a visit by Dr. Glenn L. Schrader of Iowa State University to
the University of New South Wales in Australia, to work with Dr. H.E. Curry-Hyde
to provide new fundamental information concerning the mechanism of CO, CO2 and
H2 conversion to methanol using novel Raney Cu-Zn catalysts. Despite the
importance of methanol as a large- volume chemical intermediate--and the
potentially enormous demand as an alternate liquid fuel or fuel additive--many
uncertainties remain regarding the detailed catalytic mechanism for methanol
synthesis. New fundamental information concerning the reaction pathway would
lead to improved methanol catalysts and processes. The Australian researchers
have discovered a unique series of highly active methanol catalysts based on a
Raney-catalyst preparational technique. Two advanced spectroscopic techniques
developed by the United States researchers for catalysts research--FTIR
reflectance- absorbance spectroscopy (IRRAS) and laser Raman spectroscopy (LRS),
including "surface-enhanced" approaches--will be used to examine Raney Cu-Zn
catalysts which have been prepared, characterized, and evaluated for activity
and selectivity by the Australian researchers. These studies will contribute new
information concerning the nature of adsorption and reaction on methanol
synthesis catalysts and will lead to a more fundamental understanding of the
nature of the active sites. Specifically, the goals of these studies will be:
(1) to determine the nature of CO2, CO, H2, and H2O adsorption of specific sites
on the surfaces of the Raney Cu-Zn catalysts; (2) to examine the role of
intermediates such as formates, formaldehyde, methoxy, or other surface species
in methanol synthesis; and (3) to distinguish the differences in the mechanistic
pathways for CO2 and CO conversion in methanol synthesis.