* 9014192
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Homogeneous        Nucleation of Metal Vapors
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1995
* Joseph Katz, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 08/31/1995
* USD 14,794.00

This award supports Joseph L. Katz of Johns Hopkins University for collaborative
research in chemical engineering with Professor Friedrich Hensel of Phillips
University in Marburg, Germany. They are cooperating in a study that involves
the use of upward thermal diffusion chambers to measure the homogeneous
nucleation of cesium and other metal vapors. Their research plan exploits the
complementary strengths of the two research groups. The German group led by Dr.
Hensel is well known for their research on the metal-insulator transition and
other properties of metal vapors. They have state-of-the-art facilities where
they are actively studying supersaturated mercury vapor. Dr. Katz and his group
are expert in the use of the diffusion cloud chamber and in nucleation theory.
They have a very active program using upward thermal diffusion cloud chambers
for the study of homogeneous and other nucleations. Most of the experimental
work will be done in Marburg, with some data analysis and other support going on
in Maryland. Reciprocal visits of members of the two research groups will
facilitate this joint work. Nucleation processes are extremely widespread in the
natural world as well as in the laboratory. However, our ability to predict the
conditions that cause nucleation and the rate at which it occurs in typical
processes is almost non-existent. Homogeneous nucleation of a liquid from its
supersaturated vapor is particularly amenable to theoretical and experimental
study. The nucleation properties of metals are quite different from those of
non-metals, and they are of growing importance as technologies develop to
produce and use novel alloys or to use known metals in novel ways.