* 9014105
* U.S.-UK Cooperative Research:  Advanced Modeling Techniques for Brushless Doubly-Fed Electrical Machines
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1990,05/31/1992
* Alan Wallace, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 05/31/1992
* USD 15,815.00

This award will support cooperative research in electrical engineering between
Dr. Alan Wallace, Oregon State University, and Professor Stephen Williamson,
Cambridge University, England. The objective of the proposed project is to
investigate advanced modelling techniques for brushless doubly-fed electrical
machines (BDFM's), a new development in adjustable-speed drive and variable-
speed generation systems. At Oregon State University, two proof-of-concept
machines have already been built and linear mathematical models have been
developed, which give performance predictions which correlate with test results
at specific conditions. However, the BDFM is intended for operation over a wide
range of speed, frequency, and magnetic loading. Under such conditions,
saturation and hysteresis in magnetic materials, and skin-effects in large
sectional conductors make linear models inadequate for design purposes. The most
advanced techniques to handle nonlinear analysis and design of conventional-cage
rotors have been developed by Professor Williamson of Cambridge University.
These techniques, which periodically utilize finite element analyses of internal
machine fields to determine revised values of linear model parameters, appear to
offer the best chance of modification to cover the unique BDFM rotor
configurations. The US principal investigator proposes to adapt the Cambridge
techniques for inclusion in Oregon State University's models of BDFM in order to
develop detailed design for specific applications currently being selected at
OSU. The results of this research will make an important contribution to the
potential commercial viability of BDFM's.