* 9014374
* Organometallic Chemistry of the Iron Triad Metals in High   Oxidation States
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1993
* Patricia Shapley, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 12/31/1993
* USD 228,000.00

The focus of this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic
Chemistry Program is the organometallic chemistry of three transition metals:
iron, ruthenium and osmium. Of particular interest are compounds of these metals
in which oxygen or nitrogen atoms, or nitrogen-containing organic molecules, are
bound to the metal. Results of the project are expected to provide an improved
understanding of oxidation reactions mediated by metal complexes in organic
chemistry and by metalloenzymes in living systems. Alkyl complexes of the iron
triad metals in high oxidation states will be studied. Novel reaction chemistry
of nitridoosmium(VI) and ruthenium(VI) will be exploited in cross-coupling
reactions of organic halides with Grignard reagents. The syntheses of new oxo or
nitrido metal complexes containing a second pi-donor ligand (oxo, sulfido,
alkylimido, or alkylidene) will be undertaken, and the reactions of these new
complexes with unsaturated organic molecules, two-electron donors and
electrophiles will be examined. New types of heterobimetallic molecules will be
synthesized which will be both coordinatively unsaturated and highly oxidized.
These new heterobimetallic complexes are expected to show increased reactivity
and selectivity in the oxidation of organic molecules, since they will be
designed to bind substrate, activate it toward intramolecular atom transfer, and
suppress competing electron transfer reactions. The cooperativity between the
two metals may aid in the utilization of dioxygen as the secondary oxidant. A
thorough study of the mechanism of the oxidation of alcohols by dioxygen,
utilizing a previously-discovered bimetallic osmium-chromium complex, will be
undertaken. Finally, previous work on the organometallic chemistry of ruthenium
and osmium in high oxidation states will be extended to include oxidized alkyl
iron complexes.