* 9014622
* U.S.-Germany Cooperation on Direct Measurements of ResonanceStrengths Associated with Low Temperature Hydrogen Burning  for Nuclei Near Mass 21
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1991,03/31/1992
* Albert Howard, Trinity College
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 03/31/1992
* USD 8,595.00

This award supports Professor Albert J. Howard, Jr., of Trinity College,
Connecticut, for a three month visit to Germany to collaborate with Claus Rolfs
and his group at the Institute for Nuclear Physics of the University of
Muenster. They will work jointly on several projects of mutual interest in
nuclear astrophysics. Professor Howard brings substantial experience in low
energy nuclear physics experimentation; Professor Rolfs, too, is heavily
involved in experimental research in complementary fields of nuclear
astrophysics. They will investigate the role of low-temperature hydrogen burning
in the creation of the elements in the vicinity of the Neon/Sodium and
Magnesium/Aluminum nucleosynthetic cycles. Professor Howard will participate in
established experimental programs currently ongoing in the German laboratories
directed by Professor Rolfs in Muenster and Bochum. This will involve direct
measurements of individual resonance strengths associated with the (p,gamma)
reaction on pertinent nuclei. Such measurements can readily be made at the
world- class facilities in the Bochum-Muenster area; a specialized gamma ray
detector has just been developed there that will provide improved sensitivity
for resonance studies of the type proposed. Where the size of the Coulomb
barrier prohibits or impedes direct measurement, Professor Howard will
contribute his expertise in indirect determination involving measurements of
angular distributions to obtain single-particle transfer strengths. During the
past decade, it has become increasingly clear that low-temperature hydrogen
burning may play an important role during a final stage of stellar
nucleosynthesis. This possibility emerges from a synthesis of observations
involving meteoritic chronology, gamma-ray astronomy, and low-energy proton
resonance strengths associated with the Aluminum nucleochronometer. It now
becomes important to determine the reaction rates for other critical reactions
associated with this and nearby related processing cycles. The proposed
measurements will provide information crucial to the determination of the
viability of this process for synthesis of nuclei in the atomic mass 20-30
region. In particular, the results may shed light on the possibility that the
final reprocessing of the elements occurred prior to the formation of the solar
system.