* 9014981
* Experimental & Analytical Studies of Reservoir              Compressibility Effects on Arch Dams
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/15/1990,11/30/1992
* Yusof Ghanaat, QUEST Structures
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 11/30/1992
* USD 111,700.00

Advanced analytical procedures to predict earthquake response of arch dams have
been developed based on various assumptions that have not been verified
experimentally. While these numerical models include the reservoir interaction
and the water compressibility effects, they also are sensitive to reservoir
geometry and the reservoir bottom reflection coefficient. A cooperative research
project with Chinese researchers is proposed under this project to: a)
investigate reservoir interaction effects on arch dams, b) conduct field
measurements on a large arch dam in China, and c) make quantitative evaluation
of analytical procedures by comparing the measured and calculated results. The
reflection coefficient of the absorptive reservoir bottom and the actual
topography of the reservoir, which are required as input in analytical
predictions, are to be determined by field surveys. Measurements will be made to
detect water compressibility and spatial variation of ground motion near the
dam- foundation contact. This excitation technique is expected to produce larger
hydrodynamic pressures and better information regarding the dynamic interaction
between the dam and its foundation than has been obtained previously using
eccentric-mass shakers. The measured dam response, foundation response, and the
hydrodynamic pressures will be compared with analytical predictions using the
best current mathematical procedures to validate the accuracy of the analytical
techniques. The final product of the research program will be specific testing
procedures to measure absorptive coefficient of the reservoir bottom, measured
dam-foundation and reservoir response behavior, and the associated analytical
predictions which will be useful for design purposes.