* 9014717
* Small Grants for Exploratory Research: Thermodynamic Constraints on Reactive Melt Processing of Multicomponent Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 07/02/1990,12/31/1991
* Michael Doherty, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 12/31/1991
* USD 49,872.00

Reaction systems where both reactants and products are in the liquid and solid
phase (no vapor phase present) are being used commercially to produce high
molecular weight monomers or intermediates used in the production of specialty
and commodity polymers. Specific examples include bisphenol A, paradichloro-
benzene and n-methyl phthalimide. Other classes of materials that must be
processed in the melt include elemental and compound semi-conductors such as
silicon and gallium arsenide, and superconducting materials such as
barium/copper/yttrium/oxygen systems. One advantage of some of these two phase
systems is that reaction and separation occur in the same unit, greatly reducing
processing costs. The structure and properties of multicomponent solid-liquid
phase diagrams play and important role in determining the behavior of these unit
operations (also referred to as melt processing units). The PI plans to develop
a broad comprehensive theory of multicomponent reactive solid-liquid phase
diagrams that will produce practical rules for conceiving and designing melt
processing systems. These systems have unusual phase equilibrium behavior when
reactions are present, including the appearance of reactive azeotropes in ideal
mixtures. These and other features normal azeotropes in non-ideal mixtures.
These and other features of the equilibrium behavior influence what can and
cannot be achieved in reaction-separation systems. The PI plans to use certain
invariants from differential geometry to provide a complete classification of
the phase behavior, and ultimately to predict it, from an incomplete knowledge
of the equilibrium relations. The ultimate goal is to develop a broad
fundamental understanding of reactive melt processing that will lead to useful
guidelines for the synthesis and design of such systems.