* 9014722
* Silicon Technology, U.S.- Pakistan Symposium and Workshop,  Islamabad, Pakistan, June 1991.
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1991,02/28/1994
* T. Nejat Veziroglu, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/28/1994
* USD 18,508.00

Description: This project is for support of seven U.S. scientists to
participate in a U.S.-Pakistan Symposium and Workshop in Islamabad, Pakistan, in
June 1991 on Silicon Technology. The Pakistani Co-Chairperson is Dr. Atique
Mufti, Director, National Institute of Silicon Technology in Islamabad. The
objectives are to disseminate recently acquired information and experiences in
the utilization of silicon in Photovoltaics as well as electronic applications
in the last four years, to discuss relevant applications in Less Developed
Countries (LDC's) and to identify areas for possible joint research. The seminar
will cover: status of silicon technology, including technical breakthroughs, and
economic constraints. The technical lectures will cover production procedures of
silicon from various raw materials, growth of single crystal and float zone
technology; status of amorphous silicon technology and its future;
polycrystalline casting and ribbon technology, manufacturing of silicon chips,
materials and techniques for making thin film solar cells, heterojunctions,
concentrations and hybrids; status of storage devices; and design of solar
systems. The final day will be devoted to workshops to identify the most
effective means of technology transfer, and to facilitate the development of
S.I. industry, and to identify areas for joint research. Scope: This meeting
will follow one that was held four years earlier which helped Pakistan in its
emerging silicon technology research and applications in solar energy storage
and utilization. The meeting will be attended by scientists from several
countries in South Asia and the Middle East. It should help foster the interest
in the research and development that support the use of solar energy in that
region.