* 9014902
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research:  A Study of the Effect of Soil Nitrogen on Water-Use Efficiency in Eucalypts from  Contrasting Habitats (Long-Term Visit)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1993
* Jay Anderson, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 02/28/1993
* USD 26,650.00

This award will support a Long-Term Research Visit to the Australian National
University (ANU) by Professor Jay E. Anderson, Department of Biological
Sciences, Idaho State University. The visit takes place under the U.S.-Australia
Cooperative Science Program. While in Australia, Professor Anderson will
collaborate with Professor Graham D. Farquhar, Research School of Biological
Sciences, ANU, and Dr. Michael P. Austin, Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organization (CSIRO). The objectives of the project are (1) to
determine whether the observed distributions of three species of Eucalyptus in
southeastern Australia are related to differences in the efficiency with which
the different species use water, and (2) to resolve whether variation in water
use efficiency among species results from inherent differences in photosynthetic
or other physiological processes (including stomatal) involving the leaf, or
whether differences in ability to acquire nutrients, especially nitrogen, from
the soil are responsible. The results are relevant to agricultural and
silvicultural selection programs aimed at identifying plant species and
genotypes that are superior in water use efficiency, as well as to efforts to
understand mechanisms that underlie the natural distribution of species.
Professor Anderson will carry out this research while on sabbatical leave from
Idaho State University. He will study eucalypts in Australia subjected to
gradients in mean annual temperature and in mean annual rainfall. The effect of
nitrogen level on plant growth, photosynthetic capacity, stomatal conductance,
carboxylation efficiency, water use efficiency, and nitrogen use efficiency will
be studied. Both the U.S. and Australian groups have experience in this area of
research. Previous work by Professor Anderson and his group in Idaho has shown
that nitrogen fertilization improves water use efficiency among native species.
Professor Farquhar and his colleagues at ANU have been responsible for many
advances in the understanding of the efficiency of water use by plants, and have
provided both theoretical models and empirical evidence relating carbon isotope
discrimination in the photosynthetic process to water use efficiency. Dr.
Austin, of CSIRO's Division of Wildlife and Ecology, is a leading international
vegetation scientist who has studied eucalypt distributions in gradients of
temperature and rainfall. Experimental facilities at ANU, including an
analytical laboratory for performing isotopic and other analyses, will greatly
facilitate the carrying out of this research project.