* 9014953
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Properties of Multipole  Matrix Elements in Independent Particle Approximation
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1995
* Richard Pratt, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 02/28/1995
* USD 18,530.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Richard H. Pratt, Department of
Physics and Astronomy, University of Pittsburgh, to pursue with Dr. Sung Dahm
Oh, Department of Physics, Sookmyung Women's University, Seoul, Korea, for a
period of 24 months, a program of cooperative theoretical research on multipole
matrix elements in independent particle approximation. Issues to be studied
include the existence of trajectories of zeroes in the generalized oscillator
strength, the sensitivity of resonances to exchange and vacancy features of
potentials, the construction of quadrature expressions for such resonances, and
the proof of the existence of zeroes in general multipole matrix elements. These
features also will be examined in the general multi-photon matrix elements. This
project involves cooperative research of two groups of investigators who have
complementary skills and facilities. The key collaborators are highly respected
scientists who, for a number of years, have cooperated in the field of the
research. Their cooperation has been highly successful and has resulted in
several joint publications in refereed journals. The proposed study of multipole
matrix element zeroes and resonances will shed light on the deviations from
simple point Coulomb behavior in the case of electronic screening. This project
is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program
which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean
scientists and engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas,
skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.
This project adds an international cooperative dimension to research of the PI
under NSF Grant No. PHY-9005763. Korean participation is supported by the Korea
Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).