* 9014655
* Global Time-Series Photometry of Collapsed Variable Stars
* MPS,AST
* 02/15/1991,01/31/1994
* Donald Winget, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Edward G. Schmidt
* 01/31/1994
* USD 287,000.00

Pulsating objects are important to physicists because an analysis of them gives
information about the interior structure of the object; this is the principle
underlying the study of seismic disturbances to determine the Earth's interior
structure. Astronomers have discovered that the Sun and other classes of stars
undergo many types of "nonradial pulsations", and the analysis of these
observations is now responsible for the most rapidly developing disciplines of
solar physics. Many white dwarf stars, which are the most common product of
stellar evolution, undergo many types of nonradial oscillations as well. The
large number of pulsation modes in these stars, together with their simple
"degenerate" state (which allows a model to be formulated with very few physical
variables), has moved the study of seismology of white dwarfs to the forefront
of variable star research. The Principal Investigator (PI) has used a previous,
five-year Presidential Young Investigator award to help underwrite simultaneous
observing of white dwarfs of unusual interest by a group of astronomers located
around the globe. By pooling their observations they are able to circumvent the
severe data-gaps imposed by the Earth's day/night rotation cycle and conduct
observations for several days -- in the best case over nearly 10 continuous
days. The PI and his collaborators have used such extraordinarily long data
strings to detect and identify over 100 independent pulsation modes in the white
dwarf PG+1159-035. The identification of these pulsations has permitted
astronomers to estimate the mass of this star to within 0.4% (the most accurate
determination of a stellar mass other than the Sun's), to estimate the star's
rotation rate including the tilt of the star's rotational axis in the sky, and
to infer the presence of at least three regions of the star with different
chemical compositions. The NSF award will support a continuation of
international observing campaigns on other white dwarfs of special interest. The
study will emphasis emphasis in particular the details of their chemical
structure as well as the effect of rotation of the excitation of the NRP modes.
Eventually, these studies may also permit the measurement of the change of some
white dwarfs' sizes with time. This would allow in turn an accurate estimate of
the cooling rate of these stars as they evolve to "cold embers". Such cooling
rates will permit an estimate of the ages of these stars. Since these stars are
among the oldest stars in the disk of our Milky Way Galaxy, these ages will
provide strong constraints on the age of our Galaxy and hence of the Universe.