* 9014227
* Dissertation Research:  Isolating the Hominid Contribution  to Dual-Patterned Archaeological Bone Assemblages
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1992
* NONE NONE, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1992
* USD 11,692.00

Under the direction of Dr. Robert Blumenschine, Professor of Anthropology at
Rutgers University, Mr. Salvatore Capaldo will conduct actualistic studies in
the Serengeti region of Northern Tanzania. The data thus collected will provide
the basis for his doctoral dissertation. Following an already completed pilot
study, he will collect information on carnivore modification of bone. The
results will be of direct use in interpreting archaeological assemblages. Mr.
Capaldo will obtain carcasses of large mammals which have been collected by park
officials. These will then be processed in a variety of ways which attempt to
mimic prehistoric butchering patterns. The bones will then be exposed to
predation by hyenas and other carnivores and the resultant remains then
collected and analyzed. Unmodified bones will also be treated in the same way to
serve as a control sample. On this basis, it will be possible to examine
important archaeological assemblages from East Africa to determine the extent to
which they have resulted from human, as opposed to carnivore, activity. In
recent years, archaeologists have strongly disagreed about the role of hunting
in the development of human society. It has been argued that faunal assemblages
found with early stone tools represent not hunting - as formerly believed - but
rather human scavenging from carnivore kills. It has proven extremely difficult
to decide between these alternatives, and actualistic work, such as that which
Mr. Capaldo will undertake, should serve to provide a needed interpretive
context. This research is important for several reasons. It will help to develop
a methodological tool which will be applicable to many sites in different parts
of the world. It will ultimately increase our understanding of how humans
developed and, finally, will assist in the training of an extremely promising
scientist.