* 9014056
* Support for Computational Mathematics Collaborative Researchin Puerto Rico
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/1990,09/30/1994
* Oscar Moreno, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Rodolfo Tamez
* 09/30/1994
* USD 339,349.00

The Computational Mathematics Programs of the University of Puerto Rico in Rio
Piedras and Mayaguez has had a tremendous research upsurge in recent times. For
example, the Rio Piedras Mathematics Department has moved from being in 1984 in
the last position in number of publications per researcher of all the
Departments of the Faculty of Natural Sciences in Rio Piedras, to being in 1988
in the second position of all Science Department of the campuses of the
University of Puerto Rico in such number of publication. Also the Research Funds
have increased 13 times from $100,000 for the period 1974-84 to $1,300,000 for
the period 1984-1989. Further a new BA in Computer Science has been approved by
the academic senate to be included as one of the options we offer. The main
objective of the present proposal is to further raise the competitive level of
our Department through a program of collaborative research with highly
competitive mainland researchers. On the other hand we intend to increase
minority participation in research through a local collaborative program of
research with our four year colleges. Last, the University of Puerto Rico, Rio
Piedras and Mayaguez Campus, will expand the Mathematics Graduate Program to
include a joint doctorate in Computational Mathematics. It will carry this out
via a collection of coopering institutions, from the local to the national
level. With the cooperative assistance of national research institutions, this
program will train faculty and professionals to serve the needs of local and
national colleges and industry, and will greatly expand their growth potential
in Puerto Rico along new lines.