* 9014531
* Mechanisms of Homogeneous Hydrocarbon Activation and        Functionalization by Transition Metal Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/1990,11/30/1994
* Thomas Flood, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 11/30/1994
* USD 279,000.00

In this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of
the Chemistry Division, Flood will continue his studies of how transition metal
complexes may form and break C-H, C-C, and C-O bonds in homogeneous solution.
The major emphasis will be careful and fundamental mechanistic investigations,
which should be generally applicable to organometallic chemistry. These results
should be useful in the rational design of industrial catalysts for the
transformation of hydrocarbons into useful compounds. Synthetic and mechanistic
studies of the reactions of hydrocarbons in the coordination sphere of soluble
complexes of transition metals will be pursued. The work will focus on
intermolecular and intramolecular C-H activations, reversible alkene insertions
into metal-carbon bonds, and alpha-eliminations and insertions at metal-bound
carbon and oxygen centers. Metal, oxidation state, steric bulk and electronic
effects of ancillary ligands, alkyl group structure, charge, chelate ring size,
and other factors will be investigated. The possibility of stabilizing higher
oxidation states and oxo-containing species will be tested by use of amine-
ligated organometallic species rather than more conventional ligands. Targeted
systems include Os, Ir, and Pt complexes. In all cases a thorough investigation
of mechanisms will be conducted through a variety of probes.