* 9014836
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research:  Macromolecular        Modeling of Polymeric Stabilization of Colloidal Dispersions
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1991,10/31/1993
* Wayne Mattice, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Alan Milsap
* 10/31/1993
* USD 7,620.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Wayne Mattice of the
University of Akron and Dr. Donald Napper of the University of Sidney. Polymer
colloids are important industrial materials. They must be stabilized against
coagulation to be effective. Steric stabilization, using block copolymers, is
one means of suppressing coagu- lation. If the block copolymer is to be
effective in steric stabilization, the anchoring block must bind tightly to the
colloidal particle. One objective of this collaboration is to develop the new
technology of Macromolecular Modeling so that it can provide insight into the
local structure of the anchoring block in the immediate vicinity of the
colloidal particle. An additional requirement for a block copolymer that will be
effective in steric stabilization is that the stabilizing block must interact
repulsively with both the anchoring block and the colloidal particle, and
interact attractively with the dispersion medium (solvent). The second objective
of the collaboration is to develop Macromolecular Modeling of the structure in
the immediate vicinity of the junction between the anchoring block and the
stabilizing block. It is in the vicinity of the junction that the interaction of
the copolymer with the solvent changes from repulsive to attractive. The project
represents excellent collaboration between Dr. Napper, with his broad knowledge
of the properties of sterically stabilized polymer colloids and Dr. Mattice's
expertise in block polymers. The research represents a coordinated approach to
make an important contribution to improved understanding of the interaction of
anchoring and stabilizing blocks against coagulation in polymer colloids, an
important industrial material.