* 9014589
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional    Science
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1992
* John Brian Harley, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/1992
* USD 10,000.00

Atlases consist of both maps and accompanying descriptions and explanatory
texts. As a result, they are both written geographical texts and works of
cartography. While maps are a fundmental medium of geography, the texts
accompanying them are crucial to any interpretation of the maps, and they lend
substance to the abstract and highly codified cartographic images. This doctoral
dissertation research seeks to explain the sources and influences on atlases. It
will try to explain how both maps and text are interrelated in the structure and
discourse of atlases as a whole. The earliest English world atlases are closely
related to the political, economic, scientific, and social developments in
seventeenth- and early eighteenth-century England. This study aims to
reconstruct the presence of this context within the content of the atlas texts.
Specifically, the doctoral student will examine how information about North
America was structured and diffused by early modern world atlases with English
texts, and she will analyze the interrelationships of maps and texts of atlases.
Atlas sections covering North America will be analyzed in the contexts of their
editorial and commercial theory and practice in seventeenth- and early
eighteenth-century England. The role of atlases as a medium of power and
knowledge in the formation of an English overseas empire also will be explored.
Historical reconstruction based on archival research in the U. S. and England
will take three forms: the roles of atlases as practical documents; the meaning
of the atlases to contemporaries; and the social impact of atlases in English
society. This project will illuminate several aspects of cartography. The
theoretical and empirical contributions it will make will constitute cutting
edge research that is redirecting the history of cartography toward increased
intellectual significance. The project will further develop a method for the
study of the systematic map-and-text arrangements that is vital to the study of
human communication, and it will expand the seventeenth- and early eighteenth-
century historical context for any further study of science and society in that
period. The project will also provide an excellent opportunity for a promising
young scholar to continue to develop independent research skills.