* 9014040
* U.S.-Finland Cooperative Research on Quantum Liquid         Mixtures in 2, 2+1 and 3 Dimensions
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1995
* Eckhard Krotscheck, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/1995
* USD 14,150.00

This award supports Professor Eckhard Krotscheck of Texas A &amp; M University
(TAMU) to collaborate in theoretical physics with Professor Mikko Saarela of the
Department of Theoretical Physics of the University of Oulu, Finland. They have
two principle lines of joint research. One is to produce a microscopic
description of the structure and the excitations of uniform mixtures of the
quantum fluids Helium-4 and Helium-3 in two and three dimensions. They are
particularly interested in critical concentrations and in the collective
excitations, the effective mass, and the dynamic form factor of the mixture. As
a second line of research, they are working on questions related to the
symmetry-broken geometry of films of these isotopic elements adsorbed to a
substrate. Here they are seeking to produce a semi-quantitative description of
the interface between the Helium-4 and the Helium-3 liquid and its collective
excitation. This research relies heavily upon the complementary expertise of the
collaborating scientists which is the basis for an effective division of labor.
All of the numerical work on time-dependent correlation functions will be done
in Finland, and all the work on non-uniform systems at TAMU. The work on bulk
mixtures will continue to be done at both locations. Professor Saarela has
derived most of the results necessary for the inclusion and optimization of
three- body correlations, and Professor Krotscheck has worked out the CBF
(correlated basis functions) corrections of ring diagrams and is presently
working on the elementary diagrams. The proposed work builds on a productive
collaboration in the general area of the theory of strongly interacting many-
body systems. A thorough investigation of the problem of mixtures of Helium-3
and Helium-4 requires state-of-the-art many body theory at a level that is
beyond what has been done previously in microscopic attempts to understand
quantum liquid mixtures. The proposed research will contribute to such
strengthening of many-body theory in quantum physics. It applies state-of-the-
art approaches to several interesting questions and is linked in a timely
fashion to experimental research being done by others which will refine the
theory.