* 9014996
* Calculation of Structural and Dynamical Properties of       Complex Materials by Car-Parrinello ab initio Molecular     Dynamics Simulations
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/1990,08/31/1993
* John Weare, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Barbara MelvinAA
* 08/31/1993
* USD 40,000.00

Given a geometry, electronic structure may be calculated for even very complex
materials within the local density approximation. However, geometrical
sturctures of very complex materials or disordered systems are often not known.
A major step toward the achievement of first principle predictions of the
structural and dynamical properties of very complex materials has been made
possible by the Car-Parrinello method of ab intio molecular dynmics stimulation.
While this approach when implemented on supercomputers allows the simulation of
many interesting problems of even more importance are still to large. On the
otherhand, the appearance of the massively parallel processor architecture of
the machine is taken into account. Preliminary testing of Car-Parrinello
simulation on the Connection Machine indicates that it maps well onto parallel
architectures. Provided that the code is fully optimized for the Connection
Machine it will be possible to predict strutural and dynamical properties of
complex materials form first principles. Examples would include simulation of
surface oxidation, molecular/cluster interaction with surfaces and ab initio
studies of scanning tunnel microscope and atom force microscope images.