* 9014131
* U.S.-German Cooperation in Comparative Studies of Lake      Biology
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1994
* Michael Adams, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/1994
* USD 19,906.00

This award supports four scientists from the Center of Limnology and Department
of Botany of the University of Wisconsin, led by Professor Michael S. Adams, to
collaborate in several studies of mutual interest with Dr. Max Tilzer and others
of the Institute of Limnology of the University of Konstanz. The U.S.
participants are basing their collaboration on their NSF-funded Long-Term
Ecological Research (LTER) project that focuses on the physical, chemical and
biological limnology of several small lakes in the Northern Highland Lake
district of Wisconsin. The Germans, in contrast, are studying the limnology of a
deep, large lake in southern Germany, Lake Konstanz (the Bodensee.) One topic of
emphasis in both large research programs is the role of light scattering and
absorption by algal and non-algal materials in controlling primary productivity
(the growth of the suspended phytoplanktonic algae.) The collaborating
scientists will also compare their different conceptual models of primary
productivity and their different methods of measuring it. Both groups are also
involved in long term studies of the impact of acid rain on aquatic systems.
They intend to compare the insights they have gained. The German project leader
is an expert on phytoplankton quantum efficiency. The US methods will be
strengthened and benefit from accurate interpretations of quantum efficiency.
The US team uses a sophisticated laboratory incubation method for determining
primary productivity that permits great experimental and analytical flexibility.
The German group uses the older "in situ" procedures that give accurate field
measurements but lack experimental flexibility. The lakes they use for field
study differ in a number of ways that make for interesting comparisons. The
proposed collaboration will enhance understanding of the natural variability of
aquatic systems, of primary productivity methods and models, and of the light
climate of lakes. It will also contribute to important on-going research efforts
in acid deposition.