* 9014555
*  New Methods in Spectroscopy and Dynamics of Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1990,05/31/1994
* Eric Heller, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Paul S. Bagus
* 05/31/1994
* USD 376,770.00

Professor Eric Heller is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program to perform research in the area of molecular
spectroscopy and dynamics. This theoretical research will have a major impact on
furthering our fundamental understanding of molecular processes involved in
chemical reactions. Several distinct but interrelated lines of research in the
areas of time dependent quantum mechanics, semiclassical methods, molecular
spectrosocpy, and quantum chaology will be explored. A new and very fast quantum
propagation method will be developed. A basis set technique for treating high
energy anharmonic dynamics will be studied. New methods in theory of
radiationless transitions will be developed which allow classical trajectories
to be used with greater accuracy. Deep tunneling matrix elements in intersystem
crossing and nonvertical spectroscopy will be analyzed as potential
semiclassical phase space tools. The spectra of highly anharmonic and possibly
classically chaotic molecules, for example the full SEP spectrum of acetylene,
will be studied in light of the time dependent wavepacket picture of electronic
spectroscopy. The theory of scars in eigenstates will be extended to include
nonlinear dynamics. The Raman spectra and dynamics of multi-chromophore
molecules will also be studied.