* 9014000
* US-USSR Joint Workshop on Earthquake Hazard Mitigation      (Moscow: September 17-23, 1990)
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1991
* Riley Chung, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Gerson Sher
* 12/31/1991
* USD 39,080.00

Many regions in the United States and the Soviet Union face earthquake threats.
Historically, both countries have had a number of devastating earthquakes, most
recently the December 1988 Armenian earthquake and the October 1989 Loma Prieta
earthquake. Much can be learned from US and Soviet scientists and engineers
involved in evaluating the consequences of such events. Post-disaster teams have
visited each other's country and much valuable information has been exchanged.
The objective of this workshop, is to extend and deepen this relationship and
specifically to promote long-term cooperative research in this area. Topics to
be addressed in the workshop are ground mechanics (soil-structure interaction,
liquefaction, ground failures, and landslides and mudslides; development of new
construction materials; development and validation of mathematical models; and
development of methods for strengthen- ing and retrofitting existing structures.
The workshop is being organized jointly by the U.S. National Academy of Sciences
(NAS) and the Academy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R. (ASUSSR). The NAS
participation is being managed by the NAS/National Research Council Committee on
Earthquake Engineering and the delegation will be led by committee chairman
George Housner of the California Institute of Technology. The Soviet delegation
will be chaired by Dr. V.N. Strakhov, Director of the ASUSSR Institute of the
Physics of the Earth. This project fulfills the program objective of advancing
scientific knowledge by enabling leading researchers in the United States and
the U.S.S.R. to combine complementary efforts and capabilities in areas of
strong mutual interest and competence in the field of basic scientific research
on the basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.