* 9014172
* Research Training Group in the History, Philosophy and      Sociology of Science
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/1990,08/31/1997
* Gerald Doppelt, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 08/31/1997
* USD 1,270,865.00

This award provides funds for the establishment of a Research Training Group in
the History, Philosophy and Sociology of Science. The faculty group is a mixture
of outstanding junior and senior investigators who come from each of these three
areas. The funds provided by this award will provide stipends for graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows, and will defray part of the cost of the
trainees' research. In addition, funds will be used to purchase specialized
library resources and research equipment to be used by trainees, and to bring
investigators from other research and academic institutions for short term
visits and seminars. The areas of research that the training program addresses
include the constitution of scientific disciplines, the scientific workplace,
authority and credibility in science, naturalistic epistemology, scientific and
technological networks, and scientific controversy. As scientific research and
its fruits have come to play an increasingly important, if not central, role in
the everyday life of modern society, interest in understanding the methods and
motivations of scientific researchers has also grown. Traditionally, such
studies of science itself have been done by the scientists themselves;
increasingly, the investigators of the phenomenon of science have come from
ranks of those with formal backgrounds in history, philosophy or sociology.
Though this has provided for more sophisticated analyses, the lack of
individuals trained in more than one of these areas has resulted in an often
narrow view of scientific practice and its evolution. This award will provide
funds for the training of a new generation of investigators of science able to
pose questions and investigate phenomena that cross the boundaries and elude the
paradigms of these more traditional approaches to the study of science.