* 9014111
* US-Swaziland Cooperative Research on Synthetic Routes to    Thiophospholipids
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1993
* Gene Morris, Western Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 02/28/1993
* USD 13,340.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Gene F. Morris, Department of
Chemistry, Western Carolina University (WCU), and Dr. Themba Tyobeka, Department
of Chemistry, University of Swaziland (UNISWA), to pursue, for a period of 24
months, a program of cooperative research on synthetic routes for the
preparation of thiophospholipids. Phospholipids are a major class of compounds
present in the cell membranes of most organisms. Ultimately the goals of the
synthetic schemes to be undertaken by these collaborators are (1) the production
of 1- and 2-thiophospholipids, compounds in which sulfur has replaced oxygen on
the first or second carbon atoms of the glycerol chain and (2) to study the role
of phospholipids in membranes by substituting thiophospholipids which have
similar properties and, unlike phospholipids, may be followed by continuous
spectrophotometric analysis. In addition to the chemical research to be
undertaken, each collaborator will visit the other's university and provide
consultation and lectures designed to strengthen each institution's program in
chemistry. This project provides support for a long-standing relationship
between WCU and UNISWA which now is in its eighth year. During that period, each
university has assisted faculty of the other in research activities. The present
project will allow the collaborators to complete the synthesis of
thiophospholipids which was started when Dr. Tyobeka was a visiting faculty
associate at WCU in 1988. This project is relevant to the objectives of the
Science in Developing Countries Program which seeks to increase the level of
cooperation between U.S. scientists and engineers and their counterparts in
developing countries through the exchange of scientific information, ideas,
skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.