* 9014092
* Excavation of Middle Stone Age Occupation Horizons at the   Katanda Sites, Semliki Valley, Zaire
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1991
* Alison Brooks, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 12/31/1991
* USD 78,131.00

The earliest known remains of anatomically modern humans occur in Africa. These
remains are associated with people practicing Middle Stone Age (MSA) activities.
The most intensive research on MSA peoples has been in the Cape Province of
South Africa, but remains also have been uncovered in the Katanda area of the
Semliki Valley in eastern Zaire. The Katanda sites are associated with fish
remains, which suggest that aquatic resources may have been used much earlier
than is evident at the South African sites. One of the Katanda sites also has
yielded six barbed bone points, which are estimated to date from about 40,000
years before the present, the earliest known record of complex bone technology.
This grant will permit further excavation of paleosol-related remains at the
most productive of the Katanda sites. It also will permit surveying and mapping
of the paleosol horizon along a roughly three kilometer exposure in order to
place the archaeological findings in a broader regional context, and it will
enable use of dosimeters and additional samples to determine more accurately the
age of these MSA horizons. This project will expand on the work of previously
sponsored excavations from a very promising site, which already has shed new
light on Middle Stone Age peoples in central Africa. This work will contribute
to our knowledge about the specific features of this site, and it also will
contribute to our more general understandings of the processes by which
evolution of modern humans was related to the development of new technologies
and the exploitation of new environments and food sources.