* 9014236
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Integration of Textand Database Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1993
* W. Bruce Croft, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 11/30/1993
* USD 16,570.00

This award will support collaborative research in computer science between Dr.
W. Bruce Croft, University of Massachusetts, and Professor Erich Neuhold,
Integrated Publishing and Information Systems Institute, German National
Research Center for Computer Science, Darmstadt, Germany. The objective of the
project is to improve text retrieval models. There is an increasing need for
information systems that can provide access to complex, multimedia data.
Conventional database systems provide many useful data management functions, but
have a limited capacity for handling unstructured data, such as text. Dr.
Croft's current research focuses on text- based information retrieval that uses
relevance feedback from the searcher to modify intelligently subsequent queries
and improve overall retrieval effectiveness. The proposed cooperative work will
explore ways to incorporate relevance feedback and probabilistic retrieval
models that are used in text-based information retrieval with relational
database models used in field-oriented information retrieval. The approach is to
represent documents and queries as separate directed graphs; the document will
be static and the query graphs will be matched to the document graphs and
reconstructed dynamically, based on feedback from the searcher. The research
project will benefit from the complementary expertise of the two investigators.
Dr. Croft will work on the retrieval model and study the implications of this
model for hypertext retrieval and integrated query languages. Professor Neuhold
will concentrate on the implications for data models, the actual integration
with a database system, and the design of user interfaces for the integrated
system. The results of this research are expected to lead to a better
understanding of the issues of integration, both from a theoretical perspective
and from practical experience gained through building a prototype.