* 9014821
* Foreign Keynote Speakers Travel For 3rd U.S. Conference on  Lifeline Earthquake Engineering.
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/1990,04/30/1992
* Michael Cassaro, American Society of Civil Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 04/30/1992
* USD 5,000.00

Since the birth of Lifeline Earthquake Engineering as an independent technical
discipline, only 20 years ago, as a result of the San Fernando earthquake, it
has become increasingly evident that lifeline engineering is vital to the
welfare and vitality of communities subject to earthquake events. The subject of
lifeline engineering involves safety, reliability, and related applications of
probabilistic analysis as they relate to traditional engineering principles such
as structural, geotechnical, and network analysis. These interrelated and
interacting subjects make lifeline earthquake engineering a complex subject area
requiring advanced techniques for development and dissemination of theory and
methods. This project is to provide travel funds nd per diem costs for
distinguished keynote speakers at the Third U.S. Conference on Lifeline
Earthquake Engineering which will be held at UCLA, in Los Angeles, California on
August 22-23, 1991, organized by the American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE).
The Lifeline Earthquake Engineering Conferences are international in
significance, and also cover all technological areas with regard to safety and
reliability of lifelines subject to earthquake hazards. The Conference will
emphasize recent advances in Lifeline Earthquake Engineering, and will
contribute to the development of new knowledge and improved performance of
lifelines which may be subject to earthquakes. Its goal is to help establish
methods of engineering practice and policy for mitigating earthquake effects on
an infrastructure, and the potential loss of property, human life, and societal
productivity arising from the functional and physical failure of critical,
complex civil engineering systems due to earthquake.