* 9014275
* Research Training Group in Development of the Nervous System
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1990,08/31/1995
* Bruce Oakley, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/1995
* USD 1,285,182.00

This award provides funds for the establishment of a Research Training Group in
Development of the Nervous System. The faculty group is a mixture of outstanding
senior and junior investigators who come from a variety of disciplinary
backgrounds and work with a variety of organisms, but share a common interest in
development of the nervous system. The research programs in which trainees will
participate are aimed at three problems central to the development of all
nervous systems: neurogenesis, axonal navigation, and synaptogenesis. The funds
will provide stipends for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, will
support research participation by undergraduate students, will defray part of
the cost of the trainees' research and will enable the trainees to attend
scientific meetings. In addition, funds will be used to purchase specialized
research equipment to be used by trainees, and to bring experts from other
research and academic institutions to aid in a summer laboratory and lecture
course for trainees. In recent years, remarkable advances in the use of
genetics, biochemistry, and microscopy have led to significant new knowledge
about the development of multicellular organisms. Despite this, much remains to
be learned about development and, in particular, about the mechanisms of key
problems posed by the development of many different tissues and structures.
These include the differentiation of cell types, the basis of cell-cell
recognition, and the migration of cells during development. In this respect,
some of the most exciting opportunities and, at the same time, most difficult
challenges are presented by developmental studies of animal nervous systems,
which typically contain a large variety of cell types and extend throughout the
animal. Successful research in this area requires a mixture of diverse
intellectual and experimental skills not often taught in traditional
neuroscience programs. This award will provide funds for the training of young
neuroscientists who have the multiple skill needed to attack one of the last
great frontiers of modern biology.