* 9014347
* Research Training Group in Neural Processing in Cognition
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1990,02/28/1997
* Daniel Simons, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 02/28/1997
* USD 1,356,210.00

This award provides funds for the establishment of a Research Training Group in
Neural Processing in Cognition. The faculty group is a mixture of outstanding
senior and junior investigators who come from disciplinary backgrounds as
diverse as mathematics, neural science and human behavior, but who share a
common interest in the use of mathematics and other analytic tools in the study
of relation between neural science and cognition. The research programs in which
trainees will participate cross the boundaries of neurophysiology, neuroanatomy,
psychology, biophysics and mathematics. The funds will provide stipends for
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, will support research participation
by undergraduate students, will defray part of the cost of the trainees'
research and will enable the trainees to attend scientific meetings. In
addition, funds will be used to purchase specialized research equipment to be
used by trainees, and to bring visiting faculty from other research and academic
institutions for seminars and workshops. The challenge of relating structural
and functional information about the nervous system to behavior is, at once, one
of the most exciting and challenging problems of modern science. In recent
years, the development of a variety of new techniques for locating individual
neurons within the brain and other complex structures, for detection and
isolation of hormones and other neuropeptides, and for the analysis of the
activity of individual neurons has lead to an extraordinary increase in
understanding of the physical structure and functional organization of the
brain. Similarly, the development of theoretical paradigms and computational
tools for analysis of behavior has significantly increased the sophistication of
behavioral analysis. The merging of these disparate areas of research in
approaching the underlying physiological basis of cognition requires the
training of researchers with diverse expertise in fields not often taught
together. The program funded by this award will provide both the formal training
and the research experience required for creative work at the forefront of
modern cognitive science.