* 9014274
* Research Training Group in Plant Cell Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1990,08/31/1997
* John Crowe, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/1997
* USD 1,514,024.00

This award provides funds for the establishment of a Research Training Group in
Plant Cell Biology. The faculty group is a mixture of outstanding senior and
junior investigators who come from a variety of disciplinary backgrounds, but
share a common interest in cell biology. The funds will provide stipends for
graduate students, will support research participation by undergraduate
students, will defray part of the cost of the trainees' research and will enable
the trainees to attend scientific meetings. In addition, funds will be used to
purchase specialized research equipment to be used by trainees, and to bring
investigators from other research and academic institutions to the Davis campus
for seminars and symposia. In recent years, the use of new techniques for
microscopy and the use of genetics and biochemistry has led to significant new
knowledge of the architecture and function of the cell. Much of this progress
has come through study of microbial and animal cells. The growth of knowledge of
such features particular to plant cells has lagged. There is now a significant
need for the training of new researchers skilled in the study of cell biology of
plants. This award to one of the country's most outstanding groups of plant cell
biologists should help to address the need.