* 9014532
* Generation and Detection of Ultrasonic Lamb Waves
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1991,11/30/1995
* Shrinivas Joshi, Marquette University
* Continuing grant
* Virginia M. Ayres
* 11/30/1995
* USD 198,145.00

This proposal is concerned with ultrasonic Lamb waves, which are elastic waves
that propagate in plates of finite thickness. Our interest in these waves has
been stimulated by the developments of the last 2-3 years during which Lamb wave
devices have been successfully fabricated on plates that are thinner than 1 um.
Waves propagating in such thin structures possess a number of attractive
features for use in physical, chemical, and biological sensors. Lamb waves also
provide a convenient tool for measuring the elastic properties of self-
supporting thin films and microminiature mechanical structures. The aim of this
project is to carry out theoretical and experimental investigation of the
generation and detection of Lamb waves. Four different device configurations
will be considered. These are: (1) piezoelectric plate excited by surface
electrodes, (2) composite membrane consisting of piezoelectric film deposited on
a nonpiezoelectric plate, (3) electrostrictive excitation in a nonpiezoelectric
plate, and (4) excitation of Lamb waves in a nonpiezoelectric plate using
surface stress sources. Results obtained from theoretical analysis will be
experimentally verified. Besides enabling us to completely characterize a given
transducer, the proposed research will also lead to the design of more efficient
Lamb wave transducers.