* 9014243
* Solution of Inverse Problems in Electromagnetic and Optical Propagation Using Artificial Neural Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1993
* Leung Tsang, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/1993
* USD 151,000.00

In electromagnetic and optical propagation analysis, the forward problem denotes
the calculation of fields and waves given the parameters of the media. The
inverse problem is to calculate the target or media parameters from given or
measured fields and waves. In the past, study of the forward problem has been
done extensively. However there is a relative lack of systematic investigation
of the electromagnetic and optical inverse problems because of the highly
nonlinear relations between fields and the media parameters. With the use of
recent Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), we have been successful in developing
efficient and speedy algorithms to solve nonlinear inverse problems in fields
and waves. Specifically we propose to apply and develop ANN algorithms and query
learning techniques for the study of the following: 1. Inverse problems in
microwave and optical scattering in remote sensing of agriculture and ice and
snow will be investigated. Multiple scattering effects of discrete random media
and rough surfaces will be included. The ANN algorithms and query learning
techniques will be applied to both synthetic data as well as satellite and
aircraft remote sensing measurements. 2. Fast acquisition of design parameters
in the parametric frequency selective surface designs based on neural network
inversion will be investigated. Constrained inversion for iterative acquisition
of 2D/3D surfaces using bitmap representations will be included. These
techniques will also be applied to identify new surface elements that will
provide unconventional frequency responses.