* 9014155
* U.S.-Germany Workshop on Research in Physics Learning;      Bremen, Germany; March 5 - 8, 1991
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1991,09/30/1992
* Fred Goldberg, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 09/30/1992
* USD 17,250.00

This award supports ten U.S. participants in a small interna- tional meeting
that will be held in Bremen, Germany in March, 1991 to discuss theoretical
issues and empirical studies of students' learning processes in physics. The
objective of the meeting is to orient physics education research toward the
investigation of learning processes that lead to a deeper and more robust
understanding of physics. The workshop has been co-organized by Professor Fred
M. Goldberg of the Institute for Research in Mathematics and Science Education,
San Diego State University, and Professor Hans Niedderer of the Institute of
Physics Education, University of Bremen. Specific aims of the workshop are: (1)
to analyze theoretical frameworks for the investigation of student learning
processes in physics; (2) to propose and consider new methodologies and
standards for qualitative empirical research on student learning processes in
physics; (3) to discuss new teaching strategies that promote a deeper
understanding of physics concepts; and (4) to suggest specific research
questions which might facilitate collabora- tion among workshop participants.
The primary participants are all highly qualified science education researchers
who have made significant contributions to the field. In addition, several
postdoctoral researchers are invited; the opportunity to interact with
international leaders in the field of physics education research should provide
them with a significant opportunity for professional growth. Since the late
1970's, there has been a major effort in physics education research to identify
students' ideas about scientific phenomena, both prior to and following formal
classroom instruction. Very few studies have focused on how students learn
physics. There is no international professional organization to link researchers
interested in the study of physics education. Thus, this workshop provides an
opportunity for physics education researchers from the United States and Germany
(and a few experts from other countries) to come together for intensive
discussions to promote a new orientation in their research. Proceedings will be
published by the Institute for the Teaching of the Natural Sciences, Kiel,
Germany. This will be a vehicle for encouraging a continued focus on the issues
raised at the workshop, and for sharing the results with a larger audience.