* 9014106
* U.S.-UK Cooperative Research:  Regulation of the Plasma     Membrane and Tonoplast H+-ATPases in Plants Exposed to NaC1
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1990,05/31/1992
* Paul Hasegawa, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 05/31/1992
* USD 11,070.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Paul Hasegawa,
Department of Horticulture, Purdue University, and Drs. T. J. Flowers and A. R.
Yeo, School of Biological Sciences, University of Sussex, England. The objective
of the proposed project is to study the response of the plasma membrane and
tonoplast ATPase to salt stress. Salinity is a major factor limiting
agricultural production, since it reduces yields in land under cultivation. Salt
tolerance in plants involves the integration of mechanisms at all levels of
cytological and anatomical organization. Mechanisms of critical importance are
those which function to regulate the rate of ion accumulation and mediate the
effects of high ion accumulation, yet promote sufficient solute uptake for
osmotic adjustment necessary for growth in the new osmotic environment. It is
reasonable to envisage that the plasma membrane and the tonoplast have central
roles in regulated solute accumulation and compartmentation. However,
experimental results have not defined the physi- ological or biochemical roles
of the plasma membrane and tonoplast in plasma membrane. This project will focus
on the plasma membrane and tonoplast H+ - translocating ATPases because of their
central roles in the generation of the H+ electrochemical gradient across the
respective membranes, which mediates facilitated transmembrane solute import
into the cell. The objective of this project is to provide evidence regarding
the significance of these H+ - pumps in the regulation of solute import into the
plant during regimes of salt imposition. This project will benefit from the
complementary expertise of the US and British investigators in molecular biology
and physiology of salt stress. The results of this research may have important
economic implications for agriculture.