* 9014439
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional    Science
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1992
* NONE NONE, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/1992
* USD 5,495.00

Increasing use of modern household fuels in developing countries undergoing
rapid urbanization poses serious economic and environmental problems.
Theoretical frameworks and practical tools to assist planners in addressing
these problems have been limited and contradictory. This doctoral dissertation
research will examine two factors that are particularly relevant to the use of
fuels in Third World urban households but that have not been addressed
adequately in previous research: commercial activity in the home and the value
of women's time. It will also identify potential policy measures to influence
household demand through the quality of appliance technology, instead of through
the more conventional price approaches. The project will use survey
questionnaires administered to randomly selected households in three cities in
Thailand. Socio-economic and energy-use data from the surveys will be
supplemented by measurements of individual appliance electricity use in
representative homes. Semi- structured interviews with appliance industry
representatives and government authorities will provide background for a
qualitative assessment of the market, the structure of the industry, and the
potential for technological changes to increase energy efficiency. Statistical
tests will be used to isolate the influence of specific factors of interest
while controlling for others. This research will identify socio-economic,
behavioral, and physical characteristics of urban households that are related to
the choice and quantity of fuels used in households. These data will be used to
identify the factors driving the rapid changes in the household use of energy
resources that are taking place in Third World cities and to pinpoint the ways
in which those factors are amenable to policy influence. The theoretically
grounded answers to these questions of household energy use are of enormous
practical significance for planners and policy makers concerned with urban
growth, environmental quality, and economic planning in developing countries.
The project also will provide an excellent opportunity for a promising young
scholar to continue to develop independent research skills.