* 9014127
* Digitally Corrected Oversampling Data Converters
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1990,08/15/1991
* Gabor Temes, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/15/1991
* USD 104,149.00

The proposed research involves the development of faster and more accurate
analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog data converters. The converters studied
are of the interpolating type, which effectively trade conversion speed for
accuracy. That is, in interpolating type converters, the use of a multibit
(rather than a single-bit) front end in an interpolating converter can lead to a
higher resolution for a given speed or a higher conversion speed for a fixed
resolution. However, a multibit front-end requires an analog component accuracy
which cannot be achieved without complicated and expensive trimming and or
randomizing techniques. A novel digital self-calibration and correction
technique which achieves the requisite accuracy of the multibit system without
any trimming or randomizing, using only a simple additional digital stage is
being developed in this research. The work involves an architectural study of
the novel system, development of the circuit blocks needed and design,
fabrication and testing of several fully integrated converters based on the
novel principle. This new approach should lead to faster and or more accurate
converters than any of the currently available ones. Such converters will lead
to further developments in important applications such as digital radio and
television, digital audio, ISDN, radar, etc.