* 9014226
* U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research:  Regulation of Antibody   lass Switching to IgG1 and IgG2a
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1990,05/31/1995
* Janet Stavnezer, University of Massachusetts Medical School
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 05/31/1995
* USD 6,475.00

This award will support collaborative research in genetics between Dr. Janet
Stavnezer, University of Massachusetts Medical School, and Dr. Eva Severinson,
Department of Immunology, University of Stockholm, Sweden. The objective of the
proposed project is to study the molecular basis of expression of "genomic" or
"sterile" transcripts of >unrearranged im>munoglobin constant region genes. Such
transcription has been demonstrated to be a prelude to immunoglobin class
switching. The ability of B cells to switch from production of one class of
im>munoglobin (Ig) to another is essential to the immune system, since different
classes of Ig perform different functions. This process of class switching is
highly regulated, as different classes are expressed in response to different
antigens and at different sites in the body. In this project, the investigators
propose to study the regulation of production of sterile transcripts. After
determining the initiation sites for germline transcription of certain constant
region genes and determining their promoters, the investigators will attempt to
identify and characterize the DNA.binding proteins that bind to the promoter and
then to obtain evidence of the roles these protein play in the regulation of
such transcription. Drs. Stavnezer and Severinson are leaders in the field of
the analysis of class switching, the former in the molecular analysis of
>transcription and expression of constant region genes, and the latter in the
study of the biological mechanisms of switching. The results of this research
will make an important >contribution to the understanding of the immune system.