* 9015897
* Iridium Complexes on the Border between Organometallic and  Coordination Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/1991,12/31/1992
* Jim Atwood, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 12/31/1992
* USD 142,500.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Program will
support continued work on iridium compounds by Dr. Jim D. Atwood of the State
University of New York at Buffalo. The compounds are of general formula
RIr(CO)L2, where R = alkyl, alkoxy, hydroxo, or chloro, and L = phosphine or
substituted phosphine. These species will be used to probe three areas: to model
catalytic reactions in aqueous solution, to study reactivity of complexes
containing mixtures of hard and soft ligands, and to study the reactivity of
complexes with gaseous sulfur dioxide and nitrous oxide. The first two projects
are relevant to optimizing catalytic reactions and the third project may have
implications for reducing air pollutants. For the first project, sulfonated
phosphines will be used in order to solubilize the species in aqueous solution.
In the second project, carbonate and sulfate ligands will be contained in the
compounds, along with carbonyl and the alkoxy and phosphine groups. Preliminary
evidence on related complexes suggests that substitution reactions of compounds
containing both hard and soft ligands are rapid, and this phenomenon will be
specifically investigated. In the third project, the substitution of sulfate
ligands by sulfur dioxide and nitrous oxide will be investigated. If such
reaction occurs, the gases will be effectively absorbed by a solid.