* 9015526
* Coordination of Distributed Decision Making in a Corporate  Planning Environment
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1993
* Richard Boland, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Su-Shing Chen
* 08/31/1993
* USD 237,376.00

This research is funded under the Special Initiative on Coordination Theory and
Collaboration Technology. This is one of eleven winners under that competition.
In distributed decision environments, intelligent agents at network nodes
interact with private databases, common databases, and each other to coordinate
their independent actions. This project explores how certain human,
organizational, and technological elements in a distributed corporate planning
setting, condition the level of coordination and integration of the agents'
individual plans. The researchers work with the Management Systems Research
Group of Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) to develop, test and evaluate
decision support facilities for their individual, autonomous planning decisions.
The researchers evaluate the outcomes of systems use among a set of
interdependent business unit managers in terms of the coordination and
integration of their individual plans taken as a whole, as well as the level of
trust, commitment, understanding a cooperation they experience in this
distributed planning setting. The distributed decision making of these
autonomous, yet interdependent, agents is a setting of very high equivocality
and uncertainty. the research is action-based, selectively adding structure and
feedback capabilities to increase the richness of communication supported by the
systems. It is a theory driven, empirical, investigation of how increased
communication richness of a decision support facility affects the experience and
outcome of a distributed planning systems.