* 9015968
* U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research:  Phylogenetic Relationshipsin the Meloini (Coleoptera:  Meloidae)
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1991,03/31/1994
* John Pinto, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne E. Hudson
* 03/31/1994
* USD 6,880.00

This award will support Professor John Pinto of the University of California
Riverside in a research collaboration with Professor Marco Bologna of the
Universita degli Studi dell'Aquila, Italy. The researchers intend to undertake
phylogenetic studies for the tribe Meloini, a group of approximately 200 species
belonging to the beetle family Meloidae. This family is of considerable interest
to entomologists because of several distinctive life history traits, and its
reputation as including species that are pests of crops and domestic animals.
The meloini is currently defined by the larval stage. It includes all genera of
the subfamily Meloinae known to have phoretic larvae, i.e. larvae that obtain
their food source, in this case bee larvae and provisions, indirectly by
attaching to the adult bee. Adults of the tribe do not share any special
similarity that indicates group membership. This study proposes to analyze
cladistically all available characters in all taxa (at the generic group level)
currently assigned to the Meloini, taking into consideration the possibility
that larval similarity is due to convergence and not homology. Analysis of
unrelated genera in the subfamily Nemognathinae, whose members are all phoretic
as larvae, will be particularly instructive in this effort. This research will
result in a revised classification of the tribe, greater elucidation of the
evolution of phoresy, and new information on the larval stages and behavior of
several species of Meloidae.