* 9015795
* U.S.-France (INRIA) Collaborative Research:  Massively      Parallel Computational Fluid Dynamics Computations
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1991,08/31/1994
* Charbel Farhat, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 08/31/1994
* USD 33,410.00

This award will support collaborative research between US and French scientists
on the topic of massively parallel processing of computational fluid dynamics
and large-scale coupled computational fluid and solid dynamics problems. The US
investigators are Dr. Charbel Farhat and Dr. Oliver McBryan, University of
Colorado at Boulder, and Dr. Elaine Oren and Dr. Jay Boris, Naval Research
Laboratory, Washington, DC. The French participants are Dr. Alain Dervieux and
Dr. Bernard Larrouturou, French National Institute for Computer Science and
Automation (INRIA), Sophia-Antipolis, France. The proposed research includes
five components: steady and unsteady flow computations on unstructured meshes,
direct and large-eddy simulations on structured grids, multigrid methods applied
to flow problems, and transient fully coupled fluid/structure simulations. The
application problems, real-gas flows at high Mach number, transonic combustion,
transonic combustion, detonation physics, turbulent flows and aeroeleastic
analysis of full configura- tion aircraft structures, are chosen because of
their technological importance and in order to demonstrate to the engineering
community the potential of the emerging massively parallel technology in solving
problems that are presently beyond the reach of sequential supercomputers. The
research team at Colorado will bring their extensive "hands on" experience with
massively parallel finite element/difference computations using novel adn
intrinsi- cally parallel numerical algorithms. This team will also be
responsible for the coordination of the project and the integration of the fluid
and structure engineering software. The research group at INRIA will contribute
expertise in steady flow finite element computations with unstructured meshes.
The NRL team will bring their advances in unsteady flow parallel computations
using unstructured grids, as well as their expertise in massively parallel
computing.