* 9015692
* Research Instrumentation
* CSE,EIA
* 03/01/1991,12/31/1996
* Larry Finkelstein, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 12/31/1996
* USD 1,025,757.00

This Institutional Infrastructure award to Northeastern University is for the
development of a networked environment of powerful workstations and servers
linking the College of Computer Science and the Digital Signal Processing group
in the College of Engineering. The infrastructure supports research in a number
of areas, many of them collaborative. CDMA for mobile communications involves
several activities including the design of pseudorandom sequences for minimizing
communication interference, the design of efficient CPM signals with trellis
coding, and determining the fundamental limits on the capacity of multiple user
mobile channels. Research on neural nets involves both architectures for neural
nets and learning algorithms. Communication network research involves studying
protocols for communications in high speed LANs and MANs, bridging LANs, and
packet radio networks. Research on more mathematical topics includes
computational algebra and algebraic models for compiler correctness. Digital
signal processing research involves studies of hearing, high order spectra,
image processing, adaptive signal processing methods, and joint source coding
theory. Signal processing is a natural collaborative area for computer
scientists and electrical engineers. The replacement of analog techniques by
digital techniques requires a much more intensive use of computation in order to
interpret communications. The research supported by this infrastructure grant
includes work on how to make local networks communications well amongst
themselves and other networks, the development of new algorithms to get rid of
noise and to optimize the information carrying capacity of communications links,
the development of algorithms that will allow networks of computers to work the
same way as cellular phone networks, and more theoretical work in studying the
mathematical underpinnings of learning, algebra, and compilers.