* 9015123
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research:  Major Patterns in the Phylogeny of Flowering Plants:  Floral Development and      Relationships Among "Basal" Non-Magnoliid Dicotyledons
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1991,02/28/1994
* Peter Crane, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Alan Milsap
* 02/28/1994
* USD 10,110.00

This award will support cooperative research between Dr. Peter Crane of the
Field Museum of Natural History and Dr.Andrew Drinnan of the University of
Melbourne. The flowering plants comprise the largest group of plants,
Angiospermae with approximately 500,000 species. In addition to their sheer
diversity, the angiosperms are of great economic importance to humans.
Angiosperms are also major elements of many or most terrestrial ecosystems.
Understandably, botanists have been interested in developing models and
inferences concerning the origin and radiation of this highly significant group.
Within the past two decades, techniques such as molecular systematics have
become available to permit rigorous scientific inquiry into the problem of the
origin of the flowering plants and phylogenetic models of the group. The focus
of this research is a detailed study of floral development and morphology in the
angiosperm family Buxaceae to clarify homologies and resolve generic level
relationships. Utilizing developmental information and other data, the project
will critically assess contrasting hypotheses on the phylogenetic position of
the Buxaceae. In addition, the broader implications for angiosperm phylogeny of
incorporating the Buxaceae within, or close to, the Trochodendrales will be
assessed. Because the Trochodendrales occupy a central position in angiosperm
phylogeny, the results will have important consequences for resolving
interrelationships among major groups of flowering plants. The project
represents excellent collaboration between the Australian and the U.S. scientist
in combining their joint knowledge of the taxa to be considered and the
techniques to be employed. Their complementary expertise on critical
developmental, morphological and phylogenetic issues of flowing plants has the
potential to signifi- cantly advance knowledge of the origin of flowering plants
and phylogenetic models of the group. This is also important fundamental work on
interrelationships among major groups of flowering plants, and has the potential
to stimulate additional research using new molecular approaches to these
problems.