* 9015007
* U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research on Control and Inverse    Problems in Partial Differential Equations
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1994
* H. Thomas Banks, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 09/30/1994
* USD 11,050.00

This award supports Professors H. T. Banks, K. Ito and C. Wang of the University
of Southern California to continue their collaboration in applied mathematics
research with Professor F. Kappel and others of the University of Graz and K.
Kunisch of the Technical University of Graz, Austria. They share interests in
control theory that focus on the problems of estimating parameters in partial
differential equations from known observation of a given process and also the
approximation of functional and partial differential equations stressing
applications to control and inverse problems. The specific topics on which they
will work include modeling and parameter estimation techniques in size/age
structured population models, the identifiability of parameters in models of
visco-elastic systems, and the development of an approximation framework for
nonlinear dynamics in a Banach space setting. These U.S. and Austrian
mathematicians have been among the leaders in the development of methods and
applications in a wide variety of problems in optimization, approximation and
parameter estimation for functional and partial differential equations. Their
productive collaboration has already resulted in numerous publications
containing applications to meaningful physical and biological problems. The
proposed work promises to continue this contribution by focusing on technically
interesting problems with relevance to mechanics and population dynamics.