* 9015110
* U.S.-Australian Cooperative Research:  Climate Prediction   Design for Agricultural Production
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1991,08/01/1991
* Peter Lamb, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alan Milsap
* 08/01/1991
* USD 0.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Peter Lamb of the
University of Illinois/State Water Survey Division and Dr. Neville Nicholls of
the Australian Bureau of Meterorology Research Centre. This research is to
extend and broaden a University of Illinois/State Water Survey research program
concerned with the design of growing season climate predictions for midwestern
agriculture. In this cooperative project, the U.S. effort will be extended to
address the climate prediction design issue for grain sorghum production in
northeastern Australia. This new research will enhance the extensive economic
modeling capabilities developed by the U.S. midwestern work. It will also
attempt to exploit the substantial growing season climate prediction skill that
is inherent in the strong control that the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
phenomenon exerts on northeastern Australian rainfall. The project will provide
a perspective on results reached for the U.S. Midwest (where the growing season
climate is less predictable), furnish a better understanding of the value of
currently achievable climate prediction skill, provide a modus operandi for
designing and valuing climate prediction systems for other sectors of Australian
agriculture, as well as for developing nations whose growing season rainfall is
strongly controlled by ENSO. The project represents excellent collaboration in
combining Australian atmospheric scientist expertise and Australian data on
Southern Oscillation (SO)-based seasonal rainfall with the extensive economic
modeling capabilities of the U.S.research team. This is important fundamental
work on climate prediction design research, as well as having potential for
improving agricultural productivity.