* 9015100
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research on the Measurement of Protein Crystal Impedance to Determine Dielectric Constants
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1991,10/01/1992
* Benno Schoenborn, Brookhaven National Laboratory
* Continuing grant
* Alan Milsap
* 10/01/1992
* USD 0.00

This award will support a two-year collaborative project between Dr. Benno P.
Schoenborn, Center for Structural Biology, Brookhaven National Laboratory, and
Professor Hans G. L. Coster, University of New South Wales, Kensington,
Australia, under the U.S.-Australia Cooperative Science Program. The scientists
will cooperate in measuring the dielectric constants of selected protein
crystals. Such information is important in understanding electrostatic
interactions within and between protein molecules. These interactions are
believed to play key roles in biologically important protein functions.
Crystalline myoglobin will be studied initially in this project. The procedure
is experimentally difficult, requiring micro- instrumentation as well as the use
of extremely small electric currents. Existing equipment and instrumentation
need to be improved before the measurements can be carried out, new computer
software must be developed, and the theoretical approach used to convert the
measured impedance values to useful dielectric constants needs to be further
investigated. The respective strengths of the cooperating laboratories will be
utilized in carrying out these preliminary tasks, as well as in the later
measurements and data analysis. Dr. Schoenborn is an expert in using neutron
scattering and other techniques to investigate the structure of proteins.
Professor Coster has had considerable experience in impedance measurements of
membranes. Working together in this project they expect to be able to obtain an
increased understanding of protein structures and of the relationship between
structure and function.