* 9015506
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Decision, Risk, and       Management Science
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1991
* NONE NONE, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 07/31/1991
* USD 5,335.00

This award for doctoral dissertation research in decision, risk, and management
science will suppoprt research costs for work on the dissertation, "Finding Risk
Capital for Entrepreneurs: An Examination of the Effects of Complexity-Reducing
Information on Investor Patterns." The purpose of this study is to compare how
venture capital firms and private, individual investors, manage risks associated
with providing capital to new ventures. It addresses the question of why these
two types of venture capitalists exist simultaneously in ventures. It suggests
that the basis for their simultaneous existence is likely to be that they each
have comparative advantages in risk management. This study draws upon previous
work showing that venture capital firms and individual investors rely upon
separate networks for information regarding how to control risk. Mail
questionnaires, face-to-face interviews, and telephone interviews will be used
to gather information on the two prominent segments of the venture capital
market. Covariance structure modeling will be used to examine and test the
relationships between the perception of risk type and the implementation of
controls to manage risk. A practical implementation of this study is that it can
be helpful in assisting entrepreneurs locate risk capital, by helping them know
how their projects' riskiness is viewed by potential investors.