* 9015251
* Theorem Proving in Paraconsistent Logics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1993
* Lawrence Henschen, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Larry H. Reeker
* 08/31/1993
* USD 142,514.00

There is currently no way for knowledge based reasoning systems to handle
inconsistent information, although inconsistent information arises in many
important application such as medical diagnosis and other expert systems. Most
often during the construction of a knowledge based system, if the knowledge
engineer is presented with information, which may come from a number of sources,
that is inconsistent, the knowledge engineer simply chooses, sometimes
incorrectly, to discard certain piecesof information that have been identified
as the cause of the inconsistency. The consequence of such a practice may be
disastrous since first of all the engineer may be throwing away important
information and secondly, in may instances, the existence of inconsistent
knowledge may itself convey important information. However, since most reasoning
systems are based onclassical two valued logic, they have no way to correctly
handle inconsistent information. A class of logics call annotated logics has
been proposed by several researchers as an alternative model or reasoning that
allows for inconsistencies. These logicshave been shown to provide nice,
theoretical foundations to a variety of formalism in computer science. This work
will study the use of annotated logics as a practical computational model. It
will implement annotated logic systems that can serve as an environment in which
knowledge based containing inconsistencies can be built and in which inferences
can be computed. This work should provide a nice bridge across the gap that
currently exists between the theory and the practical utility of annotate
logics, and provide a reasoning basis for many important practical applications.