* 9015982
* U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Research:  Electron Capture and  Beta Decay in the Evolution of Large Stars; Double Beta     Decay
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1996
* T.T.S. Kuo, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 08/31/1996
* USD 14,400.00

This award supports a collaborative program of research with Helio Dias of the
University of Sao Paulo and Laercio Losano of the Federal University of Paraiba
in Brazil and Francisco Krmpotic of the University of La Plata in Argentina
collab- orating with G. E. Brown and T. T. S. Kuo of the State University of New
York at Stony Brook. This program will calculate and estimate rates of weak
interaction relevant to the evolution of stars, also rates of two-neutrino and
neutrinoless double beta decays. The best available two-body matrix elements of
the nucleon-nucleaon interaction will be used in various large shell model
calculations. In the case of stellar evolution, one of the objectives is to
obtain rates for transitions between excited states of the relevant nuclei. This
project will bring the Brazilian and Argentinian work into contact with the best
effective nuclear interactions and provide an improved calculation of electron
capture rates and beta decays in stellar evolution, as well as double beta
decay. The principal investigators in Brazil and Argentina are well experienced
in shell-model and number-projected calculations while the Stony Brook side has
had considerable experience in stellar evolution, electron capture and single
and double beta decays. On the U.S. side, Stony Brook graduate students M.
Aufderheide and D. B. Stout are already involved in this work. Other graduate
students will be brought in. Besides the Brazilian and Argentinean principals, a
successful research program will certainly influence postdoctoral and
postgraduate research in the Universities of Sao Paulo, Paraiba and La Plata.