* 9015141
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research:  Topics in             Semiparametric Modeling
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1992
* David Ruppert, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Milsap
* 03/31/1992
* USD 7,036.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. David Ruppert of
Cornell University and Dr. Peter Hall of the Australian National University. The
problem of binary regression analysis is to relate an outcome Y to a predictor
X. An example of such a problem is to relate diet and other personal factors (X)
to predict the development of breast cancer (Y). Usually such binary regression
problems are modeled through a logistic regression relationship. The focus of
this research is on cases when X has measurement error and a surrogate W is used
as an estimate of X. Recently, mathe- maticians have studied the problem of
logistic regression with measurement error in predictors, and have pointed out
that ignoring the measurement error and performing an ordinary logistic
regression of Y on W leads to inconsistent and seriously biased estimates of the
parameters in these equations. One solution which has been proposed to the
problem of measurement error is a semiparametric method, which relies on the
original parametric logistic regression model combined with nonparametric
regression techniques. Building on this proposed solution, the objective of this
project is to work on several problems of general importance to statistics
through combining classical parametric with the more modern nonparametric
techniques. Theoretical problems involving estimation of nonparametric and
parametric components will be investigated. Combination of parametric and
nonpara- metric techniques to solve the problem of binary regression when the
predictors are subject to measurement error will be studied. A third study area
will concern combining data transformation and nonparametric regression. The
project represents excellent collaboration between the U.S. mathematician, whose
work, under National Science Foundation support, focuses on nonparametric
regression analysis and the Australian group, who have published many of the
seminal papers in this area. This is important fundamental work in advancing the
use of nonparametric techniques in important problems of mathematical
statistics.