* 9015995
* U.S. France Cooperative Research:  Vertical Profiles of     Krypton-85 as an Indicator of Stratosphere-to-Troposphere   Exchange Transport
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1991,04/30/1994
* Mark Kritz, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 04/30/1994
* USD 8,200.00

This award will support collaborative research in atmospheric chemistry between
Dr. Mark Kritz, State University of New York at Albany, and Dr. Joseph Sanak,
Centre des Faibles Radioactivites, Gif-sur-Yvette, France. The objective of this
project is to incorporate Krypton-85 measurements, made by the French research
team, into a US program in which vertical profiles of radon, ozone, CO, water
vapor and aerosols will be collected over northern California. The observations
will be used to document and study episodes of rapid long-range transport of
Asian surface-level air, and will aid in the verification of global circulation
and chemical transport models. A series of upper tropospheric radon measurements
made aboard a C-41 aircraft used in this research revealed systematic, rapid
transport of Asian boundary layer air to the upper troposphere near California.
These transports could also be a significant factor in the global distribution
and budgets of chemically active species and aerosols. The profiles to be
acquired in this program will span the altitude range 1-11 km and will be used
to document and study trans-Pacific transports in the mid and upper troposphere.
Because of its long (10.76 year) half-life, dominance of northern hemisphere
sources and low stratospheric abundances, the Krypton-85 measurements will be a
valuable adjunct to the research program. In addition, the Kr-85 observations
themselves will represent a significant increase in the number of free
tropospheric observations of this radionucleide, and will add to our knowledge
of its atmospheric distribution and behavior. Since its inception the French
laboratory has been among the pioneers in the use of natural radionucleides to
study the oceans and atmosphere. This project will benefit from the significant
expertise on this topic to be provided by Dr. Sanak and his research team.