* 9015661
* Biogenic Bromine Production in Arctic Waters
* O/D,OPP
* 11/01/1990,10/31/1994
* Glenn Cota, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Myers
* 10/31/1994
* USD 222,853.00

This project is a study of organic bromine chemistry in the lower arctic
atmosphere, particularly in relation to tropospheric destruction of ozone. It
has been observed that shortly after the arctic sunrise, surface ozone
concentrations decline from a late winter maximum to near zero before recovering
to moderately high summer values. There is also strong evidence which implies
that the primary cause for the minimum is the photolytic production of bromine
radicals from organic bromine gases, which then combine with ozone. The chemical
pathways are conjectural and little is known about the origins of the organic
bromine, but it is believed that a marine source is the most probable. This
study addresses the latter question through a sampling and analysis program at
Resolute, N.W.T., Canada, focusing on macrophytes, phytoplankton, ice algae,
benthic microalgae, and bacteria. These will be tested for organohalogen content
and production/emission of bromine, chlorine, and iodine species, as well as
oxygen and carbon-14. Physiological studies will describe environmental factors
influencing release rates and coupling with other metabolic processes.
Atmospheric observations, including particulate bromine, and organic and
inorganic gaseous bromine, are the subject of a separate project. Supporting
ozone and meteorological variables are measured routinely at the Barrow
Observatory of the Geophysical Monitoring for Climatic Change Program of the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.