* 9015166
* U.S.-Australian Cooperative Research on the Analysis and    Manipulation of the Algal Carbon Dioxide Concentrating      Mechanism
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1993
* Martin Spalding, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 12/31/1993
* USD 21,690.00

This award will support a two-year collaborative project between Professor
Martin H. Spalding, Department of Botany, Iowa State University, and Dr. Murray
R. Badger, Australian National University, Canberra, under the U.S.-Australia
Cooperative Science Program. The scientists will study aspects of the
photosynthetic process in the unicellular alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. This
and other unicellular algae are very efficient in their use of external
inorganic carbon for photosynthesis, and exhibit additional interesting
photosynthetic characteristics as well. The cooperating researchers believe
these effects are the result of intracellular carbon dioxide concentration
levels in the algae which are significantly greater than in most higher plants.
A "carbon dioxide-concentrating mechanism" has been proposed by the
investigators which involves energy-requiring transport of inorganic carbon (as
carbon dioxide or bicarbonate ion) into and within the algal cells, followed by
enzyme-catalyzed conversion of accumulated bicarbonate ion to yield enhanced
levels of carbon dioxide. It is the aim of this cooperative project to
understand better the transport mechanism and to determine the location of the
enzyme (carbonic anhydrase) within the cell. Both the U.S. and Australian groups
have been active in this area of research, using complementary approaches and
techniques. Professor Spalding and his colleagues have emphasized molecular
genetic studies of the CO2-concentrating mechanism in microalgae, while Dr.
Badger and his group in Australia have focused their related efforts on
cyanobacteria, and have developed special mass spectrometric and centrifugation
techniques to aid in the analyses. The cooperative project will build upon the
strengths of both groups, and will involve exchanges by the principal
investigators as well as by their postdoctoral associates.