* 9015735
* Architectures for Multichannel Optical Fiber Communication  Using Arrays of Surface Normal Devices
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1994
* John McInerney, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 01/31/1994
* USD 612,167.00

During the next three years the Principal Investigators intend to establish an
interdisciplinary research project to develop novel schemes for transmitting
many channels within the terahertz bandwidth of a single-mode optical fiber, by
extension of existing efforts in III-V semiconductor optoelectronics, diode
laser physics and engineering, high-speed detector development, surface-emitting
lasers, spatial light modulators, and optical switches, and parallel optical
information processing. The emphasis will be on interfacing many parallel data
streams into a single optical fiber using two-dimensional surface-normal
architectures. This addressed vertical cavity surface- emitting laser and
spatial light modulator arrays. The initial emphasis in this program will be on
dense time-division multiplexing and demultiplexing at a specific center
wavelength, by means of arrays of spatial light modulators. Further efforts will
be aimed at pipelining several such sets of time- multiplexed data into a fiber
using wavelength-division multiplexing. Physical device models and global Monte
Carlo simulations of complete systems will be used to study the properties of
various architectures, for comparison with experiments. At the end of three
years the investigators will have developed a working prototype system for time-
division multiplexing of ten data channels timed and recovered by using
interleaved gain-switched or mode-locked picosecond pulse trains and phase
mudulator arrays. An important element of this scheme will be the development of
optical coincidence detectors for time- division demultiplexing, based on arrays
of bistable etalons or thresholding optical detectors. The principal
investigators also will have assessed the feasibility of combining several
groups of time- division multiplexed data at different wavelengths, using arrays
of single-mode edge-emitting and surface-emitting lasers, and arrays of
spectrally matched detectors.