* 9015738
* Oxidation in Supercritical Water: Reaction Pathways and     Kinetics (REU Supplement)
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/1990,11/30/1994
* Phillip Savage, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 11/30/1994
* USD 218,408.00

Several technologies are in use for the safe treatment of hazardous wastes. Some
of these include adsorption, incineration, and biodegradation. Aqueous waste
streams with moderate organic concentrations (1-30%) may be too dilute for
economical incineration and too concentrated for treatment by adsorption or
biodegradation. For such streams oxidation in supercritical water (SCW) is a
potential alternative technology. Hazardous organic chemicals present in aqueous
waste streams can thus be converted to carbon dioxide and water. This work is
aimed at understanding the kinetics of the oxidation of hazardous organic wastes
in SCW to be used in the design and development of such processes. Phenol,
naphthalene, chlorobenzene and acetic acid will be oxidized in SCW. The
oxidation reactions will be conducted in a flow reactor and the products will be
analyzed by high performance liquid chromatography, gas chromatography, and gas
chromatography mass spectrometry. Examining the variation of the products'
yields and the reactant conversion with the reactor residence time will
facilitate resolution of the reaction pathways and determination of the reaction
kinetics. The project will provide opportunities for practical engineering
advances as well as fundamental advances in understanding chemical reaction
processes in supercritical fluids.