* 9015992
* U.S-France Joint Seminar:  Multiple Sigma and PCP Receptor  Ligands:  Mechanisms for Neural Modulation and Protection,  Montpellier, France, September 1991
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1991,08/31/1992
* Edward Domino, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 08/31/1992
* USD 13,750.00

This award will support US participation in a US-France joint seminar on the
topic of "Multiple Sigma and PCP Receptor Ligands: Mechanisms for Neural
Modulation and Protection?", to be held in Montpellier, France, in September
1991. The US and French organizers are: Dr. Edward Domino, Department of
Pharmacology, University of Michigan, and Dr. Jean-Marc Kamenka, Ecole Nationale
Superieure de Chimie, Montpellier, France. The seminar will cover the use of
sigma and PCP receptor ligands in chemistry, biochemistry, molecular biology,
neurobehavioral sciences, psychopharmacology and toxicology. Their interaction
with different neurotransmitters or modulators will be updated and the search
for specific sigma and PCP receptor agonists and antagonists will be described.
PCP and its derivatives are currently important molecular probes in many aspects
of biology and are also being considered as novel therapy as antipsychotic,
anticonvulsant and neural protective agents. This seminar will bring together
leading experts in this rapidly moving field of study and will provide an
opportunity for valuable interactions. Results of the seminar will be published
and are expected to be disseminated widely in the scientific community.