* 9015619
* Boron Isotopic Studies of Hydrothermal Fluids and AssociatedVein Mineralization
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1991
* William Leeman, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 12/31/1991
* USD 17,000.00

The purpose of this SGER award is to initiate a collaborative investigation of B
isotopic fractionation between well characterized samples of hydrothermal brines
and associated vein mineralization at the Salton Sea, Coso, and Geysers
geothermal fields. This study will serve to evaluate both B elemental and
isotopic partitioning between several common alteration minerals and the fluids
from which they precipitated. Empirical calibration of temperature effects on
such partitioning is also possible using reservoir characteristics established
for commercial geothermal wells in these fields. Essentially, it is planned to
use the natural systems as a form of experimental calibration. This approach
will provide an important survey of B concentrations in a variety of
hydrothermal minerals(and of the feasibility of B isotopic analysis in each)
that will focus subsequent detailed experimentation on those mineral species
having the greatest potential for practical applications. Isotopic measurements
will be carried out at the National Institute for Standards and Technology in
collaboration with R. Vocke whose research group has recently developed an
improved method for B isotopic mass spectrometry. It is proposed to first
analyze selected fluid samples previously collected by M.A. McKibben to refine
methods for isotopic analysis, then to visit representative wells from each of
the geothermal fields for further sampling of fluids and vein mineralization
(from core and cuttings).