* 9015848
* Compilation of an Unbiased, Terrestrial Precipitation Data  Set and Its Use in the Evaluation of the Natural Variabilityand GCM-Simulated Climates
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/1991,06/30/1993
* David Legates, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 06/30/1993
* USD 25,839.00

This is a pilot research project to evaluate the natural variability of monthly
precipitation and use these estimates to 1) evaluate General Circulation Model
(GCM) simulations of present-day precipitation variability and 2) determine
whether and where GCM-forecasts of terrestrial precipitation changes under
doubled Carbon Dioxide scenarios will be first detected. This assessment will be
obtained by compiling a pilot data base of monthly precipitation totals from
terrestrial stations and removing "gage-induced" biases (including the effect of
the wind, wetting on the interior walls of the gage, and evaporation form the
gage) by an empirically-based method. As surface air temperature, wind speed,
and humidity are required to facilitate the gage corrections, the database also
will contain observations of these climatological variables. Missing
observations of both air temperature and wind speed will be interpolated both
spatially and temporally. Digital filtering procedures then will be used to
obtain areally-averaged estimates of precipitation that are compatible with the
GCM resolutions. The natural variability in monthly precipitation will be
computed and used to calculate signal-to-noise and compared with a number of
general circulation models. These results then will be used to determine where
(if anywhere) Carbon Dioxide-induced changes in precipitation will be detectable
and consequently, important.