* 9015380
* U.S.-Western Europe Cooperative Research:  Transverse       Doppler Experimentation in France and Italy
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1991,09/30/1992
* Vernon Newhouse, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 09/30/1992
* USD 7,556.00

This award will support collaborative research in bioengineer- ing between Dr.
Vernon Newhouse, Drexel University, and two European investigators: Dr.
Dominique Cathignol, National Institute for Health and Medical Research
(INSERM), Lyons, France and Dr. Piero Tortoli, Electrical Engineering
Department, University of Florence, Italy. The objective of the project is to
find more accurate methods of blood-flow measurement. Dr. Newhouse and his
research group have discovered a new method of blood-flow measurement, in which
the transducer is held at right angles to the blood-flow. But tests are required
to perfect this method and to shed more light on the interpretation of data. The
laboratory in Florence has Doppler systems whose parameters can be adjusted
optimally for this transverse Doppler method. Such systems are not available
commercially. Dr. Tortoli and his associates are willing to test this method in
simulated blood-flow and living subjects. In order to develop the Transverse
Doppler method further, the US investigator has developed new transducer designs
which will make it possible to separate flow parameters, such as turbulence and
mean flow velocity. The research group in Lyons headed by Dr. Cathignol will
assist Dr. Vernon to construct these new transducer shapes and test them with
the instrumentation in his laboratory, which is highly sophisti- cated and not
generally available in the US.