* 9015929
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Regulation of Ferritin   Expression in Plants
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1991,10/31/1994
* Elizabeth Theil, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 10/31/1994
* USD 8,040.00

This award will support collaborative research in biochemis- try between Dr.
Elizabeth Theil, North Carolina State University, and Dr. Jean-Francois Briat,
University of Grenoble. The objective of the research is to investigate the
regulation of ferritin expression in plants. Iron is required for critical
reactions (e.g. cell division and respiration), as well as plant-specific
reactions (e.g. photosynthesis and nitrogen fixation). Alterations in iron
storage in ferritin occur in chlorosis and nematode infection. In animals,
ferritin is encoded in a multigene family and is regulated by iron and through a
conserved translational regulatory sequence. Comparable information is lacking
in plants. Recently the investigators have shown that pea and soybean ferritins
share 55-65% sequence identify with vertebrate ferritins, but soybean ferritin
mRNA also encodes a transit peptide apparently related to the plastid location
of ferritin. The effect of iron on ferritin synthesis in plants is to change
ferritin mRNA concentration. In this project, which combines US and French
expertise on ferritin and on gene expression in plants, the investigators will
carry out a joint study of ferritin regulation and accumulation in plants during
iron stress, nodule formulation, and seed development. Ferritin cDNAs and
antibodies will be used to examine: 1) ferritin sequences (regulatory and
coding) in plant genomes, 2) the effect of iron on ferritin mRNA content and
transcription, and 3) ferritin mRNA and protein accumulation during normal and
abnormal nodulation, leaf maturation and seed formation. The results will be
important for understanding iron metabolism and ferritin regulation in plants,
as well as providing a model in the future for intracellular trafficking related
to plastid development.