* 9015163
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Anomalous Transport of   Magnetically Confined Plasma
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1994
* Wendell Horton, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 08/31/1994
* USD 19,235.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Wendell Horton, Professor of Physics,
University of Texas at Austin, to pursue with Dr. Duk-In Choi, Professor of
Physics, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), for a
period of 24 months, a program of cooperative research on the basic theoretical
physics aspects of plasma dynamics. This research will deal especially with the
effect of small scale fluctuations of the drift wave type on the magnetic
confinement of plasmas. The researchers will use analytic theory and numerical
simulations to determine the nature of the electron and ion particle transport
in the system. The role of the electron temperature gradient in driving short
wavelength magnetic fluctuations will be emphasized. The research is directly
motivated by unresolved issues in the controlled fusion program, but results of
the research will be relevant to basic processes occurring in stellar,
magnetospheric, and astrophysical plasmas. The U.S. and Korean collaborators are
highly respected scientists who not only have extensive research experience and
productive publication records in the field of the proposal but also have
produced more than 20 joint publications from past collaboration which includes
collaboration under NSF Grant No. INT-8617403. This project is relevant to the
objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase
the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers
through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques
and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. Korean participation in
the project is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation
(KOSEF).