* 9015102
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research:  Public Education aboutChemicals in Society
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1991,12/31/1996
* Herbert Thier, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 12/31/1996
* USD 23,288.00

This award will support cooperative research between Dr. Herbert Thier of the
University of California at Berkeley and Dr. David James of Deakin University,
Australia. The outcome of this cooperation will be more effective materials for
educating teachers, students, and the general public about chemicals and the
societal issues related to the use of chemical in both countries. The project is
in three phases: first, investigation of how one measures what students learn in
a societal issue oriented science course that is different from the outcomes of
a traditional science course in the two countries; second, analyses and
comparisons of the impacts of implementation of U.S. and Australian societal
issue oriented science courses; and, third, a cooperative conference at which
the accomplishments will be summarized and plans developed for continuing the
collaborative effort. The project represents excellent collaboration between the
Australian and U.S. science education communities. Dr. James has expertise in
applied chemistry and the implementation of societal issue oriented science
materials to the public. The Royal Australian Chemical Society (RACI), with 8000
members throughout Australia, will act as the Australian coordinating body for
the further development and implemention of the U.S. and Australian materials in
both countries. Dr. Their, under NSF funding, has developed a unique set of U.S.
materials, the Chemical Education for Public Understanding Program, (CEPUP),
which has been extensively field-tested and evaluated in the United States. The
cooperation is important fundamental work in developing and evaluating societal
issue oriented science courses in a cross-cultural setting, and has the
potential to network school and community educators in courses such as
biotechnology and global warning in the U.S. and Australia.