* 9015198
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research:  Fluids in Amphibolite-to Granulite-Facies Lode Gold Deposits
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1991,09/30/1992
* Philip Brown, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Alan Milsap
* 09/30/1992
* USD 12,948.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Philip E. Brown of
the University of Wisconsin-Madison and Dr. David Groves of the Key Centre for
Strategic Mineral Deposits of the University of Western Australia. Most
available data on the nature and genesis of Archean lode gold mineralization has
been gathered on mesothermal deposits. Fluid compositions and the timing of
mineralization are reasonably well agreed upon. There is however considerable
continuing debate as to the source of the ore components and the fluid. The
objective of this collaborative project is to conduct a fluid inclusion study of
lode gold deposits of the Yilgarn Craton in western Australia. The area to be
studied contains gold deposits hosted in amphibolite-to granulite- facies
metavolcanic and metasedimentary rocks. This research will compare these results
which are representative of lower crustal levels and therefore less modified,
more proximal, ore fluids to data from the better-studied mesothermal deposits.
Extending the range of deposits studied through this project will allow the
development of genetic models and general understanding of the mechanisms of
gold mineralization, and their relationships to late-Archean tectonics. The
project represents excellent U.S. and Australian collaboration. Dr. Brown has
many years of experience in fluid-inclusion studies involving ore deposits
and/or metamorphic terranes and the background in theoretical fluid modeling
that will be necessary to interpret the pressure- temperature-composition
history of the fluids trapped in inclusions in high-grade metamorphic rocks. The
Australian research group has an excellent international reputation, and the
documentation of mineralization in the Yilgarn Craton required for the study. In
addition to providing useful data on the fluid characteristics and conditions of
mineralization, the research has the potential for broader application in
interpretation of gold deposition world-wide in Archean terranes and in
exploration models for similar gold deposits.