* 9015729
* Novel Polymer Architectures
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/1991,07/31/1994
* Harry Gibson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 07/31/1994
* USD 307,500.00

Polyrotaxanes, comprised of macrocyclic rings threaded by linear macromolecules,
are a new and still unexploited family of polymers. Due to the potential for the
macrocyclic components to move lateraly along the linear backbone as well as
circumferentially, these systems are expected to possess properties distinct
from those of traditional covalently bonded polymeric materials or blends
thereof. The synthesis and characterization of a wide variety of structural
types of polyrotaxanes will be carried out. Synthesis by statistical threading
of macrocycles by linear monomers will rely on use of the cyclic as the solvent
for the polymerization. A directed method is based on an attractive force
between the macrocycle and the linear monomer, forming a stable threaded entity
(a rotaxane) prior to polymerization. Stability against loss of the macrocycles
by diffusion is ensured by incorporation of large end caps or bulky spacers
along the backbone. Various combinations of the two components, over a range of
polarity, will be considered. Among the macrocycles are both rigid and flexible
crown ethers, hydrocarbons, and quaternary ammonium systems. Linear polymeric
components, likewise, will vary widely from flexible to rigid-rod structures,
formed by both step and chain- growth methods. The overall objective is to
explore and exploit the novel topographic and topological features of this novel
polymer architecture. Potential areas of utilization include interfacial bonding
(adhesion, blend compatibilization), improved processability (enhanced
solubility, lower melting points), stabilization (encasement of labile
functionality), improved control of molecular ordering (electron and energy
transport, molecular level interpenetrating networks for better mechanical
performance), and understanding the diffusion of linear macromolecules in the
bulk.