* 9015944
* Computer Applications for Persons with Disabilities (CAPD)--(The Second National Search)
* CSE,EIA
* 09/15/1990,05/31/1992
* Paul Hazan, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald L. Engel
* 05/31/1992
* USD 263,703.00

The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory (APL) will plan and
conduct, under National Science Foundation sponsorship, a comprehensive
assessment and information dissemination project of innovative computer
applications judged to be most effective in helping people with disabilities.
Called the Second National Search for Computer Applications for Persons with
Disabilities, the project is modeled on a similar search and assessment
conducted in 1980-1981 which uncovered over 900 inventions involving personal
computer aids for person with disabilities. The primary objectives of this
search and assessment effort are: (1) To heighten the nations awareness and
sensitivity to the problems and needs of disabled persons and how computers can
provide new opportunities for people with disabilities. (2) To identify
effective adaptive technology, i.e., computer applications and techniques, and
to stimulate creative developments to improve the quality of life of people with
disabilities. (3) To document and disseminate information on effective computer
applications to persons with disabilities, interested educators, researchers,
and the computer industry. This project will address a wide spectrum of
disabilities and take the form of a series of competitions. Entries from
professionals, amateurs, and students, addressing visual, hearing, language,
neuromuscular, and learning disabilities, will be judged first regionally, then
nationally to select the most effective applications. Local and national winners
will receive awards. Information on effective computer applications will be
disseminated to the disabled community and to interested researchers and
commercial organizations. A long-term task force will be established to continue
efforts to transfer computer technology to serve the needs of persons with
disabilities