* 9015221
* Determination of Metal-Oxygen Bond Strength in Oxide        Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/1991,10/31/1994
* Harold Kung, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 10/31/1994
* USD 200,000.00

In this project, the energies of metal-oxygen bonds involved in reduction and
reoxidation of an oxide are measured by calorimetry using a heat-flow
calorimeter. Heats of reduction are measured for reduction by carbon monoxide or
by hydrogen; this permits calculation of heats of formation for metal- oxygen
bonds using the known heats of formation of small molecules, or, if necessary,
the mesured heat of reoxidation. If surface hydroxyls are formed, their heats of
formation can also be determined. Laser Raman spectroscopy, performed before and
after the calorimetry, is used to identify and track the particular bonds made
or broken in the calorimetric reactions. Initial experiments are on the highly
dispersed phases of vanadia supported or gamma-alumina and anatase (titania).
Data on the energies of metal-oxygen bonds are not available. Such data should
be very useful for understanding the catalysis and surface chemistry of oxides,
particularly selective catalytic oxidation reactions in which the surface is the
proximate source of oxygen; the effort proposed is a formidable task. Selective
oxidations are major elements in the production of a variety of commodity and
specialty chemicals. Although catalytic behavior is the focus of this study, the
results will also contribute to understanding semiconductor surfaces and
insulating layers in electronic materials, and passivation an corrosion in
structrual materials.