* 9015164
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research on the Synthesis of     Ordered Composites on a Nanometer Sized Scale by            Manipulation of Layered Compounds
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1991,02/28/1994
* Abraham Clearfield, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 02/28/1994
* USD 19,330.00

This award supports a visit by Dr. Abraham Clearfield of Texas A&amp;M
University to CSIRO, Melbourne, Australia, to work with Dr. Terry Turney. The
researchers propose to combine the expertise in materials synthesis of the two
institutions to synthesize novel inorganic nanocomposite materials with two
related synthetic procedures. In the first, clays and other layered compounds
are pillared by a variety of polycations and thermally treated to decompose the
pillar into a layer of oxide sandwiched between the host layers. Compounds to be
pillared include clays, tetravalent phosphates, layered hydrous oxides, layered
titanates, silicic acids, layered spinels of the type K and layered double
hydroxides. The latter class of compounds is pillared by polyanions. These
pillared compounds will then be treated thermally to decompose the pillar into
sheets of oxide sandwiched between layers of the host, thus creating ceramic
nanocomposites. In the second synthetic procedure, two or more layered compounds
will be exfoliated into their individual layers, mixed and reconstituted into a
single phase. The exfoliates will be prepared by either attaching pendent
hydrophilic organic groups to the layers or intercalating a polyether amine
between the layers. A wide variety of di-, tri- and tetravalent metal compounds
may be manipulated in this fashion. Reconstitution of the exfoliates will be
effected by thermal removal of the organic, by acid treatment to remove
intercalated amines, or by gentle alkaline hydrolysis of the phosphonates. The
final annealed solids will be interlayered phosphates, hydroxides or oxides, and
will constitute new types of such solids with novel catalytic, magnetic and
electrical properties.