* 9015935
* U.S.-Argentina Workshop on Analytical Chemistry:  Buenos    Aires, November 12-16, 1990
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1990,05/31/1992
* Ramon Barnes, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 05/31/1992
* USD 9,952.00

This award supports the First Buenos Aires Workshop on Analytical Chemistry to
be held in Buenos Aires, Argentina from November 12-16, 1990. The organizer is
Daniel Batistoni of the analytical chemistry department of the Argentine Atomic
Energy Commission. The U.S. organizer is Ramon Barnes of the University of
Massachusetts. The aim of this workshop is to bring together local and
international scientists active in different fields of analytical chemistry.
Exchange of ideas and discussions will be stressed between research units,
government laboratories and industry. The program will include plenary lectures,
invited oral presentations on selected topics, and oral or poster presentations
of contributed papers. The workshop also includes discussion panels on specific
subjects, four tutorial lectures, and a limited instrumental exhibition. It will
stimulate the initiation of new professional contacts and long term associations
between U.S. and Latin American scientists who share common research interests.
The proposed research-oriented program is focused on modern topics in analytical
chemistry including instrumental analysis techniques; flow injection and kinetic
methods of analysis; quality assurance; toxicology, biological, and
environmental analysis; and the analysis of materials. The workshop will promote
scientific exchange and collaboration in the specific areas of advanced
spectroscopic techniques for elemental analysis at trace and ultratrace levels
as applied to the characterization of new materials; flow injection and kinetic
methods of analysis, and quality control in analytical laboratories.