* 9015105
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research:  Dating Hominid        Migration and Quaternary Environmental Change Through       Racemization of Amino Acids in Ostrich Eggshells
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1991,11/30/1992
* Gifford Miller, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Alan Milsap
* 11/30/1992
* USD 15,950.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Gifford Miller of the
University of Colorado at Boulder and Dr. Allan R. Chivas of the Australian
National University. The research is to apply to ostrich eggshells a new and
highly successful varient of the dating technique, amino acid racemization, that
is, investigation of protein changes from active to inactive materials. The
technique can only be used when there is no loss of these materials from
internal to external environments; the great density of ostrich eggshells
protects such loss in this research. Highly reproducible dates on the timing and
patterns of the migration of hominids across Asia and into Australia, and
information on climatic changes over relatively short periods of geological time
will result from this research. As racemization can be applied to materials
which are too old to be dated by radiocarbon dating, the project provides a
unique opportunity to date activities in the 35,000 and older time range. The
project represents excellent collaboration between the Australian and U.S.
researchers. The Australian group will contribute expertise in isolating
individual amino acids from fossils, excellent laboratory facilities, and field
support for collecting samples. Dr. Miller will contribute his already-extensive
expertise in the technique of amino acid racemization for dating. This is
clearly important work of benefit to both the Australian and U.S. scientific
communities on dating the ages of human migration and associated climate change.