* 9015282
* Industry/University Cooperative Research on Mechanical and  Optical Coordinate Measuring Machines (CMMs and OCMMs)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/1990,09/30/1995
* Jun Ni, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jay Lee
* 09/30/1995
* USD 286,000.00

Coordinate Measurement Machines (CMM) and more recently, Optical Coordinate
Measuring Machines (OCCM) are gaining rapid acceptance in U.S. industry,
particularly the automotive industry, because of its high-speed capability of
dimensional measurement. If properly applied, CMM, and OCMMs can be used to
dramatically improve product quality by enabling accurate and inexpensive 100%
in-process measurement and continuously monitoring the manufacturing processes
thus providing a way to process improvement. This is an essential step in
retaining U.S. competitiveness in the world. The need for such a center was
evidenced by the industrial support generated during the planning grant phase
(ECD 9015282) of the center development. Today there are over 100 different
companies marketing these systems in the U.S. and over the next decade the
annual sales should exceed $1.2 billion. The Industry/University Cooperative
Research Center on Coordinate Measuring Machines and Optical Coordinate
Measuring Machines at the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor will perform
research on the use and application of CMMs and OCCMs in improving quality of
products, particularly those related to the automotive industry. The Program
Manager recommends that the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor be awarded
$50,000 for the first year of a five year continuing grant. Near the end of each
twelve month period, the Program Manager and/or the Directors of the Engineering
Centers Division reviews the progress of the center on a number of renewal
criteria, including the following: (1) extent to which the Industry/University
interaction and collaboration is developing; (2) extent to which the support
base for the center is expanding; (3) extent to which a robust research program
is developing. If the review is satisfactory, the Program Manager will recommend
support of the next period of this continuing grant.