* 9015423
* A Hierarchical Negotiation Protocol Using Multi-Dimensional Behavior Specifications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1993
* Edmund Durfee, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Rosenblum
* 08/31/1993
* USD 170,000.00

This research is funded under the Special Initiative on Coordination Theory and
Collaboration Technology. This is one of eleven winners under that competition.
This research is directed towards integrating concepts from artificial
intelligence, organization theory, and operations research into a single
framework. The research argument is that the plans, organizations, and schedules
studies in these separate fields can share a common representation, and are
simply different abstractions of a behavioral specification. The PI develops a
hierarchical, multi-dimensional specification for behavior that subsumes
traditional goal, plan, functional and product hierarchies. the research
outlines a protocol for coordination based on the behavioral specification,
where intelligent agents incrementally exchange behavioral information and
search through alternative behaviors to resolve conflicts and promote
cooperation. The research also implements and evaluates this framework both in
the context of cooperative robotics domain, and in the context of an intelligent
systems for scheduling meetings between people. The objective is to generate
scientific and technological advances using a novel, interdisciplinary approach
to coordination.