* 9015637
* Mathematical Sciences: Conference on Inverse Problems in    Differential Equations: Computational Algorithms; March     10-14, 1991, College Station, Texas
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/1991,01/31/1992
* Michael Pilant, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 01/31/1992
* USD 16,000.00

This grant is to partially support a conference and workshop to be held March
10-14, 1991 at Texas A&M University. The topic of the conference, inverse
problems in partial differential equations, arises from a wide variety of
problems in science and engineering. The availability of high speed computers
has allowed attempts at large scale problems of enormous social and economic
value, for example, the CAT scan and oil reservoir simulations. The question of
non-uniqueness is a critical one for the development of numerical algorithms.
Determining the necessary amount of data in order that at most one solution can
exist is an important question; however, often one can redefine the "solution
class" in order to "answer" this question. Even when this is not reasonable, the
problem may be reformulated into a "sufficiently close" problem for which the
situation is much better. The very fact that CAT scans work or that features of
submarines can be detected by using reflected sound waves shows that complex
inverse problems can be, if not solved, at least negotiated. The conference
participants will discuss whether one can find numerically implementable methods
that give a unique solution to some closely related reformulation of problems in
the subareas of impedance tomography, inverse scattering and spectral methods,
and overposed boundary data. The participants will test these algorithms in a
workshop atmosphere. //