* 9015696
* Infrastructure for Parallel Processing Research
* CSE,EIA
* 01/01/1991,12/31/1996
* Howard Siegel, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 12/31/1996
* USD 1,421,967.00

This award provides support to develop computing infrastructure in the areas of
parallel languages and compilers, automatic parallelization of algorithms,
computer vision, and simulation and synthesis of digital devices. The
infrastructure consists of a state of the art Single Instruction Multiple Data
(SIMD) computer along with support staff to ensure that the computer hardware
and software are properly maintained. The parallel languages and compilers for
parallel computers research focusses on the problem of the dependence of
efficient software on the underlying parallel architecture. This dependence
makes the development of portable software which is also efficient difficult and
to date impossible. The research focusses on languages in which parallelism can
be expressed free of architecture assumptions and compilers that will compile
programs using these architecture free constructs into efficient code for
specific parallel architectures. The automatic parallelization of algorithms
research focusses on the problem of efficiently mapping algorithms to SIMD
computers. The SIMD computer executes by having many processors execute the same
instruction on different data. Thus the movement of data and the choice of which
processors should execute an instruction is critical in order to obtain high
performance. This research focusses on a software tool that can be adapted to a
variety of SIMD architectures and which will perform the parallelization of
algorithms to be used with these architectures. Computer vision and image
processing have been ideal applications for SIMD computers because the
processing of images can be broken down into the processing of sub-images, each
sub-image algorithm being the same, followed by uniform data movement between
processors. The computer vision research aims to develop a collection of
algorithms for vision and image processing that will efficiently use the SIMD
architecture. The research projects on the simulation and synthesis of digital
devices use the processing power of the SIMD computer to perform tasks that
would require supercomputer computational capabilities. These projects include
the synthesis of digital diffractive elements and the simulation of the
operation of semiconductor devices. The synthesis of digital diffractive
elements, used in optics, requires substantial computational capabilities and
input/output capacity (on the order of 10,000 hours on a VAX 780). Similarly the
modeling of semiconductor devices requires substantial computational
resources(the solution of order 30,000 sparse matrices). Both of these research
projects propose to develop algorithms for use on the SIMD computer in order to
obtain the computational capability necessary to solve problems of this
magnitude. //