* 9015101
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research:  Stereoselectivity in  Metalloprotein Electron Transfer
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1992
* Jack Pladziewicz, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Alan Milsap
* 08/31/1992
* USD 14,724.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. John R. Pladziewicz
of the University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee and Dr. Alan Sargeson at the
Australian National University (ANU). This research is to investigate the extent
to which electron-transfer reactions of metalloproteins depend on the three-
dimensional structure of other reactants. Rates of electron transfer will be
compared for metallo- proteins reacting with optical isomers, i.e., molecules
which contain the same atoms connected in the same way, but which differ in
their three-dimensional structure so that they are non-superimposable mirror
images. The results of the project will explain the selectivity exhibited by
many biological electron-transfer reactions and advance understanding of
stereochemical control of biological electron transfer. The project represents
excellent collaboration between the U.S. and Australian researchers.The
expertise and equipment for synthesizing certain novel metalloproteins essential
to the project are available in the ANU laboratory. This, combined with Dr.
Pladziewicz's expertise in metalloprotein electron transfer studies, represents
a combination of knowledge and skills for making progress on this chemistry not
achievable by either laboratory separately. This is important fundamental work
in stereochemical control of metalloprotein electron transfer, as well as having
potential for developing biological sensors of molecules such as glucose and
urea.