* 9015810
* U.S.-Philippines Cooperative Research:  Choice in Decisions of Uncertain or Diminishing Returns
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1993
* Philip Hineline, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 11/30/1993
* USD 18,055.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Philip N. Hineline, Professor of
Psychology, Temple University, to pursue with Dr. F. G. David, Professor of
Psychology, University of the Philippines, for a period of 24 months, a program
of cooperative research on choice in situations of uncertain or diminishing
returns. The proposed research grant will enable Dr. David to continue his
involvement in a research project in the psychology laboratories of Temple
University. Professor David has been integrally involved in the formative stages
of that project during a one-year post-doctoral fellowship supplemented by an
additional year via sabbatical leave. The continuing participation would entail
two summer periods at Temple University, during 1991 and 1992, and
communications via electronic mail concerning data analyses and manuscript
preparations during the intervening and subsequent periods. The research
concerns pigeons' choices between differently distributed food deliveries: One
set of experiments addresses a prediction of optimal foraging theory, that birds
become risk-prone under negative energy budgets. Other experiments concern
pigeons' sensitivities to, and preferences among, differing forms of variability
in food delivery, and a third set concerns choices between fixed vs. escalating
work require- ments for food delivery. These last procedures mimic the depleting
patches of a foraging situation, so its results will be relevant to foraging
theory; it is of special interest because advantageous short-term choices are
disadvantageous in the longer term. This project is relevant to the objectives
of the Science in Developing Countries Program which seeks to increase the level
of cooperation between U.S. scientists and engineers and their counterparts in
developing countries through the exchange of scientific information, ideas,
skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.