* 9015667
* Facility for Experimental Exploration and Validation
* CSE,EIA
* 03/01/1991,02/29/1996
* John Johnstone, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 02/29/1996
* USD 1,476,147.00

This infrastructure award is for the purchase of a network of high speed
workstations. This network of workstations is to support research in artificial
intelligence, programming languages, geometric computing, and fault tolerant
computing. The artificial intelligence research is concentrated in four areas:
machine learning, constraint satisfaction networks, parallel logic programming,
and knowledge representation. The research in programming languages involves the
translation of CCS specifications to an implementation language which provably
implements concurrency and provably satisfies real time constraints. The
research in geometric computing is focused on computing higher-degree curves and
surfaces, alternate representations for curves and surfaces, efficient methods
for representing geometric modes, and motion planning. The research in fault
tolerant computing is concentrated on self-monitoring systems. Johns Hopkins
University will use its infrastructure grant to improve the environment for
experimental research in computer science, information science, and computer
engineering. Artificial intelligence is the generic name given to computer based
research on performing actions normally described as "intelligent actions."
Johns Hopkins researchers will explore learning and reasoning actions. Languages
to instruct computers in their operations have been studied for many years. The
goal of these languages is to succinctly describe the desired operation with as
little error as possible. The programming language research at Johns Hopkins
pursues this goal for systems that must respond in "real time". Computers are
used extensively in robots. In order for reasoning to be performed about the
environment in which the robot resides, a mathematical model of that environment
must be constructed. Johns Hopkins researchers will be studying how to construct
and use better mathematical models. Finally, the network as a whole will be used
as a test bed for algorithms to detect faulty computers or links on the network.