* 9015606
* Physiology, Ecology and Biochemistry of Nitrogen Fixation byMarine Planktonic Microorganisms
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1994
* Edward Carpenter, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/1994
* USD 300,887.00

Drs. Carpenter and Capone propose to continue their investigations of the
biochemistry, physiology and ecology of N2 fixation in planktonic
microorganisms, and particularly the non-heterocystous cyanobacterium
Trichodesmium. These studies are important as Trichodesmium is a substantial
component of the phytoplankton populations of tropical and subtropical seas and
a major contributor of new nitrogen to these systems. Furthermore, the
nitrogenase enzyme system of Trichodesmium appears distinct in several respects
from the more well studied non-heterocystous analogues. An understanding of the
biochemical and molecular mechanisms used by Trichodesmium to maintain active
nitrogen fixation would be of broad relevance. They will determine the factors
(biochemical and ecological) which regulate N2 fixation and growth in
Trichodesmium, as well as its importance in the marine food web. Specifically,
they will pursue studies of: 1) the mechanisms for protecting nitrogenase from
oxygen deactivation (oxygen protective enzyme systems such as superoxide
dismutase, uptake hydrogenases etc.); 2) factors controlling the apparent
endogenous rhythms of nitrogenase synthesis and activity, and of regulation of
nitrogenase synthesis and activity, ATP/ADP ratios); 3) how fixed nitrogen is
transferred between N2 fixing and non-fixing cells within a colony; 4) the
causes and significance of diel changes in buoyancy; and 5) the fate of nitrogen
and carbon recently fixed by Trichodesmium in near surface waters. This research
program is unique in that it brings together a diverse group of investigators to
work on a broad array of topics concerning the biology and ecology of
Trichodesmium and other open ocean nitrogen fixers.