* 9015851
* Numerically Controlled Machining of Sculptured Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1995
* Robert Jerard, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* M. Christina Gabriel
* 12/31/1995
* USD 149,137.00

The goal of this research is to increase the current knowledge base in the
field of numerically controlled (NC) machining of sculptured surfaces. This
research applies geometric simulation methods to three and five axis sculptured
surface tool path generation. Specifically, the following questions are being
explored: (1) What are the best algorithms for subdivision of sculptured
surfaces into a polygonal representation to be used for NC tool path generation?
(2) What is the time/accuracy trade-off in using points versus polygons as a
surface representation for NC tool path generation? (3) Can the non-
isoparametric tool path planning algorithm developed for three axis machining be
extended to the five axis case? (4) Can efficient and accurate geometric models
of the volume swept by a five axis tool movement be defined? (5) Can parallel
algorithms be applied to the NC tool path planning problem? This project is an
interdisciplinary collaboration between the Mechanical Engineering Department at
the University of New Hampshire, the Department of Mathematics and Computer
Science at Dartmouth College, and an industrial sponsor. It has the potential of
greatly improving sculptured surface machining. In practice, it should enhance
the production of metal forming dies.