* 9015914
* Field Testing of a New IRS Sediment Trap Designed to ExcludeSwimmers
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/1990,08/31/1992
* John Hedges, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/1992
* USD 86,977.00

This proposal is a continuation of a present GOFS long-lead time project to
test the effectiveness of poisons and preservatives on preventing the
decomposition of organic matter collected in sediment traps. We have completed
three field tests of this question and concluded that the best treatments for
inhibiting bacterial activity also resulted in the greatest artifact in both
flux and organic chemical composition from swimmers. In order to exclude
swimmers, we have designed a novel trap with an indented rotating sphere and
time-series capability (IRS). We propose to test this new trap design in Dabob
Bay, WA, during fall bloom, and at the Hawaii time-series station. The questions
being addressed are: 1) Do detailed chemical analyses of materials collected in
the new IRS sediment trap indicate that this design excludes swimmers of all
sizes more effectively than conventional open collectors? 2) Are the chemical
artifacts resulting from swimmers reduced sufficiently by the IRS design to
finally allow discrimination between preservation of labile substances in
treated traps and the addition of zooplankton swimmers? 3) Can the IRS traps be
fitted with dependable subsampling carousels for time-series collections and in-
situ experiments? 4) Do the IRS and carousels-adapted (IRSC) traps perform
suitably at all depths in the open ocean? 5) Using IRS traps, can we now measure
accurately the vertical fluxes of a wide range of organic molecules throughout
the ocean? If so, can these data be used to better define particle dynamics and
productivity relationships? We anticipate that this new trap will be ready for
use in the planned equatorial Pacific GOFS experiment in 1991/1992.