* 9015272
* Experimental And Theoretical Investigation of Bridge Motion in Turbulent Flow
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1991,12/31/1994
* Y.K. Lin, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* J. Eleonora Sabadell
* 12/31/1994
* USD 271,881.00

Motion stability and statistical properties of the response of long-span
bridges under turbulent wind excitations are investigated experimentally and
theoretically in this project. Experimental investigation is conducted on bridge
sectional models in a water-channel facility. Similarity requirements between a
model and the prototype are met by suitably proportioning the model, and by
connecting the model to heavy cylinders which are located in the air chambers
outside the water channel. Fluid forces induced by the structural motion are
measured when a model is programmed to oscillate sinusoidally in a given mode
through a range of frequencies. Both the coupled type forces (e.g. lift induced
by the torsional motion), and the uncoupled type forces (e.g. lift induced by
the vertical bending motion) are measured. Theoretical models for bridge motion
are then formulated to incorporate such experimentally determined fluid-force
generating mechanisms, and motion stability boundaries and structural responses
are computed for the theoretical models. Finally, the theoretical predictions
are compared with another set of experimental results obtained when a structural
model is excited by fluid flows of specified mean velocities and turbulence
levels. The comparison provides a basis for further refinement of theoretical
models. Flow visualization experiments are also conducted to gain fundamental
insights into structure- fluid interaction. The velocity field obtained from
flow visualization provides additional means for calculating the fluid forces on
structural models.