* 9015883
* REU:  Phytoplankton Population Dynamics at the Hawaii Ocean Time Series Station
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/1991,08/31/1995
* Lisa Campbell, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/1995
* USD 388,035.00

Phytoplankton play a central role in biogeochemical cycles. Simply measuring
biomass and production is not sufficient; a detailed assessment of the community
structure is necessary to elucidate the population dynamics, annual variability
and responses to short-term physical events. The objectives of this project are:
(1) to determine the composition of the phytoplankton community at the GOFS
Hawaii Ocean Time-series station, (2) to estimate the contribution of the
different algal populations to the total biomass, and (3) to understand depth
distribution and temporal patterns and to elucidate annual variability. In order
to characterize and quantify the different populations of cells of the
phytoplankton community a number of different techniques will be employed. Flow
cytometry will allow rapid discrimination of different groups such as eukaryotic
picoplankton, Synechococcus - cyanobacteria, and the newly discovered
prochlorophytes. It will provide an efficient and quantitative way to measure
cell concentration and to quantitate pigment fluorescence and scatter signature
on a single-cell basis. Immunofluorescence techniques, using antibodies
specifically targeted at prokaryotic (Synechococcus) and eukaryotic (e.g.
prasinophytes, coccolithophorids) groups and pigment analyses (by HPLC and
spectrofluorometry) will permit further refinement of the taxonomic composition
of the community. The latter will be specifically helpful for the smaller
eukaryotes and for the prochlorophyte component which has a unique divinyl-
chlorophyll signature and which is believed to be very important in oligotrophic
waters. This project will provide the first detailed time-series data on the
structure of the phytoplankton community in the central Pacific gyre. The
results will complement the core measurements made at station ALOHA by adding a
quantitative analysis of the primary producer community, which will serve as a
basis for future realistic modeling efforts. Contrasting our findings with a
parallel project to be conducted by S.W. Chisholm and R.J. Olson (MIT/WHOI) at
the GOFS Bermuda site, where phytoplankton exhibits pronounced seasonal
variability, will reinforce the value of both studies.