* 9015938
* School on Static, Dynamic, Kinematic Aspects of Crystal and Molecular Structure, Erice, Italy; May 30-June 9, 1991
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1991
* Kenneth Trueblood, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne E. Hudson
* 08/31/1991
* USD 19,450.00

This U.S.-Italy award will support an international school--a combined workshop
and seminar meeting--covering recent advances in the understanding of static,
kinematic and dynamic aspects of crystal and molecular structure, as studied by
crystal diffraction, spectroscopic and theoretical methods. The school is being
held at the Ettore Majorana Centre for Scientific Culture in Erice, Sicily, from
May 30 to June 9, 1991 and is being organized by Professor Kenneth Trueblood of
UCLA for the U.S. side and Professor Lodovico Riva di Sanseverino of the
University of Bologna for Italy. About 120 participants from a dozen or more
countries are expected, the great majority of whom will be young faculty members
or others who have recently received advanced degrees. There will be about 20
lectures and 10 tutors to help in workshops and microsymposia. During the last
two decades, the amount of precise and accurate information about molecular
structure has increased enormously. Much of this is the result of increased
automation and precision of data collection and analysis in crystal diffraction,
but there have also been important advances in other experimental techniques for
studying structure. In addition, theory has progressed to a stage where some of
the details of molecular structure can be predicted at a level comparable with
that attained by experiment. There have also been advances in the analysis of
the kinematics and dynamics of molecules in crystals, as well as in their
correlation with phase transforma- tions and solid state reactions. The present
school intends to review past achievements, present projects, and future goals
in the realm of crystal and molecular structure studies by diffraction and
spectroscopic methods. Particular emphasis will be placed on the description and
understanding of atomic motion in molecules and in crystals, with relevance to
physical properties, chemical reactivity, and phase transformations, including
such topics as structure-correlation (using statistical methods with the
Cambridge Structural Database), polymorphism, and solid-state reactions.