* 9015008
* Cooperative Research in Power Plant Surveillance and        Diagnostics (U.S. - Turkey Cooperative Science; Science in  Developing Countries)
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1991,05/31/1994
* Belle Upadhyaya, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Edward Murdy
* 05/31/1994
* USD 16,250.00

Description: This proposal supports the collaboration of Drs. T.W. Kerlin and
B.R. Upadhyaya of the University of Tennessee (UT) and Dr. Ozer Ciftcioglu of
Istanbul Technical University (ITU) in Turkey. The expected theoretical and
implementable results of this collaboration should yield new information on: 1)
behavior of reactor process signals; 2) cause of variations in plant signatures;
3) use of signal fluctuating components for instrument fault monitoring; and 4)
use of non-invasive tests for component surveillance and preventive maintenance.
The proposed research will be carried out at both UT and ITU. Dr. Ciftcioglu is
an expert in the area of alarm reliability algorithms for stochastic processes
whose expertise will integrate well with activities already underway at UT
involving instrument calibration verification and on-line monitoring of smart
sensors. The UT scientists will visit the facilities at ITU and the ITU
participants will visit UT. Additionally, a four-day workshop will be held in
Istanbul in order to exchange information. Scope: This project in engineering
systems will enable leading experts in the United States and Turkey to combine
complementary talents and pool research resources in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence. Dr. Ciftcioglu will have an opportunity to become
familiar with research techniques and facilities at UT and, likewise, Drs.
Kerlin and Upadhyaya will benefit from the time spent in Istanbul. Therefore,
this proposal fulfills objectives of the Science in Developing Countries Program
in its exchange and transfer of scientific knowledge through an international
collaboration.