* 9015291
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant:  Renovation and Up-   grading of the Earthquake Simulator Capability
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/1990,05/31/1995
* Jack Moehle, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 05/31/1995
* USD 624,143.00

This is an equipment grant to upgrade and improve the capability of the
earthquake simulator (shaking table) facility at the Earthquake Engineering
Research Center of the University of California at Berkeley. The 20 ft. x 20 ft.
shaking table that was completed, and began its operation, in 1972 is still one
of the largest in the United States. This facility has been in use virtually
continuously since its construction for research performed by faculty members at
Berkeley and at other universities throughout the U.S. and the world, by
engineers from consulting firms, and for services to industry, corporations and
government agencies. Although the shaking table continues to be used, by 1985 it
became evident that the facility was in serious need of renovation. In 1986 the
State of California and the National Science Foundation allocated funds for the
renovation of this facility as well as to explore the possibility of adding the
missing third transnational component of motion to the table. Most of the
renovation and improvement work contemplated in these allocations has been
completed. In recognition of the importance of implementing simultaneous
capability for the table in the three transnational components that a seismic
ground motion can have, the University of California at Berkeley has allocated
additional funds for the design, construction and installation of the
modifications necessary to increase the existing electrical power. This action
will provide support for the necessary upgrading of the present hydraulic fluid
capacity to about twice the current capacity. The addition of the third
transnational component will permit conducting integrated analytical and
experimental research on the response of three-dimensional test structures to
multi- directional excitations. This project will elevate the nation's
earthquake engineering experimental research capability to a new level of higher
potential achievements.