* 9015930
* Frontiers of Molecular Biological Research, International   Symposium/Workshop, Lahore, Pakistan, September 1991
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1991,02/28/1993
* Lawrence Grossman, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/28/1993
* USD 18,450.00

Description: This project is for participation by U.S. scientists in an
International Symposium/Workshop on Frontiers of Molecular Biological Research
to be held in Lahore, Pakistan in September 1991. The Pakistani organizer is Dr.
S. Riazuddin, Director of the Center for Advanced Molecular Biology (CAMB) at
the University of Panjab, Lahore. Areas to be covered will include: repair
enzymes, restriction enzymes, replication enzymes, plant microbe interaction,
transgenic plant technology, and insecticidal proteins and other biological
controls. The meeting will be preceded by a two-week training course for twenty
selected young university researchers who intend to pursue research careers in
the field. The purpose of the course will be to train researchers on advanced
recombinant DNA techniques, on other methodologies and concepts that will form
the basis for discussions in the Symposium/Workshop. Proceedings of papers
presented and discussions will be printed and made available to the scientific
communities in the two countries. Scope: The field of molecular biology is
becoming increasingly important in dealing with developing countries' problems
such as production of food, medicines, and improving fuel sources and use. U.S.
and Pakistani scientists from the laboratories of Drs. Grossman and Riazuddin
have been collaborating in joint research projects for over a decade. This
meeting allows this relationship to be expanded to include a larger number of
Pakistani scientists and to help guide future local as well as joint research.