* 9015709
* Dissertation Research:  Determining the Seasonal Use of     Archaeological Sites:  The Potential for Cementum Annuli    Analysis of East African Assemblages
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1991
* NONE NONE, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 07/31/1991
* USD 8,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Henry Bunn, Professor of Anthropology at the
University of Wisconsin, Madison, Mr. Christopher O'Brien will collect data for
his doctoral dissertation thesis. He will spend twelve months in northern
Tanzania and work with a group of Hadza speaking hunters and gatherers to
collect a large series of faunal remains. At the end of this period, he should
have teeth from a number of different species and these should span the yearly
range of environmental variation. He will then section these specimens to
examine the annuli or incremental growth structures which are characteristic of
mammalian species and to determine the relationship between the development of
these annuli and seasonality. Extensive research has demonstrated that in
temperate environments with well defined summer and winter seasons, a clear
relationship exists between seasonality and annuli development. On this basis,
it is possible for archaeologists to examine sites which contain fauna, section
teeth, and determine the times of year they were occupied. It is not known,
however, whether such a relationship exists among tropical species, and Mr.
O'Brien postulates that in areas such as Tanzania which have alternating rainy
and dry periods, annuli development may also be seasonally determined. The large
series collected should allow him to examine this hypothesis on a species by
species basis. This research is important for several reasons. The technique, if
it works, will prove a valuable tool useful not only to archaeologists but to
biologists as well. From an anthropological perspective, it would prove
particularly important because it would shed light on the behavior of early
hominids who populated eastern Africa several million years ago. Remains of
butchered animals have been recovered from many sites in this region. The
project is also important because it will assist in the training of an extremely
promising young scientist.