* 9015862
* REU/SGER:  Phase-Space Ordination and the Complexity of     Successional Trajectories
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1990,08/31/1992
* Susan Glenn, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 08/31/1992
* USD 18,674.00

There has been a renewed interest in the theoretical and experimental analysis
of pattern and process during succession. Although much current research focuses
on mechanistic processes causing successional change, hierarchy theory allows us
to explore patterns and their causes at any spatial scale of interest. The
purpose of this research is to analyze the complexity of successional
trajectories in phase-space ordination. The P.I.'s propose to use ordination
methods such as canonical correspondence analysis to construct successional
vectors in phase-space. The complexity of the successional trajectories in
phase-space can be measured using fractals. The P.I.'s will analyze the
complexity of succession in three sets of field data: ten long term plots at
Hutcheson Memorial Forest, New Jersey, (2) two samples of a chronosequence at
Cedar Creek Natural History Area, Minnesota, and (3) eight long-term plots from
the Rothamstad Park Grass Experiment, Harpenden, UK. In addition, they will use
ZELIG, a spatially explicit forest succession simulation model (available to us
through the Konza Prairie Long-term Ecological Research site), to simulate
forest succession at different spatial scales. From the model output, they can
determine the effects of spatial scale and time interval between samples on the
measurement of complexity during succession. In addition, they can compare
patterns of complexity in the model output to patterns in the field data. The
methods described in this proposal go beyond the traditional individual-
population-community hierarchy to provide a unique approach for analyzing and
describing complex patterns in plant community dynamics. Further development of
such model will provide important insights into change currently taking place in
the environment.