* 9015954
* U.S.-France Collaborative Research:  Air-Snow Transfer      Function in Greenland
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1991,09/30/1993
* Jean-Luc Jaffrezo, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 09/30/1993
* USD 7,050.00

This award will support collaborative research between US and French scientists
on the topic of the air-snow transfer function in Greenland. The participants
are: Drs. Jean- Luc Jaffrezo, Cliff Davidson and Jack Dibb, Carnegie Mellon
University, and Dr. Michel Legrand, Laboratoire de Glaciologie et Geophysique de
l'Environment, St. Martin d'Here, France. The US (GISP II) and European (GRIP)
deep drilling projects involve acquisition of two deep cores to bedrock from the
Summit region of Greenland over the next two years. The cores will provide a
detailed record of about 200,000 years, yielding information on the earth's
geologic history, climate change and variations in the chemical composition of
atmospheric constituents. One important component of the GISP II and GRIP
projects is a program in atmospheric sciences, which is designed to help relate
the ice core data to atmospheric conditions in previous times. There are three
objectives to this program: 1) Source regions and atmospheric pathways for the
chemical constituents reaching the Summit will be identified; 2) Incorporation
of these species into precipitation at the Summit will be investigated, in order
to determine the mechanisms and rates of deposition during snowstorms; and 3)
Changes in the chemical composition of the icesheet will be quantified. These
objectives will be achieved by a multicomponent program that incorporates field
work, laboratory analyses, and computer modelling. This award will support
collaboration between US and French researchers for the purpose of carrying out
laboratory work, data interpretation and joint publications related to the above
projects. This effort will benefit from the complementary expertise of the US
and French teams in the geochemistry of gases and aerosols, of tracers of
natural and anthropogenic emissions and of transport and deposition mechanisms.
The results of this research are expected to improve greatly the ability of the
scientific community to retrieve information from deep ice.