* 9015133
* U.S.-Australian Cooperative Research:  Pollination Ecology  and Selection in Plants that Mimic Insects
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1995
* Steven Handel, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 01/31/1995
* USD 29,967.00

This award will support a three-year collaborative research project between
Professor Steven N. Handel, Department of Biological Sciences, Rutgers
University, and Professor Andrew J. Beattie, School of Biological Sciences,
Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia. The activity takes place under the
U.S.-Australia Cooperative Science Program. The scientists will study the
ecology and evolutionary biology of so-called sexually deceptive plants (plants
with flowers that mimic female insects, thus attracting male insects to mate and
thereby effecting pollen transport). The mimicry is known to occur only within
the orchid family, and though unusual, it is observed among hundreds of species
in Australia, and to a much lesser extent elsewhere. The investigators wish to
explore the hypothesis that the genetic structure of these plant populations is
significantly different from those in which pollination is the result of an
insect foraging strategy based on food rewards (nectar or pollen). Specific
species of the orchid genus Chiloglottis, pollinated by male thynnine wasps,
will be studied. Field observations of the wasp flight movements among the
flowers, as well as pollen transfer dynamics, will be carried out. The effects
of varying average inter-flower distance and flower height on pollinator
behavior will be investigated. In addition, plant samples will be taken from
representative populations in the field and their genetic profiles determined,
using the technique of gel electrophoresis. Correlations between the observed
pollination patterns and gene flow in these species will be sought. This
research in evolutionary ecology will provide an independent test of current
theoretical generalizations that insect movement patterns determine the genetic
structure of plant populations. In addition, the work has implications for the
conservation of these orchids, some of which are endangered species. The
cooperating scientists in this project bring complementary research strengths to
the study. Professor Handel's expertise is in plant ecology, especially
pollination biology and gene flow dynamics. Professor Beattie has considerable
experience in population genetics and the biochemical analysis of plant
populations. The field studies will be carried out at selected Australian
locations, and the laboratory analyses performed at Macquarie University, in
Sydney.