* 9015201
* CAMEO:  Understanding Organic Reactivity to Allow the       Logical Prediction of Reaction Products
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1991
* William Jorgensen, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 12/31/1991
* USD 83,322.00

The Synthetic Organic Program continues to support the research of Dr. William
L. Jorgensen of the Department of Chemistry at Yale University. His research is
concerned with the interactive computer program, CAMEO, which is being developed
to predict the products of organic reactions given starting materials and
conditions. The program uses mechanistic principles for broad classes of
reactions to make its predictions. The intent is for CAMEO to mimic the logical
processes of a synthetic organic chemist as closely as possible. Consequently,
an important aspect of the project is to identify the logic and cast it in terms
of fundamental organizing principles governing organic reactions in addition to
developing a tool to aid in the design of organic syntheses. The classes of
reactions that have been implemented cover (1) base catalyzed processes,
organometallic reactions, ylide chemistry and organosilicon chemistry, (2)
electrophilic processes involving carbonium ions as intermediates including
electrophilic aromatic substitution, and (3) pericyclic reactions, i.e.,
cycloadditions, electrocyclic processes and sigmatropic rearrangements. Improved
treatment of heterocyclic chemistry is planned as well as new modules for the
creation and reactions of carbenes, nitrenes, and free radicals. Standard
oxidations and reductions of functional groups will also be implemented along
with features to improve feedback to the user.