* 9015634
* Neutrino Astrophysics
* MPS,AST
* 02/15/1991,07/31/1994
* Michael Cherry, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward G. Schmidt
* 07/31/1994
* USD 141,000.00

On every list of outstanding astrophysical problems in the late twentieth
century is the "solar neutrino problem." This problem refers to the measured low
rate of neutrino production in the Sun compared to rates expected from
theoretical interior models of the Sun. Since the rate of neutrinos generated is
proportional to the thermonuclear energy rate in the Sun, there is a keen
interest to confirm our basic understanding of what makes the Sun shine. The
discrepancy between the observed and predicted rate calls this understanding
into question, hence the term "solar neutrino problem." The Principal
Investigator (PI) proposes a three-year continuation of his work in the Soviet-
American Gallium Experiment (SAGE) located in the Bakyan Neutrino Laboratory in
the Soviet Union. This experiment will provide the most sensitive test yet of
solar interior and neutrino theories because it is sensitive to low and moderate
energy neutrinos, whereas existing experiments (at Homestake, South Dakota and
Kamiokande in Japan) are sensitive to the relatively few high energy neutrinos
produced by side-nuclear reactions. The SAGE experiment became operational in
early 1990 and has already produced exciting results, an extreme dearth of
neutrinos relative to the theoretical predictions. If future monitoring of the
Sun with more sensitive equipment confirms these early results, then either our
understanding of the Sun's interior structure or the fundamental nature of
neutrinos must be changed. The PI has played a vital role in constructing the
proportional counter detectors for the SAGE experiment. The PI proposes to
continue this role both because the old detectors deteriorate with time and also
because more detectors will provide a more sensitive test of the neutrino
discrepancy. In addition, these detectors provide a means of discriminating
between bonafide solar neutrinos and neutrinos produced by alternate processes
on the Earth. Thus, the PI's efforts will help to define the extent of the
neutrino discrepancy, leading to its earlier resolution.