* 9015797
* Novel Optical Interconnection Networks Using Optoelectronic Integrated Circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1990,09/30/1994
* Alexander Sawchuk, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 09/30/1994
* USD 590,024.00

The Principal Investigators will design and experimentally demonstrate a
sophisticated and novel photonic interconnection network that interconnects 2-D
arrays of optical inputs and outputs. The network is a general volume (bulk)
multistage shuffle exchange design using high efficiency fixed optical
interconnections along with optoelectronic integrated circuits (OEICs) to
provide dynamic routing and signal regeneration. The OEICs are designed
specifically to attain the performance necessary to carry data at high
bandwidths (&gt; 100 MHz). The routing of signals is determined by the
polarization encoded on the light beam on which the data signal or optical power
is carried. Furthermore, the circuits are optimized to allow for a high density
of similar switches arranged in a 2D array format. For this reason, the OEICs
will be fabricated using Ino.53GaO.47As which has been found by the PIs to be
compatible with very low power dissipation circuits, hence lending itself to
high array circuit densities. Another feature of the system under investigation
is that it will be optically (rather than electrically) powered using integrated
InP photovoltaic cells for the array elements. Optical powering has the
advantages of supplying power with a low level of electrical cross-talk between
array elements, and is relatively easily distributed in high density networks
where interconnection to remote pixels can be a significant problem. The program
involves a close collaboration between two groups at USC -- one whose expertise
has been demonstrated in the field of interconnection architecture design, and
the other which specializes in the design and fabrication of OEICs in InP-based
materials. The combination of disciplines necessary for the successful
completion of the project goals will lead to significant advances in the state-
of-the-art of photonic interconnection networks. Furthermore, this program is to
be complemented by a partnership with photonics industry, enhancing our ability
to eventually realize commercial photonic switching networks using advanced
device technologies such as those proposed here.