* 9015895
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Quantum Mechanics of     Ordered and Disordered Media
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1991,07/31/1995
* Peter Hislop, University of Kentucky
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 07/31/1995
* USD 13,100.00

This award will support collaborative research in mathematical physics between
Dr. Peter Hislop, University of Kentucky and Dr. Jean-Michel Combes, University
of Toulon and Var, La Garde, France. The objective of the proposed research is
to investigate quantum mechanics of ordered and disordered media. The quantum
behavior of a charged particle moving in a periodic array of atoms is determined
by the bands of allowed energy. Any particle with energy in these bands will
propagate to infinity in the crystal. Physically, this is an idealized situation
which corresponds to matter with infinite conductivity. These transport
properties of matter, for example the conductivity, change dramatically when the
material is immeresed in electric and magnetic fields or when the perfect order
of the crystal is broken by impurities. Changes of this type may cause states of
the system to be well-localized in energy and space. A key ingredient in the
formation of these localized states is quantum tunneling through potential
barriers. A particle propagating with energy E will encounter regions of space
where the potential is larger than E. Classically, the particle is forbidden to
traverse these regions, but quantum mechnically, the wave function will
penetrate them. However, the net effect of many barriers may be to well-localize
the particle. In this project, the investigators will concentrate on the
spectral structure of these systems with an emphasis on the role played by
quantum tunnelling. They will study the resonance states and the scattering
theory of crystals in electric fields. They will also study models of disordered
media in which diffusive behavior is suppressed by potential barriers. The
project will benefit from the significant and complementary expertise of the two
investigators in the areas of quantum resonances and scattering theory.