* 9015602
* Particle Transformations in the "Regeneration Zone":  The   Biology and Chemistry of Mesopelagic Aggregates
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/1991,01/31/1994
* Cynthia Pilskaln, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/1994
* USD 101,365.00

Most organic matter synthesized in surface waters of the sea is returned to
inorganic constituents within the upper 500 m, or "regeneration zone."
Oceanographers attribute these chemical transformations mostly to living
organisms. Yet surprisingly little is known about the biology of
remineralization below the euphotic zone: whether the responsible organisms are
dominantly metazoan or microbial and whether or not they occur on the larger
particles that deliver material to depth. Dr. Pilskaln, together with Dr. Silver
will conduct a 2-year study in Monterey Bay, and accessible, comparatively deep
water site, to study the role of both microbes and zooplankton in the
remineralization of particles >1mm. Using a combination of in situ observations
and laboratory measurements, she will study both the abundant marine snow
particles and very large aggregates (m size) that can serve as model systems for
such studies. She plans to (1) measure the size and abundance of the aggregates,
(2) determine their chemical properties and associated living communities, (3)
measure regeneration-related activities of the communities on the particles, and
(4) compare and particle-related remineralization rates to those measured by
sediment traps in the area. For these measurements, she will use field surveys
with a Romotely Operated Vehicle (ROV) and a Marine Snow Camera, a variety of
sampling devices operated from the ROV, and a series of experiments on natural
samples incubated on shipboard and in the laboratory. In year 2, Dr. Pilskaln
transects the California Current to learn whether the very large aggregates,
which are hypothesized to be regeneration centers to Monterey Bay, occur in
significant numbers further offshore. These results will increase the
understanding of the biology of midwater remineralization and the role that
particles can play in the process.