* 9015262
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research on Chromophore-Quencher Complexes for Studies in Photochemical Redox Splitting
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1991,02/28/1995
* Thomas Meyer, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Alan Milsap
* 02/28/1995
* USD 29,950.00

This award supports cooperative research between Dr. Thomas Meyer of the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and Dr. Richard Keene at James Cook
University, Townsville, Australia. This project will extend and broaden an NSF-
supported research program in which the study of chromophore-quencher (C-Q)
complexes of ruthenium and rhenium is intended to advance basic understanding of
photoinduced electron-transfer processes. For example, it was shown that optical
excitation to a metal-to-ligand charge transfer (MLCT) state in one ruthenium
complex led to reductive quenching via intramolecular electron transfer. The
study showed that MLCT excited states of ruthenium and rhenium complexes could
be used successfully in the study of photochemically induced electron and energy
reactions. The major objective of this U.S.-Australian cooperative project is
the preparation and photophysical study of ruthenium in which electron transfer
donors and acceptors are chemically attached to MLCT chromophores. To advance
this area of study, new ligands will be designed in which spatial control of
electron transfer can be achieved in order to maximize the efficiencies of
formation and the lifetime of redox separated states. The project represents
excellent collaboration between the Keene group (synthetic methodology for
ligand modification) and the Meyer group (photophysical studies). This is
important fundamental work in establishing new photochemical electron transfer
systems and discovering new processes of energy and electron transfer.