* 9015281
* Statistical Signal Processing and Estimation for Spatial andMultidimensional Data:  Multiresolution Methods, Efficient  Algorithms and Geometric Reconstruction
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/1991,08/31/1994
* Alan Willsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/1994
* USD 195,000.00

Willsky There are three major components of this research program which has as
its overall objective the development of new classes of algorithms for
statistical signal processing and estimation of spatial and multidimensional
data. The first is the development of statistical models and methods for
multiscale signal analysis and processing in one and several dimensions.
Problems that are being addressed include the development of a statistical
counterpart to the emerging theory of multiresolution signal decompositions and
wavelet transforms, the investigation of iterative, multigrid signal processing
algorithms, and applications of these methods to topics ranging from inverse
reconstruction problems to problems of signal or image segmentation. The second
is the development of efficient algorithms for processing spatial data. This
topic focuses on the exploitation of the structure of noncausal models, such as
those described by partial difference equations or Markov random fields, in
order to develop extremely efficient and highly parallel algorithms. Specific
problems being investigated include the employment of radially inward and
outward recursions for multidimensional signal processing, parallel processing
structures based on spatial partitioning of multidimensional signal processing,
and the development of efficient algorithms for tracking motion and other
temporal changes in space-time random fields. The third is the development of
statistical methods for estimating or reconstructing geometric features in
multidimensional data given uncertain measurements of various quantities, such
as the support of a convex object in 2-D or 3-D, or the 2-D silhouette of 3-D
objects.