* 9015006
* A Center for Excellence for Computer Science Education and  Research
* CSE,EIA
* 09/01/1990,08/31/2000
* Andrew Bernat, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 08/31/2000
* USD 1,628,720.00

The University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP) located on the U.S.-Mexico border has
in the Fall of 1989, a student body comprised of 55.4% Hispanic, 33.3% Anglo, 3%
Black, and 1.7% other minorities. It's Computer Science Department is CSAB
accredited. There were 239 undergraduates (53% Hispanic) and 48 graduate
students (25% Hispanic) enrolled in 1989. Computer science enrollments, unlike
the national trend, have been increasing over the last several years. The
primary goal of the project is to upgrade the quality of education offered their
predominantly minority student body. To accomplish this they must: o Attract and
retain students, particularly minority students, through improved instructional
support and outreach activities o Encourage and prepare their most talented
students to pursue graduate education either at UTEP or elsewhere o Enhance and
support the research productivity of the faculty. An outstanding feature of
their plan is the involvement of upper division and graduate student assistants.
Each student assistant will be directly involved in both teaching and research.
The use of student assistants provides many benefits, particularly in the
educational program. Pipeline Activities: One of their major thrusts in computer
science is to increase the number of minority students intending to major in
computer science. They will accomplish this by career development support in
area middle and high schools, summer workshops designed to teach teachers how to
teach computer science and pre-college summer programs to introduce students to
science, engineering and computer science. Recitation sections: The core of
their plan is the use of student assistants which will enable them to break up
large introductory classes into two components. The beginning courses will
consist of large, professor led lecture sections twice weekly and much smaller
(10-15 students) student assistant led recitation sections thrice weekly. The
student assistants will be trained in handling the recitation sections. Such
training will include teambuilding and leadership skills and knowing how to
recognize problems as they develop. They will also receive support and
counselling on how to solve these problems. Role models: The student assistant
leaders will also serve as role models for the low division students. They will
encourage the assistants to discuss their research work in these recitation
sections. Curriculum development: They plan to deal with the deficiencies in
their curriculum coverage by encouraging faculty to develop expertise in new
areas of teaching and research. A second major curriculum development strategy
is to re-orient courses in order to fit the new ACM-Denning action-oriented
model of computer science education and the newly emerging ACM Curriculum 1990
guidelines which argue that laboratory work should include exercises in which
students modify and explore existing codes. UTEP will upgrade the research
productivity of the faculty through the avenues of technical expertise, student
assistants, and the acquisition of sufficient equipment, including a network of
workstations, and necessary software. These activities will maximize the number
of Hispanic students who will choose to pursue advanced degrees and enter the
educational or research systems as their career choice.