* 9015254
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research (Engineering): Theoretical  Analysis and Experimental Investigation of Semi Rigid Steel Frames
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/1990,10/31/1993
* Wai-Fah Chen, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 10/31/1993
* USD 30,903.00

This is a two-year collaborative project between Wai-Fah Chen of Purdue
University and H.B. Wu and S.P. Zhou of the Chongqing Institute of Architecture
and Engineering of China (CIAEC). It is supported by the National Science
Foundation and the National Science Foundation of China. Stability analysis and
design of steel structures is one of the most important structural engineering
problems today. Several important structural stability problems of similar type
exist in the United States and China, despite their differences in scale. In
this project, the principal inves- tigators will undertake full-scale
experimental tests and analytical modeling to attempt to solve stability
problems in steel framed structures. The Purdue team will work principally on
the expanded data bank for semi-rigid connections and on the basic mathematical
formulation and computer-based model development. The CIAEC team will work
principally on the full-scale tests. Each team will spend time in the other's
facility. It is expected that major findings resulting from the cooperative
research will provide the necessary basis for possible next revision of current
Specifications for Design, Fabrication and Erection of Structural Steel for
Buildings, which are used in the United States and China.