* 9015217
* Interfaces and Transport Processes in Floating-Zone Crystal Growth
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1990,08/31/1993
* Sindo Kou, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 08/31/1993
* USD 200,000.00

The floating-zone process is an important method for growing single crystals of
electronic, optical and high-Tc oxide superconducting materials. The shape of
the melt/gas interface, i.e., the free surface of the melt zone, can
significantly affect zone stability, which is critical to the successful
operation of the process. The shape of the melt/crystal interface, as well as
the solute and temperature distributions in the growing crystal, can
significantly affect the crystal quality. These interface shapes and
distributions are governed by transport processes such as heat transfer, mass
transfer and fluid flow during crystal growth. In this project, analysis of the
interfacial stability problem will be undertaken simultaneously with the study
of heat and mass transport during crystal growth. It is expected that this
integrated approach will contribute to the manufacture of larger single crystals
and of purer and larger samples in zone refining. The research consists of three
parts: 1. crystal growth and zone-stability improvement, 2. flow observation and
segregation analysis, and 3. computer simulation. The study is unique in that
the interaction between convection in the melt zone and the shapes of the
melt/solid interfaces will be clearly demonstrated through direct observations
of a transparent melt zone during actual crystal simulation.