* 9015598
* 3rd U.S.-Mexico Workshop on Atomic and Molecular Physics; Cuernavaca, Mexico, March 13-16, 1991
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1991,02/29/1992
* Thomas Morgan, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 02/29/1992
* USD 15,280.00

This award will support a workshop on atomic and molecular physics to be held in
Cuernavaca, Mexico, March 1991. The workshop, organized by Professor Thomas
Morgan of Wesleyan University and Professor Carmen Cisneros, Director of the
Institute of Physics at Cuernavaca, will serve to continue the research and
collaboration momentum that was developed as a result of two earlier workshops
held in 1981 and 1986 and to initiate new research directions in this field for
the 1990`s. Many body and many electron effects in atomic and molecular
structure and in collisions have received considerable attention during the last
several years, and there is much current interest in these topics within the
atomic and molecular physics community. Significant experimental and theoretical
progress has been made in the last few years on electron correlation and on some
few-body problems and an initial understanding of many important aspects is now
at hand. However, the field in nascent and with proper guidance and stimulation
it is likely that, in the near future, research on the more complex attributes
of few-body problems and of electron correlation, and their consequences in
differing physical phenomena, will produce conclusions of wide generality. An
important focus of the proposed workshop is to identify common features present
in a diverse network of experimental and theoretical data. The workshop aims to
provide an atmosphere that promotes and encourages open presentation of ideas
and free discussion in order to search for and identify the most influential
characteristics responsible for the diversity of many body and many electron
phenomena.