* 9015936
* US-Germany Joint Seminar on Powder-free Processing for      Advanced Ceramics; November 19-23, 1990; Schloss Ringberg,  Germany
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1991,07/31/1991
* Lisa Klein, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/1991
* USD 12,750.00

This award supports the travel costs of twelve U.S. scientists to participate in
a U.S.-German seminar on advanced ceramics to be held near Munich, Germany, in
November, 1990. German sources are financing all costs of the meeting and the
subsistence of the 30 to 40 experts expected to attend. The meeting is co-
organized by Professor Lisa C. Klein of Rutgers University and Drs. Richard
Brook and Ralf Riedel of the Max Planck Institute for Metals Research in
Stuttgart. They are well known and widely-respected in this field. The purposes
of the workshop are to discuss the state-of-the-art in powder free processing
for advanced ceramics, to identify important research directions for the future
and to promote opportunities for productive international cooperation. Specific
themes shaping the discussions are 1) the sol-gel route for the preparation of
monolithic oxide ceramics and glasses; 2) polymer pyrolysis for the preparation
of monolithic non-oxide ceramics; and 3) the direct metal oxidation (dimox)
process and biological methods for the formation of ceramics. Great efforts have
been made in recent years to reach the levels of structural reliability which
would allow ceramics to be used with confidence in a wide range of applications.
Much of the work has been concerned with improving powder-based methods that
would reduce the occurrence of microscopic faults and flaws within the
materials. Although there has been great progress in powder processing science
in recent years, the risk of flaws with powder systems remains considerable.
This meeting has the timely and worthwhile objective of examining alternative
processing methods that would allow the fabrication of ceramics without the use
of powders. The U.S. and European participants are leaders in this field and
represent both established and younger scientists. The topics selected as foci
will ensure significant interactions in forefront areas.