* 9015004
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research on Sea-State Response toVery Strong Wind Forcing:  Implications for Remote Sensing  and Modelling
* O/D,OISE
* 10/15/1991,03/31/1995
* Robert McIntosh, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 03/31/1995
* USD 51,042.00

This award supports a visit by Dr. Robert E. McIntosh of the University of
Massachusetts Amherst to the University of New South Wales, Australia, to work
with Professor M.L. Banner to investigate sea state behavior under very strong
wind forcing. The proposed investigation would install unique instruments
developed at the University of Massachusetts and NASA/Goddard Space Flight
Center on a specially equipped Australian aircraft to collect and analyze data
that would make significant advances in three important areas. It would (1)
establish the aerodynamic drag of the sea surface for very strong wind forcing
conditions typical of intense storms, improving our ability to make reliable
forecasts of sea state, (2) quantify the attributes of the ocean directional
wave spectrum under these extreme conditions, (3) determine the electromagnetic
(EM) bias that the TOPEX satellite radar altimeter will be subject to for the
very high seas and winds encountered in the Southern Ocean. By establishing the
relationship between the wind speed, wind stress, the wind wave field, and the
EM bias for very high seas and winds, this project will have a major impact on
improving the reliability of the algorithms used in remote sensing of the sea
state and marine winds and of ocean forecasting, as well as improving the
ability of satellite altimeters such as TOPEX to study the Southern Ocean
circulation.