* 9015171
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research:  Metal Iron Mediated   Synthesis of Phosphate Derivatives
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1991,09/30/1992
* Ronald Milburn, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Milsap
* 09/30/1992
* USD 21,250.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Ronald M. Milburn of
Boston University and Dr. Alan Sargeson of the Australian National University
(ANU). The objective of the research is to better understand metal ion mediated
synthesis of phosphate derivates. Previous collaborative work between Dr.
Milburn and Dr. Sargeson demonstrated extraordinary hydrolytic reactivity for a
phosphate ester in a cobalt(III)/ phosphate ester system. This work has been the
basis for further advances made at ANU, at Boston University, and elsewhere, in
the area of metal ion promoted reactions of phosphate derivates (especially in
the hydrolysis of phosphate esters and polyphosphates). The emphasis of the
prior collaboration was on degradation of phosphate derivatives; this project
will focus on synthesis of phosphate derivatives mediated by metal centers,
including reactions which can lead to the formation of new phorphorus bond
frameworks. Systems to be studied will include phosphate ester complexes of
cobalt(III), for both mononuclear and dinuclear complexes, in which reaction
between the phosphate ester and a proximate coordinated phosphate may lead to
diphosphate formation (and concomitant ester hydrolysis). While the research is
exploratory, its potential is significant for results of considerable importance
in further understanding of metal ion/phosphate interplay in biological systems.
The project represents excellent U.S.-Australian collaboration. Previous
collaboration in phosphate chemistry between Dr. Milburn and Dr. Sargeson led to
a variety of new ways to activate phosphate derivatives, which have been used
worldwide. This collaborative work with its emphasis on synthesis of phosphate
derivatives has the potential for similar impact. Overall, this research will
advance basic understanding of both synthesis and degradation of phosphate
derivates through the use of metal ions. There is also additional opportunity
for this project to have potential application to biotechnology related-
problems, in particular, those centering around developing metal ion hydrolytic
reagents for site-specific cleavage of DNA/RNA regions.