* 9015132
* Dissertation Research:  Perception of Temporal Structure in Complex Sounds
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1990,02/29/1992
* NONE NONE, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 02/29/1992
* USD 4,052.00

The goal of Susan E. Allan's doctoral-dissertation research is to study the
characteristics of sound signals that are important in communication. Such
temporal properties as waveform periodicity, pulse repetition rate, and
amplitude modulation are known to be important in acoustic communication of
anurans (frogs and toads). Anurans are ideal animals to work with when studying
acoustic communication. They communicate with small, well-defined repertoires
used to attract mates, defend territories, and recognize species. Extensive work
has been done on the sensitivity of the female green treefrog to temporal
properties of the male's calls, but little experimental work has been done on
the detection and behavioral responses of the male green treefrog to these same
signals. Because males and females of some species are known to differ in
behavioral and neurophysiological responses to a given signal, it is important
to examine the significance of particular acoustic properties for males and
females independently. Ms. Allan's research will focus on the sensitivity of the
male green treefrog to the rate of amplitude modulation in the species' calls.
This question will be investigated using three different experimental methods:
laboratory evoked calling, field playback experiments, and a psychophysical
method, reflex modification. Thus, the project will relate both behavioral and
psychophysical results with the behavior of the animal in its natural
environment.