* 9015611
* A Cooperative Network of Caribbean Marine Research          Institutions:  Environmental Monitoring Methods Workshop;   Jamaica, December 1990
* O/D,OISE
* 10/15/1990,09/30/1991
* John Ogden, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 09/30/1991
* USD 21,125.00

This award will support a group of approximately 25 U.S. and Caribbean
scientists, representing around 20 regional marine research institu- tions, to
participate in a workshop organized by Prof. John C. Ogden of the University of
South Florida and collaborators. The workshop, which is to take place at the
Discovery Bay Marine Laboratory of the University of the West Indies in Jamaica,
will discuss and conduct fields trials for a suite of standardized physical
(temperature, salinity, light attenuation, and suspended solids) and biological
(community structure and growth rate of principal species) measure- ments. This
monitoring program will be implemented with UNESCO funding following the
workshop as the core of the Caribbean Coastal Marine Productivity (CARICOMP)
program. The Workshop will be led by a staff of experts in Caribbean marine
ecosystems and will be guided by a draft Methods Manual produced with UNESCO
support since the CARICOMP program was started at a UNESCO/NSF supported
workshop in Jamaica in 1985. A key element will be the establishment of data
management protocols consistent with proper statistical procedures. The CARICOMP
program is directed at an understanding of long-term coastal ecosystem change
through comparative ecosystem studies at the geographic scale of the Caribbean
and adjacent waters. The requested support will allow the implementation of the
program at a time of increasing conviction that we are entering an unprecedented
era of marine ecosystem change caused by human impact and global climate change.