* 9015569
* U.S.-Mexico Second International Symposium-Workshop on      Frugivores and Seed Dispersal; Veracruz, Mexico, June 3-6,  1991
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1991
* Theodore Fleming, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/1991
* USD 16,476.00

This award will support a second international workshop on frugivores and seed
dispersal to be held at the Estacion Biologica "Los Tuxtlas" in Veracruz state,
Mexico on June 3- 6, 1991. The workshop is being organized by Prof. Theodore
Fleming of the University of Miami and Prof. Alejandro Estrada of the Instituto
de Biologia of the Universidad Autonoma de Mexico in Veracruz, Mexico. The
activity will consist of oral presentations, posters sessions, informal
discussions between participants, and explorations of the rain forest at Los
Tuxtlas. Expected outcomes are a book consisting of the edited papers given at
the workshop and potential collaborations between U.S. and Latin American
ecologists. As was the case five years ago, the topics of the conference-
-fruits, frugivores, and seed dispersal--are of major ecological concern because
they bear importantly on the conservation of species-rich tropical and
subtropical terrestrial habitats. In these habitats, many plants produce fleshy
fruits and depend on fruit-eating vertebrates to disperse their seeds. This
mutualistic interaction is very complex and the ultimate role played by
frugivorous vertebrates in maintaining the structure and diversity of tropical
and subtropical forests is not yet clear. Periodic assessment of the progress
being made in this field is critical so that new approaches can be initiated and
conservation recom- mendations formulated. Personal contacts among established
researchers and graduate students is one way in which the rate of progress in
this field can be maximized.