* 9015656
* Industry Internship: Manufacturability Studies of Metal     Oxide Semiconductor Field Effect Transition
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1990,08/31/1992
* Lakshmi Munukutla, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* F. Hank Grant
* 08/31/1992
* USD 12,052.00

The major thrust of this research is to develop a process for fabricating metal
oxide semiconductor transistors on a silicon-germanium alloy epitaxial strained-
layer, since such transistors are significantly faster than comparable silicon
devices. The knowledge and understanding of silicon- germanium/silicon and
silicon dioxide/silicon-germanium interfacial properties are crucial to the
metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistor fabrication. First, silicon-
germanium strained epitaxial layer will be grown on silicon using chemical vapor
deposition process. The thermal oxide with thicknesses ranging from 250 to 500
Angstroms will be grown in a dry oxygen ambient. At this stage a few sample
wafers will be subjected to high resolution transmission electron microscopy
analysis to determine the misfit dislocation density at the silicon-
germanium/silicon interface and the planarity of silicon dioxide/silicon-
germanium interface. Metal oxide semiconductor capacitor structures will be
fabricated on the remaining wafers and after metallization, quasi-static
capacitance-voltage measurements will be taken to extract fixed charge density
and interface trap charges. This work should lay the foundation to the
manufacturability of metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistors on
silicon- germanium/silicon alloys.