* 9016324
* Dissertation Research:  Light Interception and Growth in    Four Pioneer Tree Species with Contrasting Canopy           Architecture
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/1991,06/30/1993
* Fakhri Bazzaz, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 06/30/1993
* USD 7,850.00

The research will focus on the significance of canopy structure for light
interception and growth in seedlings of four fast- growing neotropical tree
species with contrasting architectural patterns. The four species, Cecropia
obtusifolia, Heliocarpus appendiculatus, Piper auritum, and Trema micrantha,
present a spectrum of canopy architectures, from few large leaves born on a
single shoot to many small leaves born in a branched crown. Light interception
of seedlings growing in the field will be estimated with computer simulations
which combine measurements of leaf display with hemispherical photographs of the
canopy light environment. The light interception capacity will be correlated
with growth over an 18 month period. This analysis will be complemented by a
study of seedling growth in a controlled environment, in which relative growth
rate is decomposed into three factors, the ambient light level, the amount of
light intercepted, and the efficiency of light utilization. Finally, individuals
of each species will be grown in spatially heterogeneous environments to
evaluate the plasticity of architectural and morphological components of leaf
display. This research will provide a quantitative analysis of the functional
significance of canopy architecture in relation to light interception and carbon
gain.