* 9016892
* Acquisition of a Freeze Fracture Instrument and a High      Pressure Freezer
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1991,12/31/1992
* Candace Haigler, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 12/31/1992
* USD 85,000.00

This is a proposal for funds to purchase a freeze fracture instrument and a high
pressure freezer. The freeze fracture machine is required for determination of:
(1) typed and distribution of proteins in membranes; (2) patterns of vesicle
fusion; (3) relationships between extracellular matrix components; and (4) the
role of non-bilayer lipids in membrane function. The research proposed includes
analysis of natural and artificial membranes, comparison of control and
experimental samples, and investigation of plants and protists. (Minor users
will also examine fungi, animals, and DNA molecules.) Freeze fracture, which
involves cleaving and replicating cells and membranes, is the only technique
that allows structural observation of intramembrane proteins and lipid phases.
Therefore, it is absolutely required for this research. If freeze fracture
micrographs are to be meaningfully interpreted, it is best for the sample to be
uncryoprotected, but frozen so fast that vitrification occurs before the
formation of large ice crystals that destroy ultrastructure. The high pressure
freezer, which briefly applies pressure and cryogen together to lower the rate
of freezing required to avoid ice crystal formation, is the only instrument that
will allow good freezing to occur below the surface layer of an uncryoprotected
sample. Therefore, it greatly reduces artifacts, enhances meaningful
interpretation of replicas, and increases the efficiency of freeze fracture
experimentation.