* 9016362
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Thermodynamics Propertiesof Mantle Minerals
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1991,04/30/1993
* Anne Hofmeister, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 04/30/1993
* USD 2,050.00

This award will support collaborative research in geology between Dr. Anne
Hofmeister, University of California at Davis, and Dr. Pascal Richet, Institut
de Physique du Globe, University of Paris VI, France. The objective of the
project is to improve thermodynamic calculations for mantle-minerals based on
spectroscopy. One of the fundamental problems in geophysics concerns the
deduction of the thermal character of the Earth's interior by comparing seismic
measurements to physical properties of minerals measured in the laboratory.
Progress is severely impeded by infeasibility of performing calorimetry at
pressure. In order to overcome this difficulty, predictions of thermodynamic
properties based on spectroscopy can be used. Currently, the calculations are
very accurate to 1000 K, but calorimetric data above such temperature is
insufficient to evaluate the investigators' current models. In this project they
propose to perform calorimetry and thermal expansivity at high temperatures and
compressibility experiments at room temperature (in Paris) and spectroscopic
measurements at temperature and pressure (at Davis) on selected mineral samples.
Direct comparison will enable the researchers to establish the accuracy of
Kieffer's thermo- dynamic model at high temperatures. Their goal is to refine
the model, so that it is reliable under mantle conditions. This project will
benefit from the complementary expertise of the two investigators in modelling
thermodynamic properties through spectroscopy. The results of this study should
improve understanding of the thermal state of the Earth's interior.