* 9016959
* Intermolecular Bonding and Microphase Separation in         Multiblock Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1991,12/31/1992
* Stuart Cooper, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 12/31/1992
* USD 179,000.00

The three general directions of study are aimed at gaining a quantitative
understanding of phase separation in multiblock polymers. The first direction
intends to address the microphase separation transition (MST) in polyurethane
systems using small- angle x-ray scattering (SAXS), differential scanning
calorimetry (DSC), and melt rheometry. Simplified polyurethane systems will be
studied which minimize complications due to hard segment crystallization and
thermal degradation. The second direction addresses the problem of
crystallization in multiblock polymers. A study of the relationship between
crystallization and the MST is proposed using a polyurethane system whose MST
may be altered relative to the hard segment melting point. A SAXS study of
crystallization and annnealing processes in poly(ether-ester) copolymers is also
proposed, emphasizing changes in hard domain morphology occuring during
recrystallization after melting. Complementary to these studies is work aimed at
understanding the role of polymerization conditions on spherulitic texture
development. The third, and final direction of study is the use of solid-state
NMR techniques to characterize polyurethane morphology. Model hard segment
compounds will be investigated using cross polarization/magic-angle spinning
techniques with C-13 as the probe nucleus. This work will be complemented with
proton NMR studies in order to gain an understanding of site-specific mobilities
in the hard domains. This work will be extended to polyether-polyurethane
copolymers with an aim toward characterization of the interfacial regions.