* 9016509
* Behavior of Clay Brick and Concrete Masonry Infill Wall
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1994
* Daniel Abrams, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 02/28/1994
* USD 191,999.00

This project is supported under NSF Announcement No. 90-23, "Repair and
Rehabilitation Research for Seismic Resistance of Structures." The object of the
research is to determine how masonry infill panels resist story shears during
earthquakes. The focus of the investigation is on the tolerable amount of
lateral drift that existing infills can resist within their plane before
significant damage occurs. In addition, the stability of damaged infills is to
be examined by loading cracked panels normal to their plane. Repair measures
will be developed that will enhance transverse flexural strength. A series of
full-scale specimens are to be constructed and tested. Each test structure will
be a one-story masonry infill panel surrounded by a one-bay reinforced concrete
frame. Horizontal forces will be applied at static rates, but will be cycled in
a representative sequence of small and large amplitudes. Variables of the test
series will include the type of masonry unit (clay brick or concrete block), the
type of mortar, the strength and stiffness of the frame and the type of infill
repair method. This project is part of a collaborative research effort which
combines fundamental studies by an academic institution and a professional
engineering firm. Together they represent a common effort for the implementation
of research results.