* 9016484
* Acquisition of 300MHz NMR Spectrometer
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1991,12/31/1992
* Gerd La Mar, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 12/31/1992
* USD 205,000.00

This Proposal requests partial funding for a vertical bore, intermediate field
NMR spectrometer for high resolution spectroscopy in structural biology. The
instrument will consist of a 7.05 T magnet, sufficient homogeneous volume for 10
mm proton and 20 mm heteronuclei sample tubes, and a console with all features
necessary for advanced techniques such as proton detection of heteronuclei, spin
locking, multiple quantum experiments, and all other modern two dimensional
methods. The spectrometer will be utilized by a core group of five Major User
(four with NSF funding) and several minor users. The projects of the Major Users
focus on NMR applications to structural biology. Planned research using the
proposed spectrometer emphasizes studies of biomolecule structure and model
compounds of protein active sites, primarily on systems containing paramagnetic
metal centers. Each investigator has an established program of NMR research with
spectrometers of lesser capability, and the Proposal documents the additional
knowledge to be gained by the new capabilities of the proposed instrument. The
proposed instrument will come under the auspices of the UC Davis NMR Facility.
The Facility has a proven record of over ten years in implementing state-of-the-
art NMR techniques, and in spectrometer maintenance and modification.