* 9016731
* Optical Emissions from Photoexcitation of Atmospheric       Radicals and Molecules in the Gas Phase and on Aerosol      Surfaces
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1993
* Masako Suto, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 03/31/1993
* USD 100,000.00

The project is devoted primarily to atmospheric aerosols. Laboratory
experiments will probe the conditions under which aerosols of ammonium sulfate
and ammonium bisulfate can be formed in the gas phase from ammonia, sulfur
trioxide and water vapor. The aerosols will be produced by mixing the reacting
gases in a flow tube. Particle-size distributions of the resulting aerosols will
be deduced from measurements of ultraviolet light scattering. Experiments will
assess the possibility of chemically identifying such aerosols by observing
light emitted by them when they are exposed to laser beams of variable
wavelength and intensity. Variations of these experiments will test
possibilities of separately detecting chemical species adhering to the surfaces
of the aerosol particles. Similar experiments will be conducted on the formation
of ammonium nitrate aerosols from ammonia, water vapor, nitric acid and/or
nitrogen dioxide. The experiments will be useful for better understanding of
conditions under which these aerosols are formed in both the natural and the
perturbed atmosphere. The feasibility of measuring the aerosols under field
conditions will be explored. Experiments aimed at detecting chemical species
adhering to the aerosol surfaces are designed to reveal any unsuspected surface-
chemical properties of the aerosols, by virtue of which they might influence the
chemistry of the gas phase.