* 9016200
* U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Research on The Steroid Hormone  1,25(OH)2D3 and its Receptors Functioning to Produce Both   Genomic and Nongenomic Biological Response
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1991,05/31/1993
* Anthony Norman, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 05/31/1993
* USD 17,581.00

This award supports cooperative research on steroid hormones to be conducted by
Anthony Norman of the University of California at Riverside and his Argentine
colleague R. Boland of the National University of the South in Bahia Blanca,
Argentina. They propose a collaborative research program directed towards
studies on the biochemical mode of action of the hormonally active form of
vitamin D. While it is generally accepted that steroid hormones generate
biological responses through regulation of gene expression, it is not widely
accepted that steroid hormones can generate significant biological responses
through mechanisms not dependent upon immediate regulation of gene expression.
Both laboratories have published a series of papers reporting that 1,25(OH)2D3
can generate biological responses in muscle (Bahia Blanca) and the intestine
(Riverside) by nuclear receptor-mediated modulation of gene expression as well
as by a pathway(s) in which a putative membrane recognition element for
1,25(OH)2D3 is implicated in processes which generate biological responses
within 1-5 minutes. The major objectives of this proposal are (a) to initiate a
collaborative characterization of the membrane-related receptor for 1,25(OH)2D3
in intestine, HL-60 cells and muscle and compare it with the classical nuclear
receptor for 1,25 (OH)2D3 and (b) further define the biochemical details of the
signal transduction pathway leading to "rapid" biological responses which lead
in the intestine to the process of "transcaltachia" or the very rapid
stimulation of intestinal calcium absorption. Specifically the Riverside
laboratory will study the role of 1,25(OH)2D3 receptors in (a) gene expression
particularly as exemplified by examination of the calbindin-D28K gene's promoter
and (b) the process of transcaltachia or the very rapid stimulation of
intestinal calcium transport (via nongenomic mechanisms). The Bahia Blanca
laboratory will study the function and mechanism of action of 1,25(OH)2D3 and
its receptor(s) in muscle. This work will formalize an existing active
collaboration.