* 9016079
* Fort Monmouth-University of Massachusetts: Mechanistic Studies of MOCVD Growth
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1993
* William Conner, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Brian J. Clifton
* 07/31/1993
* USD 76,660.00

The focus of our proposed research is to investigate the surface reactions
occurring during the growth of III-V semiconductors by metal organic chemical
vapor deposition, MOCVD. Many kinetic and mechanistic models for MOCVD have been
proposed that include numerous reactions steps and kinetic parameters. However,
few studies have been conducted to study the reactions occurring at the surface
during the growth of III-V semiconductors. In situ techniques are available to
characterize surface reactions but they are normally limited to study lower
temperatures and pressures than those employed in MOCVD growth (to
1Atm.and>500oC). Most notably, transmission and reflectance infrared
spectroscopy in conjunction with isotopic labelling has revolutionized our
understanding of catalytic reaction on solid surfaces. As temperature increases,
semiconductors are no longer transparent in the infrared and transmission
techniques can not be employed; indeed, these solids begin to emit radiation.
Fortunately, the spectra of the emitted radiation can be analyzed by similar
techniques and contains similar information with regard to the adsorbed
intermediates. Thus, emission spectroscopy may be an effective tool for
determining these reactive species for higher temperature reactions on
semiconducting surfaces. We propose to use infrared emission spectroscopy in
conjunction with isotopic tracers and on-line mass spectroscopy to investigate
the surface species during the adsorption and reaction and to show how different
precursors effect surface compositions. In parallel transmission infrared and
detailed surface analyses for the same samples will be conducted at Fort
Monmouth. This unique combination of complementary techniques will then be used
to better determine surface reaction models for growth of II-V semiconductor
surfaces.