* 9016470
* Deep Arrays for Earthquake Response, San Francisco Bay Area
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/1991,07/31/1993
* Pedro de Alba, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 07/31/1993
* USD 255,235.00

This action is to support the installation, in collaboration with the U.S.
Geological Survey (USGS) - and possible collaboration with the California
Division of Mines and Geology (CDMG) - of two deep arrays in the San Francisco
Bay area, with the objective of measuring ground motions and the elevation of
ground water pressure during the large earthquake that is expected to occur in
the San Francisco Bay area. These recordings will provide valuable data for
seismological, earthquake engineering and earthquake hazard mitigation studies:
these data do not exist at present. Surface measurements from the October 17,
1989 Loma Prieta, California earthquake showed that the apparent amplification
of the peak horizontal ground acceleration at deep clay sites was higher by 100%
or more than would have been anticipated; yet no measurements in the soil
profile showing how amplification progressed between bedrock and the ground
surface are available. Nor are data of this type available at other locations
for strong-motion earthquakes. There is a significant probability (67% in 30
years) that an earthquake producing greater intensity of motion than the Loma
Prieta event will occur in the San Francisco Bay area; it is thus an excellent
location to establish a deep accelerometer array to improve prediction
capabilities. Sites are being surveyed in the area, and several promising
locations have been identified. An advisory panel consisting of eminent
researchers and administrators in earthquake hazard mitigation, from major
universities in the United States and Canada, and from the USGS and CDMG, will
provide advice on the general requirements for the sites and their
instrumentation, as well as on the location of instruments to maximize the
usefulness of the data recovered. The panel members have expertise in earth
science, geotechnical engineering, and field data measurements. The damage
caused by the Loma Prieta earthquake, as well as previous major earthquakes
worldwide, point to the need to measure two different types of data so as to
improve earthquake hazard mitigation methods: The measurement during strong
earthquake-induced ground shaking of the amplification of ground motions in deep
clay deposits; and the ground motions and the increase in ground water pressure
in saturated sands during strong earthquakes. These measurements could be
obtained through two separate field arrays, or a combined array at a site which
has the appropriate combination of saturated sands and deep clay deposits. The
establishment of these arrays follows the recommendations of the September 1988
workshop on "Designated Sites for Geotechnical Experimentation in the United
States", and the November 1990 workshop on "Dynamic Soil Properties and Site
Characterization". These sites will become designated geotechnical test sites,
open to all interested researchers. The sites will be available for research
into geotechnical phenomena not associated with earthquakes, but it is expected
that the sites chosen will, in general, be more suitable for investigation of
the earthquake-induced phenomena discussed.