* 9016548
* Gene Structure &amp; Function
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1991,07/31/1994
* Kenneth Tartof, Institute For Cancer Research
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1994
* USD 300,000.00

In Drosophila, position effect variegation results when a euchromatic gene has
been placed adjacent to a block of centromeric heterochromatin. In this context
the euchromatic genes adjoining the heterochromatin are repressed in some cells,
but not in others, thereby giving rise to a tissue or organ composed of patches
of mutant and wild type cells. The most reasonable explanation for the
inactivation seen in variegating rearrangements, is that the usual compacted
structure of heterochromatin is propagated past the breakpoint into the
neighboring euchromatic sequences, thereby repressing their function. We have
shown that, in Drosophila, there are perhaps 20-30 dosage sensitive loci capable
of dominantly modifying variegation. These are known as Enhancers and
Suppressors of Variegation (E(var)and Su(var)) and may be divided into two
classes (I and II). Class I genes behave as Enhancers when duplicated and as
Suppressors when mutant or deficient. Such Loci are the majority type and
probably code for structural polypeptides that composed heterochromatin. On the
other hand, class II genes function as E(var) when deficient and as Su(var) when
duplicated. Only two class II genes are known so far. The fact that the
reduction or removal of a class II gene product may increase the spread of a
heterochromatic domain implies that the wild type function of such loci
negatively regulate the propagation of heterochromatin. This suggests that the
class II genes play a pivotal role in the assembly of heterochromatin. In order
to obtain a deeper understanding of position of effect variegation, we propose
to clone by recombinant DNA techniques the class II gene E26A, and to understand
how it participates in the assembly of heterochromatic domains. The results from
this study should provide greater insight into the structure and function of
eukaryotic chromosomes.