* 9016417
* Relativity and Quantum Mechanics: Modern Physics from an Elementary Viewpoint
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1993
* Paul Horwitz, BBN Systems & Technologies Corporation
* Continuing grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 07/31/1993
* USD 980,927.00

Introductory physics teaching has tended to treat relativity theory and quantum
mechanics as though they were totally disconnected from the rest of the field.
This project seeks to modify the traditional curriculum by concentrating on
those fundamental concepts that link classical and twentieth-century physics,
thereby bridging the gap between them, demystifying the latter and making both
more accessible to the beginning student. Building on recent results from
cognitive science research, the project will use technology in two complementary
ways: (1) to create sophisticated yet inexpensive experiments capable of
demonstrating some of the relevant physical effects and principles, and (2) to
build powerful computer-based environments within which students will design
their own simulated experiments that go far beyond what can be achieved in the
laboratory. The computer tools will enable students not only to model purely
classical systems but, by varying parameters, to pass continuously from the
classical to the relativistic or quantum regimes. Students will thus be able to
investigate effects that are observable only at high speeds or small scales,
displaying them in multiple representations from any frame of reference. In
collaboration with high school and undergraduate teachers, we will create
curriculum materials to make our software and experiments applicable to physics
courses at many different levels.