* 9016277
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research on Cohomological Methodsin Mathematical Physics
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1991,02/28/1994
* James Stasheff, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Alan Milsap
* 02/28/1994
* USD 6,335.00

This award supports a visit by Dr. James D. Stasheff of the University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, to the University of Sydney, Australia, to work with Dr.
Donald Barnes on cohomological methods in mathematical physics. The researchers
will address problems in cohomological physics in terms of developing and
applying techniques developed by Dr. Stasheff in his earlier research in
combination with the relevant and complementary expertise of Dr. Barnes. These
techniques fall into two broad categories: homological perturbation theory and
the study of higher order homotopy algebraic structure. One approach to
quantization is via a special kind of homological perturbation theory. The terms
in a perturbed differential can often be interpreted as higher order homotopy
structure. Dr. Stasheff identified a Lie algebra version of such structure in
several different aspects of mathematical physics. This project will further
develop the formal theory of such "strong homotopy Lie algebras" and apply it to
the physics. The vast majority of examples of BRST cohomology in physics share
the characteristic features of strongly homotopy Lie algebras. This project will
address the characterization of BRST cohomology along the characterization of
spectral sequence constructors by Dr. Barnes.