* 9016586
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:   Structural Phenomena in Quasi-One-Dimensional System
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1991,06/30/1995
* Arthur Epstein, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 06/30/1995
* USD 13,880.00

This award will support collaborative research in solid state chemistry between
Dr. Arthur Epstein, Ohio State University and Dr. J.P. Pouget, University of
Paris-Sud, Orsay, France. The objective of the project is to investigate
structural phenomema in quasi-one-dimensional systems. More specifically, the
researchers propose to explore the subtle relationships between local molecular
and polymeric crystallographic order and electronic and magnetic phenomena in
low dimensional solids, especially with respect to the polyaniline family of
polymers and the ferromagnetic charge transfer salts. The study of electronic
and magnetic phenomena in low dimensional organic and organometallic solids has
made revolutionary advances in the past two decades. A key aspect of these
advances is the exploration of properties of new material systems and
determination of the dependence of these properties on subtle local structural
phenomena. An essential aspect for the advancement of scientific study of these
systems is the knowledge of the local structure and its variation with
temperature and chemical modification. This cooperative research program
combines the structural expertise of the University of Paris-Sud group with the
experience in integrated optical, magnetic and electrical studies of the Ohio
State group. Drs. Epstein and Pouget have a decade-long history of joint
research efforts to uncover the effects of local order on the one and three
dimensional electronic phenomena in molecular and polymeric systems. Dr.
Pouget's laboratory is one of the few in the world which is set up specifically
to study the subtle orders in materials and Dr. Pouget himself is a leading
authority in structural phenomena of low-dimensional solids. The results of this
research should significantly enhance understanding of the physical properties
of polyaniline in terms of chemical structure.