* 9016703
* Mathematical Sciences: NSF/AWM Workshops to Encourage and   Support Young Women Mathematicians
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/1990,02/28/1993
* Lenore Blum, Association for Women in Mathematics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 02/28/1993
* USD 35,000.00

This project will support three workshops to encourage and support young women
mathematicians. The first workshop will be held in conjunction with the
twentieth anniversary celebration of the Association for Women in Mathematics
(AWM) at the Joint Meeting of the American Mathematical Society (AMS) and the
Mathematical Association of America (MAA) in January 1991. Part of the program
will consist of an AWM Symposium entitled "The Future of Women in Mathematics;"
this symposium will involve approximately ten recent doctoral recipients who
will present thirty minute talks on their research. The other planned activities
will run concurrently with the Joint Meeting. The other two workshops will be
held prior to major mathematical meetings in 1992; the first at the Joint
Mathematics Meeting (January 1992) and the second at the national meeting of the
Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (July 1992). These workshops will
bring together women who are recent doctoral recipients or graduate students in
mathematics, and several established mathematicians. The workshop participants
will be expected to give a brief presentation on their research interests and
research environment. It is expected that the opportunity to meet and interact
with one another, as well as with a few established mathematicians, will enable
the participants to promote their own research and decrease their professional
isolation.