* 9016896
* Population Dynamics and Ecosystem Processes:  Theoretical   Study of the Stability Development of Food-Web Structure
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1991,06/30/1993
* Donald DeAngelis, Oak Ridge National Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Alexander P. DeAngelis
* 06/30/1993
* USD 22,126.00

This award provides support for a two year cooperative project between a group
from the Environmental Sciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory led by
Dr Donald Deangelis, and a group from Ryukoku University, Japan, led by
Professor Ei Teramoto. The objective of the proposed research is to demonstrate
how the macroscopic processes of energy and nutrient flow in an ecosystem are
related to the spatiotemporal behavior and fate of species populations within
that ecosystem. Traditionally, two general theories have been applied to the
understanding of ecological food webs, namely the population and community
dynamics theory, emphasizing the modelling of population numbers, and the
ecosystem process theory, emphasizing the modelling of energy and nutrient
flows. There has been relatively little interaction between ecologists employing
each of these approaches and this has hindered the development of ecological
theory. This project aims at developing theoretical approach to ecological food
webs which integrates both approaches. Two specific food webs are to be studied;
a termite-microbial- detritus interaction in a subtropical ecosystem, and a
periphyton-grazer community in artificial streams. The project will involve the
development of models linking ecosystem energy and nutrient flows with
population dynamics. This integrated approach, may help clarify several
important theoretical questions including the relationships of energy and
nutrient supply regimes to the stability and species diversity within an
ecosystem, the coevolution of species in relation to structure and processes in
food webs, and the causes and effects of spatiotemporal heterogeneity of
ecosystems. Both the US and Japanese scientists involved in the project are
highly regarded in their fields. The two groups have complementary research
interests with similar aims but different orientations, the US group being more
oriented towards ecosystem processes, and the Japanese group more towards
population/community dynamics. This project should yield new insights into the
interplay between the dynamic processes of species populations in an ecosystem
and the ecosystem processes of energy and nutrient flow, which could have
important implications in the context of both landscape ecology, and issues such
as the greenhouse effect, acid rain and biodiversity.