* 9016299
* U.S.-Denmark Collaborative Research on a Theoretical        Description of the Stopping of Swift Projectiles by         Material Foils
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1995
* John Sabin, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 03/31/1995
* USD 16,250.00

This award supports Professor John R. Sabin of the University of Florida and
several of his graduate students to collaborate in theoretical materials
research with Professor Jens Oddershede of the Chemistry Department of the
Odense University, Denmark. Both research groups are highly productive and
recognized for their expertise in quantum chemistry. They share an interest in
understanding the physical process of energy deposition in matter by swift,
massive particles. The Florida group offers strengths in the theoretical aspects
of this question, while the group in Denmark has particular strengths in the
experimental and theoretical aspects. They propose a series of theoretical and
numerical studies related to molecular stopping in several systems. In
particular, they will investigate the moments of oscillator strength
distributions in small molecules, and also apply a less rigorous approach to
calculate stopping cross sections in larger systems. In both cases, a good deal
of experimental data exists that has not been examined for theoretical
significance. The interaction of swift, massive particles with matter is a field
with implications for such diverse studies as detector design and dosimetry,
target design for the light ion beam fusion program, radiation therapy in
medicine and ion beam implantation of impurities in solids. The proposed
collaborative work will be the first consistent theoretical study of energy
deposition processes in molecules.