* 9016619
*  U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar : Magmatic Contributions to        Hydrothermal Systems - Magnitude and Importance (November   1991, Kagoshima and Ebino, Japan)
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1991,05/31/1992
* Stephen Kesler, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 05/31/1992
* USD 19,408.00

This award provides support for the participation of six US scientists in a
joint US-Japan seminar on "Magmatic Contribu- tions to Hydrothermal Systems:
Magnitude and Importance". Hydrothermal systems form where heat and water meet
in the earths crust. One important aspect of research on hydrothermal systems is
the role of magmas. Continuing study of fossil and active hydrothermal systems
makes it clear that magmas can contribute to these systems in several different
ways but such contributions can be difficult to recognize and characterize.
Difficulties arise, for example, because magmatic contributions are small in
relation to the total mass of the hydrothermal system and because they undergo
rapid modification by reaction with other constituents of the system. A further
impediment is the wide range of disciplines involved including, for example,
field geology, experimental geochemistry, thermodynamic modelling, water
geochemistry and geophysics. In order to gain a comprehensive understanding of
the importance of magmatic contributions to the evolution of hydrothermal
systems, interaction among scientists in these fields is required. The seminar
will be held Novemeber 10-16, 1991 at Kagoshima and Ebino, Kyushu, Japan. The
co-organizers are Professor Stephen E Kesler, Department of Geology, University
of Michigan, and Dr Eiji Izawa, Department of Mining, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan. Specific topics to be discussed include (1) igneous petrology of
magmas; (2) the composition of volcanic discharges and their relation to
magmatic fluids; (3) fluid inclusion and geochemical studies of epithermal and
geothermal systems; and (4) chemical and physical modelling of magmatic
hydrothermal systems. Although the US and Japan each have many Scientists active
in this field, contact between these two groups is not as extensive as it could
be. The seminar will allow represent- atives from the two countries to meet and
exchange information and it is anticipated that more extensive research
collaboration will result.