* 9016921
* REU:  GLOBEC:  Significance of Circulation to Egg and LarvalDistributions on Georges Bank
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1991,12/31/1993
* Daniel Lynch, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 12/31/1993
* USD 210,000.00

This is an interdisciplinary, site-specific modeling study focused on the
Georges Bank conducted within the GLOBEC -Global Ocean Ecocsystems Dyanamics
framework of the U.S. Global Change Research Program. It involves a
collaborative effort on the part of U.S. and Canadian scientists at the
Department of Fisheries and Oceans. Biological and physical data will be
examined with the aid of three-dimensional circulation models under development
at Dartmouth College and Skidaway Institute of Oceanography. The study will
focus on sea scallops (Placopectin magellanicus), Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua)
and the copepod Calanus finmarchicus. Larval drift models driven by the
circulation models will be created and used to determine the extent to which egg
and larval distributions on Georges Bank can be explained by the monthly-mean
circulation fields; and to evaluate the significance of simple behaviors
(vertical migration) and more complex physics (time-dependence, spatial
structures) to the egg and larval distributions. The general approach will be to
focus on the null hypothesis that distributions are determined by passive
advection and diffusion in the monthly-mean circulation fields, and the
corollary that apparent "retention" is merely a reflection of the Bank's natural
residence time. Hypotheses for significant influences from higher-frequency flow
variability, small-scale flow structures and vertical migration will also be
explored.