* 9016451
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Computers in Heat Transfer Science/October 1991/Tokyo, Japan
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1993
* Kwang-tzu Yang, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 03/31/1993
* USD 20,668.00

This award will support the participation of six U.S. scientists in a joint
seminar on "Computers in Heat Transfer Science," to be held in Tokyo, Japan, in
October 1991. Among the main topics to be discussed are forced convection,
natural convection, phase changes, radiative heat transfer, and heat transfer in
combustion. Experimental, theoretical, and a combination of the two approaches
will also be featured. Significant issues to be addressed are: (1) in what
details can we theoretically clarify hitherto unresolved heat transfer
processes, if the performance of computers is upgraded 10-fold or even 100-fold
from that of computers available today; (2) how far can we improve the accuracy
of heat transfer measurements if we are equipped with data acquisition and
processing equipment in the laboratory that are more powerful than that
currently available by a factor of 10 or 100; and (3) what role can heat
transfer specialists play to develop the technology that is essential in
ushering in computing equipment that is 10 or even 100 times more powerful than
those in existence today? The advent of computers has played a major role in the
advancement of the science of heat transfer as well as in the solution of many
practical problems. Both the United States and Japan have made significant
contributions to advance the knowledge of heat transfer and are also among the
most advanced countries in the development and utilization of microelectronics
and computing technology. The objective of the seminar is to bring together
leading researchers from both countries in an effective forum to review the
current impact of computers in heat transfer research and discuss how the
continuing advances in computer technology will impact the development of heat
transfer science. The co-organizers of the meeting are Professor Kwangtzu Yang
of the University of Notre Dame and Professor Wataru Nakayama of the Tokyo
Institute of Technology. This seminar is the third in a series of joint meetings
between the United States and Japan sponsored by NSF and the Japan Society for
the Promotion of Science. The first was held in Tokyo in 1981 and the second in
San Diego in 1985.