* 9016512
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Field Tests of            Interspecific Competition in Stream Salmonid Guilds in Japanand the U.S.
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1994
* Kurt Fausch, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander P. DeAngelis
* 03/31/1994
* USD 35,620.00

This award provides support for a two year cooperative research project between
Professor Kurt Fausch, Department of Fishery and Wildlife Biology, Colorado
State University, and Dr Hiroya Kawanabe, Department of Zoology, Kyoto
University, Japan. This project is aimed at increasing our understanding of the
roles of biotic interactions and environmental factors in shaping longitudinal
distributions of salmonid guilds in mountain streams. Ecologists have long
sought to understand the relative roles of biotic and abiotic factors in shaping
animal communities by investigating distributions of species along altitudinal
gradients where environmental features and species composition change over short
distances. A frequent finding is that congeneric species, which are assumed to
compete strongly, occupy different positions along the gradient and overlap
little. Furthermore , the distribu- tion of one or both species is usually
expanded in locations where its congener is absent versus those where it is
present. The objective of this research is to experimentally test whether
interspecific interference competition is an important mechanism in determining
the relative success of two congeners, the Japanese charr and the Dolly Varden
charr, in the altitudinal zone where they are sympatric, in the Hidaka Mountains
of Hokkaido, Japan. Both Professor Fausch and Dr Kawanabe are leading experts in
their fields and their strengths are complementary. The project will give
Professor Fausch the opportunity to undertake research in a relatively
undisturbed community, and the Japanese methods of 3-dimensional mapping of
positions should yield a more precise examination of interactions and
displacements than generally encountered. The results of this research should
provide a better understanding of the ecology of stream salmonids and animal
communities in general. Stream salmonids are an economically important species
and any increase in knowledge of their ecology should permit better management
of streams that support them.