* 9016349
* Dissertation Research: Biosystematics and Evolution of the  Genus Brachylaena R. Brown (Comlpositae)
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/1991,12/31/1992
* Daniel Crawford, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1992
* USD 7,400.00

Brachylaena (Compositae) is a woody, dioecious genus of thirteen species; it is
distinct from other members of the Compositae and is considered to represent a
monophyletic assemblage. Five of the species of Brachylaena are endemic to
Madagascar and the Mascarene Islands while eight species are confined to the
continent of Africa. The PIs propose to test some of the proposed origins and
affinities of the Madagascar Flora using Brachylaena as an exemplar. The genus
is distributed between the two regions and it is widespread on the Island of
Madagascar, suggesting an ancient affinity. Several taxonomic problems such as
intergrading morphological forms have been recognized in the genus therefore, it
is proposed that an initial phenetic analysis be carried out to establish the
limits of the groups. The groups obtained from this analysis will then be
compared electrophoretically to determine the genetic variation within and among
populations of individual species and to estimate the genetic divergence among
species of the genus. Only two chromosome counts have been made for the genus
but it appears from these that at least one of the species is tetraploid. In
addition to phenetics and electrophoresis, an analysis of restriction site data
from chloroplast DNA will be undertaken in order to produce a phylogenetic
hypothesis for the genus. This will be compared to a cladogram generated from
morphology. The distribution of Brachylaena, with certain species restricted to
the continent of Africa and others endemic to Madagascar, will make it possible
to discuss the evolution of this group in the context of the two regions and to
relate this to known geological events. Furthermore, aspects of the biology and
distribution of this genus (i.e., woody, dioecious and tropical) make it an
interesting and important group in which to study genetic variation within and
among populations.