* 9016785
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Structure and Evolution of Protogiant Planet Formation
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1991,05/31/1994
* Douglas N. Lin, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Alexander P. DeAngelis
* 05/31/1994
* USD 22,270.00

This award will provide support for a two year cooperative research project on
protogiant planet formation, between Professor Peter H Bodenheimer and
colleagues at the Lick Observatory, University of California, Santa Cruz, and
Professor Satoru Ikeuchi and colleagues from the National Astronomical
Observatory, Japan. The formation of the solar system is one of the most
important unsolved problems in astrophysics and planetary science. Recently
accumulated observational data on the existence and evolution of protostellar
disks around young stars seem to indicate that systems, similar to those that
lead to the formation of the solar system, may be abundant, and that the
formation of planetary systems may be an ongoing process instead of a long-ago
event. The aim of this project is to is to undertake a theoretical investigation
of the formation of giant planets to help interpret these observations. Giant
planets are thought to have been initiated by the accumulation of small solid
particles that existed in the primordial solar nebula. After the build up of
this core to a few earth masses, it is believed that the protoplanet was able to
gravitationally capture relatively large amounts of gas from the nebula, and
that the final formation stages were dominated by gas accretion. It is intended
during this project to analyze this process of gas accretion, using a three-
dimensional hydrodynamic computer code. Through this analysis, it is hoped to
determine the mass accretion rate as a function of time, the rate of accretion
of spin angular momentum as a function of time, and the change in the location
of the protoplanetary orbit as a function of time. Both the US and Japanese
researchers involved in this collaboration have made intensive investigations
into the general problem of the origin of the solar system and are highly
regarded for their past research in the subject area. The research skills of the
two groups are very complementary. If the research is successful it should give
us some insight into how the final mass of giant planets was determined and how
the regular satellite systems originated, and should provide a very valuable
theoretical component to our understanding of the process of planet and solar
system formation.