* 9016567
* Facility for High Performance Mass Spectrometry
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1991,03/31/1996
* Robert Cotter, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Karl A. Koehler
* 03/31/1996
* USD 1,889,825.00

This award provides funds for continuation of the Mid-Atlantic Mass
Spectroscopy Laboratory (MAMS) at Johns Hopkins University. Funds provide
support for the laboratory's collaborative research activities, from which
investigators at a number of institutions benefit, for research training at the
graduate and post-graduate level, and for continued technique development
activities. Dr. Cotter is an outstanding young investigator known particularly
for his technique development activities, especially in use of time of flight
(TOF) and plasma desorption mass spectrometry. Collaborative projects include
structural studies of lipids and composition of lipid membranes, structure
function relationships in enzymes and other proteins, and structures of
oligosaccharide side-chains on glycoproteins and glycolipids. In the last decade
or so, mass spectrometry (MS) has become a technique of increasing usefulness to
biologists and biochemists. MS is of particular use in the analysis of lipids,
of polysaccharides, of the types and sites of naturally occurring modifications
of proteins, and of other aspects of protein structure including primary
sequence. Because of the expense of their purchase and operation of the
spectrometers, the disparate types of biological problems for which MS is
useful, and the real but often infrequent need for MS in a given research
project, mass spectrometry is particularly suited for central facilities such as
MAMS that provide analyses for investigators at a number of institutions. The
focus on collaborative research insures that the projects undertaken are not
simply routine analyses, but instead are challenging problems that help provide
a suitable environment for continued development of MS techniques.