* 9016061
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Structural and Dynamical Studies of Living Polymers by Neutron Scattering
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1996
* Sandra Greer, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 09/30/1996
* USD 11,650.00

This award will support collaborative research in experimental physical
chemistry between Dr. Sandra Greer, University of Maryland, and the following
French scientists: Professor Pierre Pfeuty, Laboratoire de Physique des Solides,
University of Paris-Sud, and Drs. R. Bellissent and F. Boue, Laboratoire Leon
Brillouin, Grenoble, France. The objective of the proposed research is to carry
out structural and dynamical studies of living polymers by neutron scattering.
Living polymers are organic polymers which remain in dynamical chemical
equilibrium with their monomers. The monomers come and go from the active
polymers. The conversion of monomers to polymers depends on temperature,
commencing only below a certain "ceiling temperature". Below the ceiling
temperature, the mole fraction and the average chain length of the polymers
increase as the temperature is decreased. The investigators propose to study the
static and dynamic properties of these polymers by neutron scattering. Dr. Greer
and her research group have expertise in the preparation of samples of living
polymers which will remain "alive" indefinitely. Dr. Pfeuty is an expert on the
statistical mechanics of living polymers, while the investigators at the
Laboratoire Leon Brillouin have extensive experience in neutron scattering and
polymer research. In this project, samples will be prepared at the University of
Maryland and transported to the nuclear reactors at Saclay and Grenoble. Low
angle neutron scattering from living polystyrene in deuterated cyclohexane to be
carried out at Saclay will provide the investigators with information on the
structure of the polymer chains near the polymerization and near the tricritical
point, and on the rate of relaxation to the equilibrium chain distribution.
Studies with the spin echo neutron spectrometer at Grenoble will provide
information on the dynamics of the chain motions. The proposed experiments
cannot presently be carried out in the US, because of a lack of high-flux small
angle neutron scattering facilities.