* 9016749
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Interactions of Swift     Charged Particles with Valence Electrons Near Surfaces
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1991,10/31/1993
* Joachim Burgdorfer, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Alexander P. DeAngelis
* 10/31/1993
* USD 12,636.00

This award provides support for a two year cooperative research project between
Professor Joachim Burgdorfer and Professor Stuart B Elston, Department of
Physics and Astronomy, University of Tennessee, and the Quantum Physics Group at
the Department of Engineering, Kyoto University, Japan, led by Professor Michi-
hiko Mannami. The purpose of the project is to undertake a collaborative
theoretical and experimental study of the collision interactions of fast charged
particles with valence electrons near surfaces. Scattering from clean well
defined surfaces at glancing angles provides the opportunity to study collision
processes at large impact parameters, thereby accentuating interactions with
valence electrons in the proximity of the surface while suppressing
contributions from ionic cores. The project will involve firstly a theoretical
and experimental investigation of the energy and angular distributions of convoy
electrons ejected in glancing angle ion-surface collisions as a function of
projectile charge state and velocity, and surface structure and composition.
Secondly a computer simulation of the reflection of scattered ions will be
developed, with particular emphasis on the simultaneous evolution of electron
projectile states and the dynamical response of the valence electron. Finally a
theoretical and experimental investigation of the yield and angular distribution
of convoy electrons produced by channeled fast ions will be carried out. There
is strong overlap between the work of the groups at Kyoto University and the
University of Tennessee, with complementing capabilities in both theory and
experiment. The group in the US, for example, have extensive numerical
experience in Monte-Carlo simulations for electronic transport in solids, where
as the Kyoto group have developed a simulation code for ionic scattering from
solid surfaces. This project should provide detailed new information on the
contribution of delocalized electrons to excitation processes, on the collective
response of conduction electrons and its influence on secondary electron
emission and, more broadly, on the usefulness of inelastic collision processes
as a tool of surface diagnostics.