* 9016659
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar:  Micromechanics of Granular       Materials/August 1991/Potsdam, NY
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1992
* Hayley Shen, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 03/31/1992
* USD 12,650.00

This award provides support for the participation of ten US scientists in a
joint US-Japan seminar on "Micromechanics of Granular Materials". Granular
material is an assembly of discrete particles, the macroscopic behavior of which
is significantly influenced by the properties of those individual particles and
their interactions. A wide range of engineering problems involve characterizing
and handling granular materials, and solutions to these problems often rely on
phenomenological formulas. To improve these phenomenological formulations, much
research is undertaken aimed at increasing our understanding of how microscopic
information relates to the macroscopic behavior of granular materials. Research
undertaken by US and Japanese scientists in this area is complementary, US
researchers concentrating on the formulation of rapidly deforming granular flows
and the utilization of computer simulation, and Japanese researchers
concentrating on the mathematical description and physical experiments of
discrete systems. This seminar should therefore provide an excellent forum for
scientists from each country to exchange results and discuss future research in
this area. The seminar will be held on August 5-9, 1991 at Clarkson University,
Postdam, New York. The co-organizers are Professor Hayley Shen, Department of
Civil and Environmental Engineering, Clarkson University, and Professor Masao
Satake, Department of Civil Engineering, Tohoku University, Japan. Specific
topics to be discussed at the seminar include (1) constitutive relations with
internal variables; (2) transiti- onal behavior including elastic to plastic,
quasi-static and rapid deformation; and (3) two-phase flows. This will be the
fourth seminar in a series that started in 1978. The prior seminars have been
very valuable and the published proceedings well respected. This seminar will
allow this successful cooperation between the two countries to continue, and
should lead to further exchanges of information and more extensive research
collaboration.