* 9016679
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Data Analysis of FermiLab  Experiment E-653 and Measurement of the Oscillat#ins of     Muon Neutrinos into Tau-Neutrinos
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1991,04/30/1995
* Neville Reay, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 04/30/1995
* USD 15,870.00

This award will provide support for continuing collaboration between scientists
from the Department of Physics, Ohio State University, lead by Professor Neville
W Reay, and scientists from Nagoya University, Japan, lead by Professor Kimio
Niwa. The objectives of this project are to continue to investigate areas in
theoretical physics of mutual interest, namely mixing and CP violation in the
decays of B-mesons and the gage structure of electro-weak theories beyond the
standard model. Collaboration between these two groups has continued for the
last decade and their past activities have produced several important results in
charm physics. This award will provide support for the completion of the
analysis of the Fermilab experiment E653. E653 has very important data on the
semileptonic decays of charmed particles. These decays are the key to measuring
the K-M matrix, one of the most fundamental quantities in elementary particle
physics. At the present time the existing semileptonic decays data is confusing
and the E653 data can bear directly on resolving these issues. It is also
intended to undertake a hybrid emulsion experiment (Fermilab P803) to measure
the oscillation of Muon-neutrinos into Tau-neutrinos, which could decide whether
Tau-neutrinos are the long sought after dark matter in the universe. The
observation of an effect on P803 would have a dramatic effect on our
understanding of particle physics. The collaboration between these two groups is
long-standing and successful, and both the US and Japanese groups have
demonstrated a high competence in the techniques involved. The strengths of the
US and Japanese participants are complementary. Collection of data by both U.S.
and Japanese scientists on the project is done at Fermilab, together with some
of the electronics analysis. Analysis of emulsions and additional electronic
analysis is carried out in Japan. If the project is successful, the results of
the research will be of great scientific interest to the particle physics
community.