* 9016982
* Statistical Mechanics in General Relativity and             Gravitational Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1992
* Henry Kandrup, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Richard Isaacson
* 06/30/1992
* USD 46,818.00

Recent years have witnessed increasing applications of nonequilibrium
statistical mechanics and dynamical systems theory in relativistic astrophysics
and quantum field theory. Professor Kandrup will investigate certain general
features underlying many of these applications and show how such investigations
can provide significant new insights into specific problems. The other area to
be considered entails an application of ideas from statistical physics and
quantum field theory in the early Universe. One principal area in statistical
mechanics to be considered is the "relaxation" and stability of classical self-
gravitating systems of stars. Relevant questions to be addressed include: Why do
galaxies look so similar one to another and "so relaxed" when their nominal
relaxation time is much greater than the age of the Universe? Can this apparent
relaxation be derived from first principles as a consequence of the "mixing"
properties of a system of self-gravitating point masses? Could "mean field
fluctuations" or other collective effects induce an effective relaxation on a
time scale short compared with the "collisional" relaxation time? In what sense
are all self-gravitating systems unstable, and could this generic instability
lead to the formation of a massive black hole at the center of a galaxy?
Relevant questions to be addressed in field theory include: To what extent can
various field theoretic processes in the early Universe be modeled via simple
stochastic equations? What does one mean by "gravitational entropy"? Is it
possible to envision changes in topology in semiclassical quantum gravity as
"tunneling" events, characterized as instantons? Could one, e.g., make precise
the idea that the Universe "tunneled into Being" as a quantum fluctuation? What
would this imply about the "initial conditions" at the Big Bang, and could this
"explain" the observed "arrow of time"?