* 9016430
* Dissertation Research: The Systematics and Evolution of     Jaltomata (Solanaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/1991,06/30/1993
* Gregory Anderson, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 06/30/1993
* USD 11,317.00

The PIs proposed a study of the taxonomy, pattern of phylogenetic relationships
and evolutionary processes in Jaltomata. A neotropical, herbaceous to
suffrutescent genus of the Solanaceae. One species of this poorly understood and
taxonomically confused genus is of particular interest because it is undergoing
progressive domestication in Mexico as a fruit crop; fruits and root-stocks of
several other species are also consumed by humans. The PIs will construct a
chloroplast DNA-based phylogeny. Based on this rigorously constructed phylogeny,
independently derived patterns of morphological and karyotypical evolution and
biogeography will be tested. They will also explore evolution of breeding
systems. Jaltomata is especially suitable for the study of evolutionary process
and pattern for several reasons. Generic boundaries present a challenging
problem; some workers retain the tubular flowered Jaltomata species as
Hebecladus, and species of Saracha and Physalis have been treated as Jaltomata.
There is much morphological diversity among species (habit, vestiture, corolla
shape and color, etc.). The group, therefore, lends itself to the study of
morphological evolution as it relates to phylogeny, chromosomal evolution, the
evolution of altitude / habitat preference and breeding system evolution. The
genus includes a diversity of breeding systems such as autogamy, facultative
autogamy, and obligate outcrossing.