* 9016798
* Development of Cell Culture Analog Systems for Use With     Pharmokinetic Models
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1991
* Michael Shuler, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 12/31/1991
* USD 40,000.00

The ultimate goal of this work is to develop techniques to better evaluate the
potential toxicity of chemicals to humans. Currently, toxicological and
pharmacological testing of chemicals requires large numbers of animals. Data
obtained from whole animal studies are difficult to accurately extrapolate
across species lines and to effects at low doses. Basic metabolic interactions
are difficult to monitor. On both economic and ethical grounds it is desirable
to reduce the number of animals utilized in such testing. Advances in
biotechnology and cell culture present an opportunity to develop alternative
methods that can yield both better data and reduced use of animals. This work
will combine pharmokinetic models and in vitro cell culture techniques to
construct a direct physical analog of the whole animal. This concept will be
tested by constructing a mouse analog - using two types of lung cells and
hepatocytes from the liver. Direct observations can be made of molecular level
mechanisms for biotransformations of xenobiotics. Further incorporation of
mechanistic information into the pharmokinetic model will allow extrapolation of
observations. Controversies on which cytochromes are responsible for
bioactivation of napthalene and on which cell types are primarily responsible
for its activation will be addressed.