* 9016136
* Dissertation Research: Phylogeny and Geography of Host      Associations in Papilio zelicaon
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1991,06/30/1993
* John Thompson, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 06/30/1993
* USD 11,963.00

The investigators will study the phylogeny and geography of host associations
among populations of Papilio zelicaon (Lepidoptera) that differ in the host
plants they use in northwestern United States and southwestern Canada. The
proposed work will use the broad range of umbelliferous species fed on by P.
zelicaon to relate the intraspecific geographic patterns of host use to
phylogeny. Objective 1 of the proposed work will test for differences in
oviposition preference and specificity among females from populations that are
oligophagous. The oviposition preference and specificity trials will show the
geographic pattern for variation in oviposition preference and specificity among
females tested. Objective 2 will take advantage of molecular techniques to
analyze mitochondrial DNA and allozyme variation and construct a phylogeny of
host use the same populations used in objective 1. In objective 3 the same
techniques will be used to show the number of times a novel host (fennel,
Foeniculum vulgare) has been colonized, and the extent to which fennel-feeding
populations have diverged from native host populations. Together, these 3
objectives will provide a better understanding of how phylogeny and geography
interact to produce regional patterns of host specificity in phytophagous
insects.