* 9016873
* Strengthening and Repair of Nonductile Reinforced           Concrete Frames Using External Steel Jackets and Plates     (Collaborative Research)
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1995
* Loring Wyllie, Degenkolb Engineers
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 02/28/1995
* USD 34,722.00

This project is supported under NSF Announcement NO. 90-23, "Repair and
Rehabilitation Research for Seismic Resistance of Structures." The need to
strengthen existing buildings with inadequate seismic resistance is an urgent
problem in the field of earthquake engineering. A major class of existing
structures identified as posing one of the greatest seismic hazards are
nonductile concrete frames. A number of strengthening techniques for concrete
frames include addition of structural walls, addition of steel bracing, and
enlarging of columns and beams using reinforced concrete jackets. An alternative
approach to concrete jackets is the use of external steel jackets and plates
attached to the existing members. Steel jackets may offer significant advantages
of reduced labor, reduced cost, and reduced disruption to existing facilities,
as compare to the use of concrete jackets. The proposed research program will
investigate critical issues associated with the use of external steel jackets
and plates for strengthening nonductile concrete frames. The project consists of
a number of interrelated tests, divided into three major phases: I - behavior of
steel-to-concrete connections; II - behavior of individual members strengthened
with steel jackets; and III - behavior of beam-column subassemblages
strengthened with steel jackets. The overall objective of the project is to
develop design guidelines for the effective implementation of steel jackets as a
strengthening and repair technique. This project is one part of a collaborative
research activity involving an academic institution and two professional
engineering offices in a common effort to implement research results into
practice.