* 9016850
* U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar:  Molecular Biology of Marine      Invertebrate Development/April,1991/Honolulu, Hawaii
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1991,11/30/1991
* Fred Wilt, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Alexander P. DeAngelis
* 11/30/1991
* USD 12,834.00

This award provides support for the participation of eight US scientists in a
joint US-Japan seminar on "Molecular Biology of Marine Invertebrate
Development". In the last 15 years, primarily through advances in the field of
molecular biology, considerable progress has been made in our basic
understanding of the major issues involved in development. The study of marine
invertebrate embryos has played an important role in this progress by providing
a good model for analyzing the fundamental problems of development. For example,
sperm-egg interactions in general and fertilization in particular have always
been areas where marine invertebrate research has lead the way. Another area of
immense importance is how genes preside over the complex process of
morphogenesis, and the accessibility of marine embryos makes them a particularly
favorable material for the study of this process. Development- al biology of
marine invertebrates has been a traditionally active field of research in both
the US and Japan since the beginning of this century and this seminar should
therefore provide an excellent forum for researchers in the two countries to
compare results and discuss future research in this area. The seminar is to be
held on April 3-6 1991 at the Kewalo Marine Laboratory of the University of
Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii. The co-organizers are Professor Fred H Wilt, Molecular
cell biology unit, University of California, Berkeley, and Professor Hiraku
Shimada, Department of Zoology, Hiroshima University, Japan. Specific topics to
be discussed at the seminar will concentrate on cell-cell interactions including
(1) the biology of cell-environmental interactions; (2) the molecular biology of
morphogenesis; and (3) specific gene expression. The seminar is especially
timely as the last seminar in this topic, between these two countries, was held
ten years ago and enormous advances have been achieved since that time. It is
expected that ongoing collaborative projects and exchanges of scientists will
occur as a result of this seminar.