* 9016146
* Dissertation Research: Genetic Basis of Flowering Date in   Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1991,07/31/1993
* Thomas Mitchell-Olds, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 07/31/1993
* USD 10,000.00

Life history characters such as fecundity and age at first reproduction, are
closely related to the ultimate survival and reproductive ability of plants.
Life history traits are directly affected by artificial and natural selection
and are therefore of particular concern for both plants breeders and
evolutionary biologists alike. The expression of these traits is thought to be
the result of many genes of small effect (quantitative trait loci or QTLs).
Predictions about the rate and direction of evolutionary change depend on the
number of segregating QTLs and the magnitude of their effects. The actual number
of QTLs involved in quantitative variation, and the importance and prevalence of
QTLs of large effect is still virtually unknown. Methods based on statistical
theory have been used to estimate the minimum number of QTLs influencing a
trait, and the relative magnitude of their effects, but these methods lack
precision. In contrast, techniques of molecular biology and classical
quantitative genetics provide a powerful means of estimating the minimum number
of QTLs and their relative effects. This study will use genetic markers in
Arabidopsis thaliana to answer the following questions: 1) How many QTLs control
the timing of flowering? 2) Are there genes of large effect? 3) Do interactions
between flowering time and other characters important to plant survival prevent
genes of large effect from being important in the evolution of flowering time?
Arabidopsis is the ideal organism for this study because the existing map is
extraordinarily complete. The existence of naturally occurring inbred lines
greatly simplifies statistical analyses. These techniques have been used with
success in marker-aided selection programs for economically important traits in
a few crop plants. They are powerful tools in genetic improvement programs, as
well as for addressing fundamental evolutionary and genetic questions. However,
these techniques have not been applied to natural plant populations. This work
will provide some of the first data on the number of genes and the magnitude of
genetic effects within species.