* 9016752
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Metallic Superlattices    with Artificial Superstructures
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1991,04/30/1994
* Charles Falco, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Alexander P. DeAngelis
* 04/30/1994
* USD 20,364.00

This award will support a two year cooperative research project between
Professor Charles M Falco, Department of Physics, University of Arizona and
Professor Teruya Shinjo, Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University,
Japan. The project will involve the experimental study of several interesting
physical properties of artificial multilayers consisting of metallic elements.
Artificial multilayers are new materials which do not exist in nature. As such
there are a number of unusual, and potentially useful, physical phenomena
exhibited by these materials including, for example, magnetic excitations,
perpendicular magnetic anisotropy, dimensionality crossover effects, and unusual
magneto-optic properties. The particular physical properties to be studied
include perpendicular magnetization in ultrathin magnetic layers, giant
magnetoresistance of ferromagnetic multilayers, and lattice dynamics and elastic
properties of epitaxial multilayers. A variety of techniques available in
Arizona and Kyoto will be used to characterize these materials including x-ray
diffraction, Brillouin light scattering, superconducting measurements and a
variety of surface science probes. The materials themselves will be prepared by
alternately depositing two elements using vacuum deposition and sputtering
techniques. The expertise of the US and Japanese scientists is complemen- tary.
Professor Falco is an expert in the structural and electronic properties of thin
films and superlattices, while Professor Shinjo is an expert on the magnetic
properties, particularly the Mossbauer spectroscopy, of these systems. The study
of artificially prepared multilayers is considered to be among the frontier
topics in solid state physics research and the results of this collaboration
will be of great scientific interest. It is expected that the collabor- ation
will generate new data that will improve our under- standing of the magnetic
properties of metallic superlattices which may lead to new systems for magnetic
storage applicat- tions.