* 9016958
* U.S.-France (INRIA) Cooperative Research:  Specifying and   Finding Solutions to Constraint and Search Problems
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1994
* Nachum Dershowitz, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 11/30/1994
* USD 14,350.00

This award will support collaborative research between US and French computer
scientists. The US investigators are: Dr. C.L. Liu, Dr. Edward M. Reingold and
Dr. Nachum Dershowitz, all from the University of Illinois at Urbana. The French
collaborators include: Dr. Rene Schott, University of Nancy and Claude Kirchner
and Michael Rusinowitch, of the Lorraine campus of INRIA, the French National
Institute for Research in Computer Science and Automation. The research will
focus on algorithmic solution of restraints and the design and analysis of
search algorithms. The task of designing algorithms for finding optimal or near-
optimal solutions to problems as a set of constraints has received added impetus
from needs engendered by advances in VLSI circuit design. At the same time, some
modern programming languages (e.g. Prolog) can be viewed as systems that search
for solutions to programs specified as sets of constraints. With parallel
computers, new issues in constraint solving have arisen. Furthermore, future
programming environments may contain built in theorem provers and constraint
solvers. Techniques for analyzing search algorithms need to be developed. This
project will address two major areas in VSLI research. In the design and
synthesis area, most of the effort in the short term future will be devoted to
research in physical design. In the long term, the investigators will build up
their effort in the area of higher level synthesis, in particular, working on
topics such as logic minimization, module generation and state assignment. The
project will benefit from the extensive and the complementary expertise of the
two groups in the physical design of integrated circuits. The problems to be
considered will have important applications to very large scale integration,
very high level programming languages, automated deduction and design of
efficient search and constraint-solution algorithms. The results of the
theoretical work will have a direct benefit to our ability to design the wiring
and placement of multichip modules, a very important concept which is being
exploited by US electronics firms.