* 9016682
* Stereoselectivity in Electron Transfer
* NONE,NONE
* 12/15/1990,05/31/1994
* A. Graham Lappin, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* John Gilje
* 05/31/1994
* USD 243,400.00

In this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Lappin will continue his studies of chiral
induction in electron transfer reactions between metal ion complexes. This is a
relatively new field that has become an international endeavor and is attracting
increasing attention from the chemical community. While it is a very basic
research area, potential applications of the results in the design and
manufacture of pharmaceuticals are possible. The principal goal of the project
will be the provision of further details on the origins and interpretation of
stereoselectivity. The relationship between chiral induction in outer-sphere
reactions and chiral recognition in ion pairs formed as intermediates along the
reaction coordinate will be explored. Besides kinetic studies and product
analysis, the work will use NMR methods to investigate weak interactions between
ions in solution to obtain structural information. A second aspect involves
ligands of biological importance - amino acids and oligopeptides - and will
focus on the additive effects of chiral substituents on ligand structure.
Experiments with cyclodextrins will be initiated. The final portion of the work
will exploit recent success in the detection of stereoselectivity in inner-
sphere reactions.