* 9016112
* The Ohio State Infrared Imaging System:  A Survey of        Galaxies and Regions of Star Formation
* MPS,AST
* 01/15/1991,08/31/1993
* Paul Byard, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Van Citters
* 08/31/1993
* USD 296,400.00

A 1-2.5 micron wavelength imaging system will be constructed to carry out two
major research programs: a study of the morphology and stellar content of
galaxies and a determination of the stellar initial mass function in regions of
star formation with a wide range of physical characteristics. The instrument
will be based on a Rockwell 256 x 256 HgCdTe array and be used on the Ohio
State/Lowell Observatory 1.8-m telescope in Flagstaff, Arizona. A plate scale of
1.6 arcsec per pixel and a grism with a resolving power of 240 will give the
instrument two unique characteristics: a large - 7 arcmin - field of view
combined with high quantum efficiency (QE), and a slit length of equal size for
low resolution spectroscopy. These characteristics combined with the
availability of long blocks of observing time, will allow the researchers at
Ohio State to carry out large scale survey programs to a level of sensitivity
that would be otherwise impossible. The first of the two major undertakings will
be the compilation of a multi-color near infrared (IR) atlas of normal galaxies
of all types. The near IR light, which closely tracks the mass distribution, is
expected to reveal structures not visible optically. The study of dark clouds
and regions of star formation represents the first time a complete survey over a
range of cloud masses will be obtained and will establish, for example, how the
stellar initial mass function varies with environment.