* 9016860
* Resonance Raman Studies of Electron-nuclear Coupling, Time  Resolved Dynamics and Magnetic Perturbations of Biomolecules
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/1991,09/30/1994
* Paul Champion, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 09/30/1994
* USD 294,000.00

The proposed research utilizes resonance Raman and Rayleigh scattering to probe
the electronic and nuclear structure/function relationships of biological
molecules such as the heme proteins (myoglobin, hemoglobin and cytochrome c).
Related techniques, such as electronic absorption and far infrared spectroscopy,
are also utilized and theoretical relationship that link a variety of
experimental measurements are developed. Further experimental and theoretical
studies involving the spectroscopic and kinetic effects of protein
conformational distributions are also proposed. Dynamic studies will include the
measurement and analysis of ligand binding to heme proteins under a wide variety
of sample conditions as well as pump/probe experiments designed to monitor
protein folding and conformational relaxation. Laser mediated thermal
perturbations will be followed using Stokes/anti-Stokes Raman scattering.
Studies of photon induced electron transport kinetics as well as resonance Raman
saturation studies are also proposed. Resonance Raman and kinetic studies of
biological Single crystals will also be extended. Overall the objectives are to
achieve a better understanding of the resonant light scattering properties of
biological molecules and to apply this knowledge to the elucidation of their
mechanism of action. These studies are significant not only in their
relationship to the biological sciences, but also in their connection to the
understanding of basic light-matter interactions.