* 9016832
* Reactive Radionuclides in the Eastern North Atlantic:  JointGlobal Flux Study
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1992
* J. Kirk Cochran, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 09/30/1992
* USD 112,528.00

Reactive Radionuclides in the Eastern North Atlantic, Joint Global Ocean Flux
Study This proposal requests renewed funding for a study of spatial variations
in the distributions and particulate fluxes of a suite of naturally occurring
radioactive nuclides, which was initiated as part of the North Atlantic Bloom
Experiment of the Joint Global Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS). The radionuclides that
are being measured serve as ocean tracers that can yield fundamental information
about the rates of biogeochemical processes that govern the scavenging of
reactive chemical species and the fate of biogenic particles in the oceanic
water column. The study is designed to test the hypothesis that the uptake and
release of soluble chemical species by particulate matter and the formation and
destruction of particle aggregates in the oceanic water column occur at rates
that vary both spatially and temporally in response to variations in the rate of
plankton production at the sea surface and the flux of organic matter leaving
the surface layer. The data will be interpreted within the context of biological
rate measurements and other data that are being collected within the
international JGOFS program and will be used to test biogeochemical models. This
study is expected to contribute to a better understanding of particle fluxes and
dynamics in the ocean, issues that are of broad concern to marine chemistry,
biology and geology. //