* 9016468
* Uses and Simulation of Randomness: Applications to          Cryptography,Program Checking and Counting Problems.
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1993
* Michael Luby, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Dana May Latch
* 08/31/1993
* USD 63,462.00

Randomized algorithms consume a valuable resource: uniformly distributed random
bits. One of the primary focuses of this work is to develop general techniques
for designing algorithms which do not use as many random bits. A pseudo-random
generator stretches a short random string into a much longer string that looks
totally random to any polynomial time adversary. A pseudo-random generator is
the central component in a secure private key cryptosystem, and can be used to
conserve on the number of random bits used by Monte Carlo algorithms. Having
shown how to construct a pseudo-random generator from any one way function, the
investigator plans to develop constructions for even more efficient pseudo-
random generators. A typical and important example of a counting problem is to
estimate the number of truth assignments that satisfy a given boolean formula. A
polynomial time randomized algorithm has been designed for this problem, and a
polynomial time deterministic algorithm will be sought. Recently, the theory of
program checking has developed which is a useful supplement to program
verification and program testing. This theory, which provides a way of computing
a function f and verifying the correctness of the answer using a possibly
partially faulty program P that supposedly computes f. This theory, which has
been successfully applied to a variety of algebraic problems, will be extended
to other applications. //