* 9016645
* Dissertation Research:  Archaeology of Hawaiian Ceremonial  Architecture
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1990,08/31/1991
* NONE NONE, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 08/31/1991
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Timothy Earle, Professor of Anthropology at the
University of California, Los Angeles, Mr. Michael Kolb will collect data for
his doctoral dissertation thesis. In a first stage of this process, Mr. Kolb has
collected excavation and survey data on "heiau", impressive prehistoric stone
structures located on the island of Maui, Hawaii. Heiau were the scene of
religious and political ceremonies which integrated ancient Hawaiian life and
were important indicators of a community's political and economic role through
time. Although these structures have been known to exist for many years, very
little archaeological work has been done on them, and they are not well dated.
During his excavation of seven of these structures, Mr. Kolb collected charcoal
as well as volcanic glass. Both are amenable to absolute dating, the first by
radiocarbon determination, the second by measurement of the hydration rim which
develops over time. Prehistorically, Hawaii achieved a chiefly level of society,
and islands such as Maui were divided into a number of independent competing
polities. Each centered on a heiau. Therefore, by understanding the construction
sequence of individual structures and determining its size and number of man-
hours involved in building each, it is possible to reconstruct, in general
outline, the political prehistory of the island. To accomplish this, however,
very careful age determinations are necessary and to this end samples will be
radiocarbon and obsidian hydration dated. This research is important for several
reasons. It will increase our understanding of how complex chiefly level
societies emerge and interact with each other. It will provide much needed
information on Hawaiian prehistory and will assist in the training of an
extremely promising young scientist.