* 9016724
* Collection Support for Invertebrate Paleontology at the     Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1991,09/30/1995
* Gary Rosenberg, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* None
* 09/30/1995
* USD 151,364.00

The collection of invertebrate fossils in the Academy of Natural Sciences,
Philadelphia includes 4,000 type specimens and one million specimens in 104,000
lots, half of which are currently cataloged. The collection is composed
predominantly of Tertiary molluscs from eastern North America, and includes
historically important collections. Prior NSF support has initiated the process
of rearranging the collection from stratigraphic to systematic order,
sequestration of types, and computerization of all lots. Dr. Gary Rosenberg,
Curator of the collection, is now embarking on the first phase of a ten-year
plan to computerize the type specimens as well as the systematic collections.
Type specimens will be photographed and analyzed from a conservation perspective
and remedial actions taken to halt deterioration. A type catalog will be
published in the Academy's malacological journal Tyronia. The proposed
curatorial improvements will benefit a wide audience of paleontologists,
malacologists, ecologists, and biogeographers. The proposed improvements will
reverse the effects of prior neglect, and will make this valuable research
resource easily accessible to investigators. Systematic collections of fossils
may prove to be the most valuable tool for gauging the rate of extinction and
environmental change on Earth, and the proper care of these collections is
critical to future generations of researchers.