* 9016445
* Dissertation Research:  Predator-Prey Interactions Between  Fish and Drifting Invertebrates in Streams
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1991,07/31/1993
* Peter Sale, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 07/31/1993
* USD 15,000.00

This dissertation improvement award is for a project to test effects of fish
predation on the structure of benthic invertebrate communities in streams.
Direct and indirect effects of predatory fish on invertebrate behavior and on
dispersal are the major components of this research. Field sampling will provide
background information on relationships between the distributions of fish,
drifting and benthic invertebrates. Field manipulation of fish density in
enclosed sections of stream will test effects of fish on drift behaviour and
dispersal. A further manipulation will test the effect of fish on benthic
community composition in the absence of replenishment by drift from upstream.
Experiments in a laboratory stream will test hypotheses about behavioural
interactions between fish and invertebrates. These interactions will be filmed
and recorded on video cassette for analysis. Researchers will investigate
details of the predatory behaviour of fishes in the context of their effect on
invertebrate behaviour. In addition, the research will test behavioural
responses of invertebrates in the benthos and drift to fish and the cues used by
invertebrates to detest the presence of fish. The research will contribute to
the conceptual basis of stream ecology and to the information base useful in
stream fisheries management.