* 9016577
* Bioinorganic Chemistry Winter School, Madras, India,        December 9-15, 1990, Group Travel Award in U.S. and Indian  Currencies.
* O/D,OISE
* 11/15/1990,11/30/1991
* David Dooley, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 11/30/1991
* USD 24,700.00

Description: This project supports participation by eight U.S. scientists in a
seminar and workshop on " Bioinorganic Chemistry" to be held in Madras, India,
December 9 to 15, 1990. The Indian organizing committee is chaired by Dr.P.T.
Monaharan of The Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) in Madras. Several
participants are expected from the U.K., the FRG, and the U.S.S.R. The topics to
be covered will include: the role of metal ions in biology; reaction mechanisms;
optical, magnetic and catalytic properties of metal-ion containing systems;
proteins, enzymes, ion transport; enzymes containing zinc, cobalt; vitamin B12
and B12 coenzymes; iron heme proteins; oxygenases, peroxidases, catalyses,
cytochromes; chlorophylls and photosynthesis; non-heme iron proteins; iron
transfer, electro transfer, electron transport proteins; molybdenum proteins and
nitrogen fixation; nitrogenase, xanthine oxidases, dehydrogenases, sulphite
aldehyde oxidases; copper proteins; construction of model system metal-
containing sites; and applications in medicine. Scope: The area of the workshop
is an important subdiscipline of chemistry which is gaining increasing attention
in the developed countries but which is relatively new to developing countries.
The Government of India, Department of Science and Technology is attempting to
stimulate interest and to increase education and research activities in the
field partially through the sponsoring of this workshop. Indian young
researchers with potential for work in this area will be exposed to and will
interact with senior Indian scientists and world leaders in the field through
lectures and discussion sessions. The U.S. side will benefit by the interaction
with European and Indian scientists and by identifying potential collaborators
from India.