* 9016100
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Rewriting and Rule-      Completion Techniques for Horn Theories with Equality
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1991,10/31/1993
* Hantao Zhang, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 10/31/1993
* USD 5,410.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Hantao Zhang,
Department of Computer Science, University of Iowa, and Drs. Emmanuel Kounalis
and Michael Rusinowitch, Centre de Recherche en Informatique de Nancy (CRIN),
France. The objective of the project is to justify good techniques to be used in
Logic Programming for handling the equality relation. Horn Logic, a restriction
of first order logic, has provided a most useful logical basis for many
applications in computer science, for example, expert systems, database systems,
algebraic specifications, logic programming, and symbolic calculus. In many
applications of Horn Logic, it is important to incorporate the equality relation
into the logic. Because Horn clauses will be interpreted as conditional rewrite
rules and rewriting techniques will be used to handle the equality relation, the
investigators in this project propose to carry out theoretical research to study
different rewriting and completion techniques. The results of the study will be
implemented in a software system called RRL (the Rewrite Rule Laboratory), a
theorem prover for experimenting with and developing new automated reasoning
procedures based on rewrite methods. RRL has been successfully used for solving
problems often considered a challenge for mechanized theorem provers, including
significant applications in verification and specification of hardware and
software. The focus of this project will be to implement in RRL a Prolog-like
interpreter and to experiment with different rewriting techniques. Further
investigations will also be conducted on methods for analyzing structural
properties of logic programs, such as consistency, termination and definitional
completeness and for computing in incompletely specified logic programs. The
project will benefit from the complementary expertise of the US and French
investigators in symbolic computation.