* 9016301
* Reduced Phonon Dimensionality of Superconductivity in       Mesoscopic Scale Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1995
* Michael Isaacson, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 06/30/1995
* USD 210,000.00

This project describes a new approach to study micro- and nano- fabricated
structures whose physical dimensions new effects originating because the
wavelength of the quantum excitations have dimensions of the order of the
physical structures involved. By exploiting the ability to fabricate free-
standing metallic microstructures with dimensions as small as 25 nm, it is
possible to decouple these microstructures from the bulk phonons emanating from
the substrate. This permits the phonon density of states to be controlled
systematically, and thus provides a unique opportunity to study the electrical
and lattice properties of low dimensional systems. The consequences of low
phonon dimensionality on the electron-phonon interaction will be investigated by
measurements of electron inelastic scattering and thermal transport properties
of the electron gas. Interference properties of superconductors will also be
studied using materials prepared by a similar fabrication process. This should
allow the injection of quasiparticles into the superconductor, as well as
superconducting pairs into the adjacent normal metal. This can be done with a
spatial resolution smaller than the coherence length, thus providing a route to
"imaging" proximity effects in junctions and, possibly, providing a
determination of the relation between superconducting transition temperatures
and characteristic lengths in materials.