* 9016477
* A Model International Engineering Exchange Program:         MSU/RWTH-Aachen, and Kaiserslautern
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1997
* John McGrath, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Alexander Garris, Jr.
* 06/30/1997
* USD 244,145.00

This project supports a three year program. This program may serve as a model
for future programs to be considered by the National Science Foundation (NSF).
This project includes a of undergraduate and graduate level international
engineering exchange and research program between the Mechanical Engineering and
Chemical Engineering Departments at Michigan State University (MSU) and the
technical universities (Rheinisch Westfalische Hochschule (RWTH) in Aachen,
Germany and the University of Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germay. The
project supports an international engineering exchange program within the
National Science Foundation- enhancing NSF efforts in the direction of
mechanical and chemical engineering. This project represents an opportunity to
invest in the up-grading of an established program with an unusually strong
balance between instruction and research components that goes beyond the
traditional research-only or intstuction- only exchange programs. NSF support is
provided for a three-phase program. Phase I involves strengthening the
undergraduate component of an existing program. Phase II encourages and involves
short term collaborative research projects which will explore and develop the
bases for long-term, in-depth collaborative research projects involving MSU and
faculty at Aachen and Kaiserslautern. Successful Phase II projects will be used
as the basis for submitting regular research proposals for Phase III funding
which will support multi-year, full-scale collaborative research projects. It is
anticipated that German academies will also seek appropriate support from their
indigenous funding sources for these efforts. In a supplementary portion of this
project, the program will provide partial support for initiating the development
and implementation of a few engineering courses taught in German at Michigan
State University, and some faculty support to administration and further develop
this program.