* 9016174
* SGER:  New Approaches to Modelling the Interaction of       Plants, Fungi and Bacteria in the Soil Environment
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1991
* Craig Liddell, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 12/31/1991
* USD 39,689.00

Fractal geometery permits the description of many complex natural phenomena
using a few relatively simple equations. At least three methods to generate
fractal models have been developed to the degree that they can be applied to
biological questions of ecological significance: fractal set theory, iterated
function systems (IFS), and Lindenmayer systems (L- systems). Plant roots, fungi
and soil pore spaces all have fractal properties; hence fractal methods appear
to be suitable for the study of interactions between plant roots, the soil and
soil microorganisms. The aim of the proposed research it to develop methods for
modelling these interactions, to facilitate research into the plant root-soil
ecosystem. Work in progress at the P.I.'s laboratory has shown the common
species of soil fungi have patterns of mycelial branching that are fractal, and
that these patterns can be modelled for up to 5 days after spore germination
using L-systems. L-systems appear to work equally well for geometrically simple
root systems, such as those of pea. These methods will be extended to other
systems, and methods for modelling of the interaction between roots and soil
microorganisms that are based on fractal representation will be developed. The
methods will be tested by comparing them to laboratory measurements of fungus-
root interactions. These type on interactions are broadly important in virtually
all terrestrial environments, including many endangered habitats.