* 9016605
* High Energy Physics Phenomenology II, Workshop, Calcutta,   India, January 2-15, 1991, Group Travel Award in Indian     currency.
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1990,11/30/1991
* Rabindra Mohapatra, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 11/30/1991
* USD 31,500.00

Description: This project supports travel of ten U.S. physicists to a "Workshop
in High Energy Physics Phenomenalogy II" planned for January 2-15, 1991 in
Culcutta, India. The organizer is Dr. P. Majumdar of the S.N. Bose National
Centre for Basic Sciences in Culcutta. Topics will include 1. Structure
functions at low X, polarized structure functions, and higher order QCD
contributions for jets, W, Z and heavy flavour production; 2. Low energy weak
interactions (hedronic matrix elements, B- Physics); 3. New particle search; and
4. Electro - weak radiative corrections to electro - weak processes and 2 W
physics. Participation will include scientists from India, the U.S., U.K.,
Germany, France, Switzerland, Sweden, Japan, Austria, and Poland. Much of the
presentations will cover theoretical research, with experimental work
contributed by four Indian and a number of European and U.S. scientists. The
meeting will include three days of presentations to be followed by one week of
separate working groups on specific subtopics under group leaders. The group
leaders will present the results on the final day of the workshop. Scope: This
is the second such workshop. The first was held in January 1989 at Tata
Institute of Fundamental Research in Bombay which resulted in proceedings
published by World Scientific. The two week intensive interaction between senior
visiting scientists and young Indian scientists is expected to lead to emerging
new ideas and new results for expanding the present knowledge of basic science.
It is also likey that future collaboration would result from this interaction.