* 9016841
* "U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Structural Change and    Vibrational Dynamics Studied by Ultrafast Spectroscopies"
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1991,03/31/1994
* Graham Fleming, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Alexander P. DeAngelis
* 03/31/1994
* USD 17,290.00

This award will support a two-year cooperative research project in chemical
dynamics between two groups at the University of Chicago and two groups at the
Institute for Molecular Science, Okazaki. Professors Graham R. Fleming and
Jeffrey A. Cina will work with Professors Keitaro Yoshihara and Iwao Ohmine and
their associates on studies of chemical dynamics in solution. The studies
combine ultrafast spectroscopy with theory and simulation and are aimed at
building up a detailed understanding of how solvents influence the rate and
outcome of chemical reactions. Such reactions are often modeled as occuring on
simple one- dimensional potential surfaces. The other degrees of freedom - in-
tramolecular vibrations are either modeled statistically or simply ignored. The
roles of the solvent in modifying the potential surface and in influencing
motion along it are generally regarded as distinct ("static" and "dynamic"). The
development of a more realistic description of simple chemical processes such as
photochemical isomerization is hampered by ignorance of vibrational dynamics, of
the true potential surface, and of the various time scales of the solvent
response. The goal of this collaborative project is to combine the experimental
and theoretical strengths of the groups at the U.S. and Japanese institutions to
specifically address these questions. The experimental programs at both Chicago
and Okazaki represent the state of the art. They are complementary in several
ways. The groups at Chicago have developed fluorescence spectroscopy further
than the Okazaki groups, while the Okazaki groups have developed unique
femtosecond studies of clusters. The FSCAR and Raman spectroscopies require
different set-ups and will give complementary information. The use of very large
scale computing to combine electronic structure and dynamical modeling is well
developed at Okazaki and the enormous computing power available there will allow
calculations that could not be contemplated in the United States. It will be of
great value to see how such calculations influence the thinking of
experimentalists. Both the U.S. and the Japanese groups possess great strength
in analytical studies of condensed phase dynamics and again, the exposure to the
large computer calculations in Japan will be most valuable to the American
groups. Finally, as an important part of the project, two U.S. graduate students
will participate in the study, spending time each year in the Japanese
laborator- ies.