* 9016714
* Evaluation of the Strength, Stiffness, and Ductility of     Older Steel Frame Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1990,09/30/1994
* Charles Roeder, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 09/30/1994
* USD 300,000.00

This project is supported under NSF Announcement No. 90-23, "Repair and
Rehabilitation Research for Seismic Resistance of Structures." This project
studies the techniques for repair and strengthening of steel frames. Additional
strength and ductility can be obtained by adding cover plates, welding, or other
relatively unobtrusive techniques that allow strengthening to proceed while most
of the building remains in use. This project is conducted as a joint research
effort between the University of Washington, University of Minnesota, and
Preece, Goudie and Associates with the University of Washington serving as the
coordinating institution. The research addresses the question of the prediction
of the strength, stiffness and ductility of older steel frames through a
combined experimental and analytical study. The objective of this research is
the development of rational methods and guidelines for predicting the seismic
performance of older (as built) steel frames. Emphasis will be placed on the
strength, stiffness, and ductility of the building, and it will focus on the
types of steel structures used in the United States between 1900 and 1950. The
study will provide design engineers with guidance in selecting analytical
procedures for predicting the seismic resistance of these older structures, and
as a result it will lead to economical rehabilitation of older steel structures.