* 9016813
* The Extent and Cause of Earthquake Strong Ground Motion     Variations Measured by SMART-2 Accelerograph Array in Taiwan
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/1991,06/30/1993
* Bruce Bolt, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 06/30/1993
* USD 108,682.00

This action is for support of a new earthquake accelerograph array at Hualien,
Taiwan. This accelerograph (strong ground motion recording) array is referred to
as SMART-2, an acronym for Strong Motion Array in Taiwan, support for the
existing SMART-1 accelerograph array at Lotung, Taiwan. It is also a
continuation of a collaboration with the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the
Electric Power Research Institute in the U.S. and the Institute of Earth
Sciences, Academia Sinica in Taiwan. In this collaboration, the U.S.
institutions were initially the major supporters, but this has progressively
changed until now the major support for this project is provided by the Academia
Sinica. SMART-1 has logged a large number of earthquake strong ground motion
records, which have been used extensively by researchers and practitioners in
the United States. SMART-2 is on harder soil, which is more typical of the
foundation material on which most major structures are erected; thus it promises
to provide strong motion records of even greater value to engineers. As
operation of SMART-1 will continue, it is expected that SMART-1 and SMART-2 will
record the same earthquakes, yielding valuable information on the propagation of
earthquake motions, especially those motions close to the epicenter. The
Institute of Earth Sciences is responsible for purchasing and installing the
digital recorders, preparation of the instrument sites,providing staff for the
SMART-2 operations, and for developing the algorithms used tom process the
strong motion records. The NSF is responsible for (1) helping establish the
dissemination and basic processing of seismic motions recorded by SMART-2, (2)
assisting in the integration of SMART-2 data with that from the smaller scale
three-dimensional array operated by utility engineering groups for studies of
soil- structure interaction; and (3) the initiation of basic research into the
variation of strong ground motion and other ground motion problems treated first
at SMART-1 on "soft" soil.