* 9016743
* U.S-France Cooperative Research:  The Role of Protein       Kinases and Phosphoprotein Phosphatases in Regulation of    Differentiation
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1994
* Robert Dottin, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 09/30/1994
* USD 14,050.00

This award will support collaborative research in developmental biology between
Dr. Robert Dottin, Hunter College, City University of New York, and Dr. Michel
Veron, Pasteur Institute, Paris, France. The objective of the project is to
investigate the mechanisms by which protein kinases and phosphoprotein
phosphatases mediate signal transduction in Dictyostelium. Signal transduction
refers to the process by which extracell- ular stimulatory molecules, such as
peptide hormones, growth factors and neurotransmitters, mediate intracellular
events, such as gene induction. In Dictyostelium discoideum, extracellular cAMP
activates genes by binding to cell surface receptors. Binding of this agonist
activates the synthesis of intracellular messengers. For extracellular cAMP to
induce a Dictyostelium gene, activated nuclear regulatory proteins must interact
with regulatory regions on DNA. Reversible protein phosphorylation is involved
in the activation/inactivation process. Therefore, the two researchers propose
to investigate by a molecular genetic approach the role of protein kinases and
phosphoprotein phosphatases in the induction of genes by extracellular cAMP. Dr.
Veron has focused on the cloning and the expression of the regulatory subunit of
cAMP depended kinase. Dr. Dottin and his research group have identified a large
number of clones encoding the catalytic subunit of different protein kinases and
phosphoprotein phosphatases. Together they propose to characterize these clones
to ascertain their potential roles in these signal transduction pathways. These
studies will help to define a fundamental process, the mechanisms by which cells
respond to their extracellular environments.