* 9016589
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Application of Neogene    Molluscs and Ostracodes to Paleoclimatology of the Pacific, Atlantic and Arctic Oceans
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1994
* Joseph Hazel, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander P. DeAngelis
* 03/31/1994
* USD 18,250.00

This award provides support for a two year cooperative research project between
a group from the Department of Geology and Geophysics, Louisiana State
University, Baton Rouge, led by Professor Joseph E Hazel, and a group from the
Institute of Geosciences, Shizuoka University, Japan, led by Professor Noriyuki
Ikeya. The objectives of the project are to conduct taxonomic and zoogeographic
studies of temperature- sensitive circumpolar ostracode and molluscan clades for
application to the study of Pilocene climatic changes. Paleontologic analysis of
climatically sensitive organisms is a valuable tool for quantitative study of
paleoclimatic change. This project will investigate molluscs and ostracodes from
middle and high latitude regions of Japan, Alaska, and eastern North America
during the Pilocene, when a global climatic change occurred about 3.0 million
years ago. Taxonomic and zoogeographic study of diagnostic species will be
applied to shallow marine paleoclimatology of the North Pacific, Atlantic and
Arctic Oceans before, during and after this climatic deterioration began.
Molluscs and ostracodes have potential for reconstructing marine environments in
general and are of particular value in cold shallow marine realms where plantik
organisms are rare or absent. There application to paleoclimatology has been
limited however by inadequate taxonomic, ecologic and zoographic study of
circumpolar Arctic/Subarctic species. This project aims to overcome these
limitations, and make molluscs and ostracodes more applicable to shallow marine
paleoclimatology. Both the US and the Japanese researchers involved in the
project have good track records in their fields, particularly in the areas of
ostracode taxonomy and the paleoclimatic inferences that can be drawn from
changes in assemblages through time. This project should hopefully lead to a
better understanding of climatic history in high latitudes, which should lead to
a better understanding of climatic processes in general.