* 9016721
* Physical Forcing of Spatially Distributed, Meroplanktonic   Populations/GLOBEC
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1991,09/30/1994
* James Quinn, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/1994
* USD 399,977.00

Dr. Botsford and collaborators will model and analyze the dynamic effects of
spatially and temporally varying physical oceanographic conditions on spatially
distributed, meroplanktonic marine populations with age or size structure and
density- dependent recruitment. They will examine the effects of both: (1) large
scale physical forcing on transport and survival between sub-populations during
the planktonic larval stage, and (2) small scale physical forcing on life
history rates in local sub-populations. Population behavior will be
characterized in terms of persistence, stability, sensitivity to environmental
variability, and spatial synchrony. These investigators will use their models
and the results of their analyses to project changes in these populations due to
projected changes in global climate. As specific examples for which to make
these projections, they will focus on the Dungeness crab (Cancer magister) and
the feeding interaction between sea urchins (Strongylocentrotus spp.) and
macroalgae (Nereocystis leutkeana, Macrocystis pyrifera) in the California
Current System. For these systems they will model larval transport based on
idealized flows and small scale benthic flows computed from wave energy.
Potential future changes in the physical environment will include changes in the
level of upwelling and the frequency and magnitude of ENSO events.