* 9016078
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Interstellar Clouds and  Circumstellar Matter
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1995
* William Langer, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 09/30/1995
* USD 14,000.00

This award will support collaborative research in astronomy between Drs. Alfred
Glassgold, W. D. Langer and P. J. Huggins, New York University and Dr. A. O.
Omont, Institute for Astrophysics, Paris, France. The investigators propose a
joint program to investigate interstellar clouds and circumst- ellar matter,
which will focus in three areas: circumsteller chemistry, multifrequency studies
of the physical properties of interstellar clouds, and planetary nebulae. Part
one of the project seeks to elucidate the physical and dynamical properties of
nearby interstellar clouds by complementary observations with radio telescopes
in the US and France. Part two involves further significant development of the
photochemical model for the circumstellar envelopes of red giants with large
mass-loss rates. The last part of the program deals with observations of the
molecular component of planetary nebulae, mainly with the IRAM 30 millimeter
wave telescope. The objective is to elucidate the evolutionary properties of
planetary nebulae, particularly their connection with red giant envelopes and
the structure of ionized nebulae. The use of the French-German IRAM telescope
will make available observations of circumstellar envelopes, including planetary
nebulae, that cannot be obtained with instrumentation now available in the US.
The project will benefit from the extensive and complementary expertise of the
US and French investigators in the areas of interstellar clouds and
circumstellar matter. The results of this research are expected to advance
significantly the understanding of several important aspects of the late stages
of stellar evolution.