* 9016913
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Chemical Reactions of     Microclusters in Gas Phase and Interaction with Surfaces
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1994
* Mark Johnson, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander P. DeAngelis
* 03/31/1994
* USD 20,506.00

This award will support a two-year cooperative research project in physical
chemistry between Professor Mark A. Johnson of Yale University and Professor
Tamotsu Kondow of the University of Tokyo. They will collaborate on research
into "Chemical Reactions of Microclusters in Gas Phase and Interaction with
Surfaces." Over the past five years, physical chemists have become increasingly
interested in molecular clusters as a tool to learn about the molecular aspects
of condensed phase behavior. Professor Johnson's group at Yale has developed
methods based on mass spectrometry to isolate a specific number of solvent
molecules around a solute molecule or reaction complex in order to study the
size dependence of bimolecular and photo-initiated chemical processes. A
particularly interesting solute "anion" is the free electron itself, which has
been studied through the accommodation of an excess charge by a collection of
closed shell species. The behavior of excess charges in polar media is of
primary interest in radiation chemistry and is presently a focal point for
experimental tests of current theories. In previous work, the Yale group has
discovered that several homogeneous systems possess strong absorptions near the
binding energy of the excess electron, and that the excitation of these
absorptions leads to fragmentation of the cluster rather than ejection of the
electron. Excitation near the binding energy means that the ejected electron
would have very low kinetic energy and apparently cannot escape. In Japan,
meanwhile, Professor Kondow has been looking at the microscopic reverse process,
the propensity of slow electrons to stick onto closed shell neutral clusters. He
has found that the slow electrons are efficiently attached to create a
negatively charged clusterion. It is likely that the two groups are carrying out
complementary probes of the same essential physics and the goal of the
cooperative project is to bring their efforts together to find a unified
description of these phenomena.