* 9016235
* Ion Acoustic Wave Turbulence in Ionospheric Plasmas
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/1991,05/31/1993
* Min-Chang Lee, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 05/31/1993
* USD 107,755.00

This study will investigate a source mechanism generating ion acoustic wave
turbulence in the topside ionosphere that can cause strong backscatter radar
echoes leading to false satellite detection signals. Theoretical investigation
of the problem will be conducted at MIT, while field experiments are planned at
the Arecibo Observatory to simulate the ionospheric conditions for the
generations of ion acoustic wave turbulence. The proposed source mechanism is a
nonlinear mode coupling process whereby Langmuir waves induced by particle
precipitation can interact nonlinearly to produce ion acoustic mode waves.
Detailed formulation of this nonlinear interaction process will be carried out,
incorporating realistic energy spectra of high particles with a numerical
analysis. In the simulation experiments at Arecibo, the VLF waves induced in the
ionosphere by the HF heater are expected to cause the pitch angle scattering of
originally trapped electrons in the radiation belts. These suprathermal
electrons precipitated into the ionosphere along the earth's magnetic field will
form a potential source producing large amplitude ion acoustic waves. Both the
430 MHz and 50 MHz radars will be employed to diagnose the ionoaphere over
Aercibo. The Aercibo experiments will be conducted primarily in the 1991
ionosphere heating campaign for the dedicated research program.