* 9016729
* International Workshop on "Lasers in Science and            Technology," at the University of Jordan in Amman, Jordan,  October, 1991
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1994
* Charles Clark, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/1994
* USD 20,000.00

Description: This project provides partial support for 10 U.S. scientists to
participate in an International Workshop on Lasers in Science and Technology,
scheduled to be held in Amman, Jordan, in October 1991. The topics will involve
laser radiation, and include: basic atomic, molecular and optical physics;
atomic spectroscopy and applications; molecular spectroscopy of systems that are
of importance to physical chemistry, inorganic chemistry, and biochemistry;
laser-induced reactive and non-reactive chemistry, and photochemical processes;
laser chemical analysis, and laser induced ionization and fluorescence; laser-
produced plasmas; laser-surface interaction; small accelerator physics; and
biomedical applications of lasers. In addition to contributed scientific and
technological papers, there will be a small number of talks of general character
to suit the interdisciplinary audience. Participants are expected from the U.S.,
several European countries, India, Pakistan, China, the USSR, and all Arab
countries as well as Iran and Turkey. Proceedings of the workshop will be
published. Scope: The aims of the workshop include: (1) providing a forum for
scientists and researchers from the region to present the results of their
research and to hear from active foreign researchers about their recent work.
(2) working by Arab and other Middle East scientists to plan for a laser
research center with help from the expertise of U.S. and European participants.
and (3) planning for collaboration between the U.S. and Middle East countries.
These aims are well within the goals of the Science in Developing Countries
Program.