* 9016035
* U.S.-Venezuela Cooperative Research on Experimental and     Evolutionary Demography:  An Approach to the Ecology of     Tropical Savanna Communities
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1991,10/31/1995
* Hal Caswell, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 10/31/1995
* USD 8,538.00

This U.S.-Venezuela award will support Professor Hal Caswell of the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution in a research collaboration with Professor Juan Silva
of the Universidad de los Andes in Merida, Venezuela. The investigators intend
to study the way in which the environment, genetics, development, and life
history interact to produce a set of vital rates (i.e., rates of survival,
reproduction, growth, etc.). By incorporating those rates into appropriate
structured population models, mathematical analysis may be used to predict
patterns of population dynamics and the sensitivity of those patterns to changes
in the environment. The researchers plan to collaborate by combining theoretical
population models with an experimental program on tropical savanna plant
populations. The theoretical research will extend statistical tools for
analyzing demographic experiments, develop matrix models for interacting
populations, and incorporate quantitative genetics into models of complex life
histories. The experimental research will address the comparative responses of
annual and perennial savanna plants to environmental disturbance, competitive
interactions among savanna grasses, the evolution of seed dormancy, and the way
these factors combine to determine savanna community structure. This approach to
population dynamics is a most powerful approach to understanding community
patterns, including diversity, stability, and coexistence.