* 9016432
* U.S.-Japan Long-Term Research Visit:  Asian Corporatism in  Comparative Perspective
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1991,04/30/1994
* Dennis McNamara, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cassidy
* 04/30/1994
* USD 57,065.00

This award will facilitate cooperation between Professor Dennis L. McNamara in
the Sociology Department at Georgetown University in Washington, D.C., and
Professor Keiko Imai in the Sociology Department at Sophia University, Tokyo.
The research project will focus on comparative historical methods of the
relationship between governments and the business class in Japan during the
postwar years. This project is an effort to specify differences in comparatist
styles of ties between State and Capital in Japan and South Korea (with other
funding), and their effect on business class formation. Societal corporatism in
Japanese cotton manufacture will be examined. The Research will include focus on
the anti- recession contacts among the Japan (cotton) Spinners Association
(1965-67 and 1977-78) and the development of trade controls against cheaper
imported textiles in the early 1980's. This research may lead to a better
understanding of the institutional relationships that promote the competitive
advantage of business in the Pacific Rim countries. The project represents an
excellent collaboration between the Japanese and U.S. scientists. Professor
McNamara has had considerable relevant field experience that has resulted in a
number of publications. He has a strong foundation in Korean language and area
studies and will be studying intensive Japanese during his visit. Professor Imai
was previously with the Institute of Developing Economies in Japan. She focuses
most of her studies on Latin American development but also has strong
comparative interests and familiarity with both Japan and South Korea. Professor
Imai and the Institute of International Relations in Tokyo will participate in
providing the necessary contacts among leaders in academic business and
government in both Tokyo and Osaka. Professor McNamara will publish, disseminate
and discuss his findings among scholars in the Economy and Society Research
Committee of the International Sociological Association. Furthermore, the study
should provide historians, social scientists, and policy analysts an excellent
forum for discussing models of business/state relations.