* 9016554
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Construction of Large-   Scale Lexical and Textual Database
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1994
* Nancy Ide, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 08/31/1994
* USD 11,845.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Nancy Ide, Vassar
College, and Dr. Jean Veronis, Groupe Representation et Traitement des
Connaissances, French National Center for Scientific Research, Marseille,
France. The objective of the project is the construction of a large- scale
lexical and textual database from machine-readable materials in French and
English, with the goal of extracting information that can be used for automatic
language processing tasks. A number of machine-readable materials in French and
English, including dictionaries in typesetter's format, but also corpora and
other linguistic data, have been acquired by the project and installed at each
site. Software tools have been developed to structure, access and analyze these
data, utilizing compatible hardware and software systems in order to enable
their use in both locations. The project involves three avenues of research: 1)
the structuring of machine readable dictionaries and other linguistics data into
a consistent lexical database, 2) the extraction of machine- usable knowledge
from dictionary definition texts for use in natural language understanding and
generation and 3) the construction of large neural networks from dictionary
texts and experimentation with these networks for language analytic tasks, such
as word sense disambiguation. The project will benefit from the complementary
expertise of the two investi- gators in lexical database and the results of this
research may make a significant contribution to the fields of lexicography and
machine translation.