* 9016779
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Electric Currents in     Complex Active Regions and Their Relation to Solar Flares   and Prominences
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1995
* Gordon Emslie, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 08/31/1995
* USD 13,250.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Marcos Machado,
University of Alabama in Huntsville, and Dr. Brigitte Schmeider, Observatory of
Meudon, Paris, France. The objective of the project is to investigate electric
currents in complex active regions and their relation to solar flare and
prominences. It is widely accepted that solar flares are due to the release of
energy stored in stressed, current carrying magnetic fields. Over the past few
years, it has also become clear that complex field configuration, indicating the
possible interaction between impacted magnetic bipoles, are important to the
trigger of flares, as well as the formation of prominences and their eruption.
Field complexity and particularly energy storage are not yet completely
understood within the context of flare production, but are thought to be linked
to converging and shearing motions observed at photospheric levels and above.
This project will focus on the detection of current buildup, using data from the
Marshall Space Flight Center and Meudon Observatory, as well as proxy indicators
of field line connection in the chromo- sphere and coronal levels. The
investigators will emphasize the link between current buildup and the velocity
field, exploiting the combined capabilities of US and French instruments. In
order to obtain this goal, the observational studies will be linked with
theoretical field calculations under various field conditions to infer the
topology of the coronal field and its response to the current buildup.