* 9016637
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research (Chemistry):  Dynamic       Nuclear Polarization in Carbonaceous Solids
* O/D,OISE
* 11/15/1990,12/31/1993
* Gary Maciel, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 12/31/1993
* USD 26,590.00

This is a two year collaborative project between Gary Maciel of Colorado State
University and Ye Chaohui of the Wuhan Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of
Sciences. It is sponsored jointly by NSF and the Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Research will focus on the continued development and application of dynamic
nuclear polarization (DNP), a powerful electron.spin/nuclear.spin
double.resonance technique that enhances the nuclear spin polarization in
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) experiments on materials containing both
magnetic nuclei and unpaired electrons. DNP is especially important in the
characterization of Chinese and U.S. coals and diamond.like carbon films
prepared in Chinese and U.S. laboratories. For the coal studies, the striking
differences between magnetic resonance properties measured for U.S. and certain
Chinese coals will be examined in depth, and structural models will be explored
for explaining both types of coals and these specific differences. In the
diamond film studies, the nature of "defect" structures will be elucidated and
related to film properties and preparation methods. The unusual field strength
used in the 1.9 T DNP spectrometer in the Wuhan Institute of Physics will
provide a good opportunity for elucidating fundamental details of the DNP
phenomenon in these samples (via the field dependence of DNP properties) and for
establishing the optimum magnetic field for DNP studies of typical carbonaceous
solids.