* 9016647
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Study of Neutron-Proton  Bremsstrahlung
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1991,04/30/1993
* Benjamin Gibson, Los Alamos National Laboratory
* Interagency Agreement
* Rose Gombay
* 04/30/1993
* USD 10,000.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Stephen Wender and
his research group at Los Alamos National Laboratory and Dr. Jean-Alain Pinston
and colleagues at the Institute for Nuclear Science, Grenoble, France. The
investigators propose to measure the neutron-proton bremsstrahlung (NPB) cross
section, using the continuous, high energy neutron source at the Los Alamos
Meson Physics Facility. Data for this reaction are very sparse and some of the
existing data may be in error. This experiment is important for several areas of
nuclear physics. A major goal is to map out the NBP cross section up to 400 MeV
incident neutron energy to investigate meson exchange current. This experiment
will also shed light on the origin of high-energy gamma rays seen in heavy-ion
reactions. The first year will involve measurements of gamma rays using a multi-
element detector. In the second year, the investigators will detect gamma rays
in coincidence with recoil proteins. The final configuration may be a triple
coincidence, with the scattered neutron detected as well. The collaboration with
the Grenoble group is essential because of their knowledge and experience with
multi-element gamma-ray detector arrays. Such detectors are vital because of
their insensitivity to backgrounds.