* 9016019
* U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research:  Competition Between       Microspores Within Tetrads
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1991,09/30/1993
* David Mulcahy, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne E. Hudson
* 09/30/1993
* USD 6,110.00

This award will support Professor David Mulcahy of the University of
Massachusetts in a research collaboration with Professor Mauro Cresti of the
University of Siena, Italy. The investigators intend to study microbial-like
competition among pollen grains. Preliminary data indicate that while
microspores (pollen grains-to-be) are still united in tetrads, they are
competing with each other for resources. The major evidence for such intratetrad
competition is that the deletion of one to three members within the tetrad is
characterized by increases in the size of the viable members. The extent to
which surviving members are able to absorb the resources of aborted members, the
degree to which viable members compete among themselves, and the extent to which
ultrastructural changes may express this competition are some of the topics that
will be addressed by this research. In the angiosperms (and gymnosperms) pollen
represents a microbial-like system of extremely large population and genotypes.
Although pollen comprises a small portion of the angiosperm life cycle, it
expresses, and thus exposes to selection, approximately 60% of all
spirophytically expressed genes. This system is particularly effective in the
angiosperms and may represent a significant contributor to the adaptive
superiority of that group in the world flora. By combining the genetic approach
of the U.S. researcher with the focus on pollen microstructure of the Italian
investigator, this study will not only examine a newly appreciated aspect of
microspore competition, it may also reveal information which could be useful in
using pollen selection to develop plants resistant to agronomically and
ecologically important stresses.