* 9016780
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Integrating a Theorem    Prover and a Specification Environment
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1994
* John Guttag, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 09/30/1994
* USD 12,650.00

This award will support collaborative research in software engineering between
Drs. John Guttag and Stephen Garland, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and
Drs. Michel Bidoit and Christine Choppy, Laboratoire de Recherche Informatique,
University of Paris-Sud, France. The investigators propose a joint project that
will first work on combining Assegigue, a specification environment under
development at the University of Paris-Sud, and LP, a theorem proving system
under development at MIT. They will then experiment with using the combined
system to develop and reason about specifications. There is now widespread
agreement that precise specifications can play a useful role in software
development and maintenance. The most vexing problems in building systems deal
with overall system organizations and the integration of components. Modularity
is the key to controlling this, and specifications are essential for achieving
modularity. Both the US and French research groups have adopted a style of
specification that emphasizes brevity and clarity rather than executability. To
make it possible to test specifications without executing or implementing them,
both groups have developed techniques that enable specifiers to make claims
about logical properties of specifications. However, whereas the French have
centered their research around the technology needed to produce and manage large
scale specifications, the MIT group has centered its research around the
technology needed to check claims about logical properties of specification. By
combining these two complementary research efforts, the investigators plan to
produce a tool that can be used to develop, reason about and manage large-scale
formal specifications of software.