* 9016694
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Formal Verification of    Finite State Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1991,03/31/1994
* Edmund Clarke, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander P. DeAngelis
* 03/31/1994
* USD 19,822.00

This award provides support for a two year research project between Professor
Edmund Clarke, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, and
Professor Hiromi Hiraishi, Department of Information Science, Kyoto University,
Japan. The aim of the project is to investigate formal verification methods for
finite state systems. These systems arise naturally in the design of computer
software and communication protocols, and their correctness is likely to become
an important issue in the future. Recent work has shown that finite systems can
often be verified automatically by constructing and analyzing state-graph models
of system behavior. However these methods rely on decision algorithms which
explicitly construct the state-graph model and because the number of states in a
model may grow exponentially with the number of concurrently executing
components, the complexity of systems that can be verified has been limited.
This research will focus on new techniques which avoid this problem, so that
formal verification can be applied to systems of realistic complexity. A number
of alternative techniques have been proposed. One example is to exploit the
hierarchical structure of the circuit in the verification process. Each
individual component may be verified separately and the results combined to
infer properties of the global behavior of the system. A second approach is to
implement parallel algorithms that will run on supercomputers. Both the US and
Japanese researchers involved in this project have been developing techniques
for detecting these design errors and recent research by both provides strong
evidence that it is possible to develop practical tools for this purpose. The
research skills of the two researchers are complementary and each country has
much to learn from the other about ways of dealing with this problem. If
successful this project should lead to new techniques for automatic design
verification of finite state systems.