* 9016373
* Molecular Analyses of the Population Dynamics and Activity  of a Newly Identified Bacterioplankton Group:  The SAR11    Cluster
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/1991,08/31/1994
* Stephen Giovannoni, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/1994
* USD 373,410.00

Within the past decade it has become evident that bacterioplankton contribute
significantly to biomass and biogeochemical activity in planktonic systems.
Until recently progress in identifying the microbial species which constitute
these communities was slow because the majority of the organisms present (direct
counts) could not be recovered in culture. Recently introduced molecular
techniques are providing the means to study the population dynamics of
uncultivated microbial species. This project is based on molecular data which
demonstrates the existence of a novel microbial group, the SAR11 cluster, and
indicates that this group accounts for about 20% of the non- cyanobacterial
microbial activity in the Sargasso Sea. The SAR11 cluster is a related group of
species which were detected by cloning 16S ribosomal DNA genetic markers from a
natural Sargasso Sea bacterioplankton population. This research will extend
earlier observations by providing time-series and depth profile information on
the distribution of these organisms at the BATS station in the Sargasso Sea,
where they were first observed. The dynamics of seasonal changes in the Sargasso
Sea bacterioplankton community will be measured using specific DNA probes for
the SAR11 cluster (SAR11R) and marine Synechococcus (SYNF), as well as general
probes for eubacterial, eukaryotic and universal small subunit ribosomal RNAs.
The specific goals of the project are: 1) to test the hypothesis that the SAR11
cluster population reaches a numerical maximum during summer stratification; 2)
to test the hypothesis that the SAR11 cluster is distributed widely in the upper
euphotic zone ofoligotrophic oceanic regions; 3) to test the hypothesis that the
distribution of the SAR11 cluster is correlated with aerobic photoheterotrophic
activity; 4) to provide parallel time series information on the distribution of
other planktonic bacterial groups which are being revealed by further genetic
studies nearing completion. The theory that bacterial photoheterotrophy is an
active process in the open ocean can potentially have a dramatic influence on
calculations of carbon flux through the microbial loop. The standing crop of
"heterotrophic" bacterioplankton is too large to be explained form primary
productivity estimates using a standard 0.6 respiratory conversion factor, but
could be better explained using the higher growth efficiencies associated with
photoheterotrophy.