* 9016771
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Infrared Synchrotron     Radiation Studies of Adsorbate-Substrate Vibrations
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1991,05/31/1995
* Gwyn Williams, National Synchrotron Light Source
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 05/31/1995
* USD 13,600.00

This award will support collaborative research in physics between Dr. Gwyn
Williams, Brookhaven National Laboratory and Dr. Paul Dumas, Laboratoire de
Spectrochimie Infrarouge et Raman, Thais, France. The objective of the project
is to study low frequency modes of adsorbates on metal and semiconductor
surfaces. Recent developments in infrared synchrotron radiation sources have led
to the demonstration of their utility as a probe of low frequency absorbate-
substrate vibrational modes. Such low frequency vibrations of adsorbed atoms and
molecules contain direct information on the adsorbate-substrate bond, which
controls the stability, reactivity and mobility of adsorbates. Few techniques
can access these vibrations. Electron Energy Loss spectro-scopy (EELS) has
provided the most abundant information due to its particularly good sensitivity.
However, its resolution has limited its use for line-shape and isotopic shift
studies, as well as for work at higher pressures. In this project, the US and
French investigators will use the new infrared synchrotron radiation facility at
Brookhaven to perform both and EELS studies on surfaces of transition and noble
metals and semiconductors in the low frequency region, combining their expertise
EELS (on the French side) and surface reflection-absorption spectroscopy (on the
US side). Dr Williams is internationally recognized as a leader in synchrotron
radiation spectroscopy and is responsible for the development of the far-
infrared beamline at Brookhaven. Dr. Paul Dumas has developed an outstanding
surface vibrational laboratory, including research on infrared, electron energy
loss, and Raman and laser spe- ctroscopies. Results of this research are
expected to contribute to the understanding of the geometry and bonding of
adsorbates on surfaces, still one of the most important problems in surface
science.