* 9016134
* U.S.- France Joint Workshop on Adsorption Processes for Gas Separation, Orsay, France,  September 1991
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1991,04/30/1992
* M. Douglas LeVan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 04/30/1992
* USD 12,679.00

This award will support a joint US-France seminar on the topic of "Adsorption
Processes for Gas Separation". The organizers of the seminar are: Dr. Douglas
Levan, Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Virginia, and Dr. F.
Meunier, Laboratoire d'Informatique pour la Mecanique et les Sciences de
l'Ingenieur, Orsay, France. Adsorption processes are important in several
applications for gas separation. Pressure swing adsorption (PSA) has many small
and large scale applications, including air separation, carbon-dioxide/methane
separation, hydrogen production, hydrocarbon separation and gas drying. PSA is
also expected to play an increasing role in anti-pollution projects, such as the
recovery of pollutants from industrial effluents. Research on PSA and the
development of PSA is very active in both the US and France. The laboratories of
the French National Center for Scientific Research are strongly involved in the
field of adsorptive gas separation and French industry is present in the whole
chain of scientific and engineering functions (adsorbent preparation, process
design and process operation). The joint workshop will bring together experts
for an intensive four day workshop on gas separation by adsorption with specific
focus on the most recent trends in PSA research and processes. Topics to be
discussed are: 1) the materials aspect of adsorbent design 2) methods for the
prediction of mass transfer rates of mixtures in adsorbents, 3) the exact role
of modeling and numerical simulation in the conception of new processes, and 4)
the reliability of predictive models. The results of this workshop should make a
valuable contribution to future directions in adsorption process research.