* 9016915
* Third International Conference on Informetrics, Bangalore,  India, August 9-12, 1991, Group Travel Award in U.S. and    Indian Currencies.
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1992
* Susan Bonzi, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 03/31/1992
* USD 17,897.00

Description: This project supports the travel of a U.S. delegation of five
scientists to the Third International Conference on Informetrics to be held in
Bangalore, India, between August 9-12, 1991. Conference topics include:
Informetrics, foundation, empirical laws, and general theory; Bibliometrics,
classic laws, models, distributions and their applications, and epidemic models;
Citation analysis; Obsolescence of literature; Growth of libraries, systems, and
data bases; Information use, models, circulation theory, in-library use, use of
journals, and of databases; Scientometrics, quantitative aspects of science,
quantitative and graphic studies of science policy, science administration, and
scientific productivity; Statistical methods as applicable to informetrics, rank
theory, non-Gaussian distribution, stochastic models, bootstrap approach to
inference, and multivariate studies; Software, development of special purpose
software. Scope: This is the third in a series of conferences in this field. The
earlier two were held in Diepenbeek, Belgium, and London, Ontario, Canada. Past
participation has been from 23 countries from North America, Europe, Asia and
Africa. The program committee for the 1991 conference includes four U.S.
scientists in addition to others from India, China, the UK, Canada, Hungary,
Belgium, and Bulgaria. Dr. I.K. Ravichandra Rao of the Indian Statistical
Institute in Bangalore is the organizing secretary. The topic is of special
interest to U.S. and Indian scientists, both in the academic institutions and in
governmental organizations.