* 9016138
* Acquisition of a Photomicroscope & Image Analysis System for Plant Biology Research
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1991,07/31/1993
* Howard Grimes, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 07/31/1993
* USD 75,000.00

Funds are requested for the purchase of a photomicroscope equipped with a video
camera capable of detecting low light emissions, an image processing and
analysis system (for enhancement of image quality, quantification of data, and
3-dimensional reconstruction of plant tissues), and a video recorder. One of the
primary uses of this instrumentation will be in the analysis of gene expression
and protein localization during plant development. In particular, we will pursue
investigations into the regulation of cell surface proteins during embryogenesis
(Dr. Grimes), the cellular basis of calcium oxalate deposition in plants (Dr.
Franceschi), and the temporal and spatial distribution of key enzymes involved
in the evolution of the C4 photosysthesis mechanism (Dr. Ku). In these studies,
we will need to analyze low-level cell immunofluorescence data, quantitate gene
expression in specific cell and tissue types, and perform image analysis and
3-dimensional reconstruction in order to develop a comprehensive understanding
of the mechanisms involved in these processes. This instrument will also be used
to probe the mechanisms of phloem unloading by in vivo monitoring of fluorescent
dye movement in sink tissues. (Dr. Fisher). To fully understand phloem function,
it is necessary to evaluate the data in a structural context. The use of
3-dimensional reconstruction from sections of the tissues involved will be of
central importance for progress in this area. The mechanism of malic acid
accumulation into the vacuole of CAM plants is also being explored (Dr. Uribe).
The use of fluorescent probes to monitor the energetics of the the vacuolar
membrane in vivo will allow events inside of a living plant cell to be
visualized, as opposed to studies on isolated membrane fractions. The requested
instrumentation is critical to many aspects of the proposed research and will
greatly enhance our capabilities for research in plant cell biology.