* 9016032
* Performance Evaluation of Fast Packet Switches Supporting   Integrated Services
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/1991,09/30/1995
* Fouad Tobagi, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 09/30/1995
* USD 392,965.00

Two objectives characterize the design of new telecommunications networks. One
is to support high bandwidth applications (such as digitized video and image
communication) made possible by the high capacity of fiber optics transmission
systems; the second is to provide a single communications system which supports
all services in an integrated and unified fashion. In response to these
objectives, packet switching is emerging as the appropriate switching technique.
Several proposed architectural designs for fast packet switches have emerged in
recent years. There is a need to evaluate and compare these proposals under
various traffic scenarios with respect to the performance of the switch as seen
by network users. The performance measures, which are typically expressed in
terms of packet loss and packet delay, must be tailored to be consistent with
the specific requirement of the applications supported. This research will
create a unified framework consisting of a precise definition of the performance
measures of interest and a characterization of the basic traffic patterns
corresponding to the various applications and their mixes to be supported by a
fast packet switch. Using this framework the research will examine the
performance of switches in two steps by 1) focusing on single module switches of
the above mentioned types and 2) addressing the case of large switches composed
of several switching modules organized in multistage configurations. Both
mathematical analysis and computer simulation will be used in this study.