* 9017781
* Gut Cell Cycles and Diel Feeding Patterns in Acartia Tonsa
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1993
* Darcy Lonsdale, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/1993
* USD 110,000.00

Observations of the feeding activity of copepod populations have revealed a
wide range of responses both between and within species. Feeding may be
continuous, with no change in gut fullness on a diel period, or feeding may
occur on a cyclical, diel pattern. A diel pattern may be seen in both non-
migratory copepods and in the absence of vertical stratification of chlorophyll
a. Recently, researchers have demonstrated that nocturnal grazing in Acartia
tonsa was timed to lighting conditions. However, while light may cue a feeding
response, light conditions alone cannot explain an energetic advantage for
cyclical patterns in feeding. One hypothesis is suggested Calanus finmarchicus,
a vertical migrator, where a cyclical pattern is seen in gut cell development
during feeding under experimental conditions. These results indicate that during
the course of feeding certain cell types are depleted, and require a non-feeding
period to regenerate. As a vertical migrator, C. finmarchicus has a natural
period during the daylight hours in which to allow this regeneration. This
research will investigate differences that might exist in non-migrating
copepods, exposed to continuous food. This project will use morphometric
analyses of the gut cells of the nearshore copepod Acartia tonsa over a 24-h
period in the laboratory. Analyses will be conducted at both the light and
electron-microscope level. Laboratory conditions will simulated natural light
and food conditions, and these results will be compared to samples taken from
the field. Patterns in physiological rates (digestive enzyme activity, glutamate
dehydrogenase activity, and respiration rates) and gut fullness will be
determined concurrently.