* 9017063
* U.S.-Mexico Collaborative Research:  Study of Citlatepetl   Volcano, Mexico
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1991,10/31/1993
* William Rose, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 10/31/1993
* USD 12,780.00

This award will support Professor William Rose of Michigan Technological
University in a research collaboration with Professor Zoltan de Cserna of the
Institute de Geologia of the National Autonomous University (UNAM) of Mexico.
The objective of the research is to carry out a detailed study of the later
eruptive products of Citlaltepetl volcano, in order to describe its explosivity,
sequence of volcanic events and general evolution. The work will result in a
modern characterization of a large glaciated sub-tropical strato- volcano, which
will facilitate important volcanic hazard evaluations. The analysis of this
information will provide important support for the second goal, the
establishment of specific volcanic hazard planning for the Citlaltepetl region.
Citlaltepetl is the highest peak in Mexico (5675m) and the third highest peak in
North America. It is the easternmost volcano of the Transmexican Volcanic Belt,
located on an important normal fault zone that marks the central plateau from
the Mexican Gulf coastal plains. Citlaltepetl volcano has been proposed for
volcanological research because of the perceived potential volcanic hazards for
the surrounding areas and because there is only a limited amount of geological
or volcanological information available at present. Such a volcano is an
important target for detailed study because high, glaciated tropical volcanoes
have rarely been thoroughly described and, as the experience at Nevado de Ruiz
volcano (colombia) (Naranjo et al., 1986) in 1985 shows, are inadequately
understood and particularly dangerous.