* 9017153
* A General Neural Simulation System for Computational        Neurobiology
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/1991,12/31/1994
* James Bower, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* James H. Beach
* 12/31/1994
* USD 1,215,220.00

This award will support the distribution, use, and extension of a new neural
network simulation tool, referred to as GENESIS (General NEural SImulation
System). GENESIS has been developed by the principal investigator to build
realistic models of biological neural systems. The large interest in using
simulations to studying the nervous system also makes it more important that the
system be supported, enhanced and extended. One approach to this support is the
design of GENESIS based tutorials that both demonstrate the use of the
simulation system and, at the same time, provide educational tools for
understanding how neural simulations are structured and constructed. This is an
important aspect of the current award. From a technical point of view, because
GENESIS makes use of state of the art approaches to computer simulation
platforms and graphics interfaces, further software development will provide
exciting opportunities for expansion of the systems capabilities. This award
will support the porting of the software system to parallel computers which have
the potential to provide significant increases in the computing power for
simulations. This award will also support the development of broadly based
GENESIS users group communicating over computer networks. With this capability,
researchers will be able to interact even in real-time while developing
simulations and associated tools. Taken together, this award will provide the
support necessary for the distribution and extension of a valuable tool for
computational neurobiology. It will support general education in the use of
simulation techniques as well as the development of communication between
different research groups interested in computational approaches to
understanding the nervous system.