* 9017739
* Cold Adaptations of Carbon Metabolism in Antarctic          Phototrophic Microorganisms
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1991,05/31/1995
* Brian Kinkle, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 05/31/1995
* USD 263,747.00

Studying the molecular mechanisms of cold-adaptation of biological systems is
intrinsically important to understand evolution and ecological interaction of
species on Earth. In the Dry Valley region of Antarctica, a complete microbial
ecosystem lives within sandstone at freezing temperatures and in permanently
ice-covered lakes. Vestal proposes to determine whether psychrophilic
phototrophs (cold-adapted cyanobacteria, algae, and photosynthetic bacteria)
possess unique nucleotides and amino acids sequences in their DNA and a key
CO2-fixing enzyme in photosynthesis to account for the enzyme's function at sub-
zero temperatures. From a previous award (Small Grant for Exploratory Research),
Vestal determined that this key enzyme from a psychrophilic cyanobacterium has
unique photosynthetic properties that may be related to its molecular structure
of this particular CO2-fixing enzyme. Using the latest methods of molecular
biology, true psychrophilic phototrophs, which will be selectively isolated from
sandstone and algal mats from Dry Valley lakes, will be studied. If these
Antarctic psychrophiles possess unique sequences in their DNA and enzymes, the
information would provide new insight into the mechanism of cold-adaptation of
biological species and their evolutionary relatedness to other temperate
species.