* 9017085
* Mechanisms of Fiber Formation During Muscle Hypertrophy
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1991,02/28/1995
* Edward Schultz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 02/28/1995
* USD 327,737.00

Hyperplasia is a distinctive component of the hypertrophy that occurs in the
overloaded and stretched avian wing; a large number of embryonic myosin positive
fibers appear in intra- and interfascicular locations. The number of fibers
formed decreases as a function of increasing age. This proposal examines two
potential mechanisms of nascent fiber formation: 1) from activation,
proliferation and fusion of satellite cells, and 2) from existing fibers through
a process referred to as "fiber splitting", where a fiber splits along its
longitudinal axis, producing first a branched fiber, and ultimately two
independent fibers. Mature and immature chickens will be infused continuously
with bromodeoxyuridine, a thymidine analogue and marker of cell division, during
the overload period in order to distinguish whether one or both processes are
involved in nascent fiber formation. Virtually all myonuclei of nascent fibers
formed through proliferation and fusion of satellite cells will be labelled,
while nascent fibers formed from pre-existing fibers will contain few labelled
nuclei. Satellite cells involved in formation of new fibers in interfascicular
spaces would be required to migrate from their fibers into these areas. The
location of activated and proliferating satellite cells will be examined during
overload in order to determine if satellite cells located on fibers at the
periphery of fascicles are preferentially activated. Finally, Dr. Schultz will
test directly if environments in overloaded muscles promote interstitial fiber
formation by implanting myoblasts into control and overloaded muscles and
comparing their fusion behavior with the electron microscope. These studies
should provide fundamental additional information to our understanding of the
plasticity of skeletal muscle during a response to increased functional demand.