* 9017053
* Ultrafast Optical Switching in High Temperature             Superconducting Films
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/1991,02/28/1995
* Hoi Kwok, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Virginia M. Ayres
* 02/28/1995
* USD 243,059.00

This project involves the study of ultrafast processes in high temperature
superconductors. Femtosecond duration laser pulses will be used to study the
response times of simple high Tc superconducting electronic devices. The goal is
to investigate the possibility of using these high Tc materials in active
ultrafast electronic devices such as switches and transistors at 77K.
Preliminary results have shown that the response times of Y-Ba-Cu-O
superconductors can be as fast as 1 ps. In this research program, high quality
in-situ superconducting thin films will be deposited by pulsed excimer lasers
onto various substrates and patterned into various calculated geometries.
Microstriplines will be used predominantly, although other structures will also
be examined. Additionally, the use of hibrid devices involving both
superconducting and semiconducting films will be investigated. The relaxation
times after laser excitation will be measured by optical as well as electrical
techniques as a function of material parameters such as doping and crystallinity
of the films. The use of granular films and weak link junctions to increase the
speed of these devices will also be studied. Besides applications to ultrafast
electronics, this project will also contribute to the fundamental understanding
of nonequilibrium phenomena in high Tc superconductors.