* 9017196
* U.S. Participation in the International Geological          Correlation Program 1991-92
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/1991,12/31/1992
* Bruce Marsh, American Geological Institute
* Standard Grant
* Felicia Fauntleroy
* 12/31/1992
* USD 40,000.00

The International Geological Correlation Program is a multidisciplinary
scientific program established in its present form in 1973, sponsored jointly by
the International Union of Geological Sciences (IUGS) and by the United Nations
Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization Unesco). The principal goal
of IGCP is to promote international cooperation in research on global geologic
problems, with emphasis on the nature and sequence of major geologic events,
geologic hazards, and energy and mineral resources. Program work is carried out
through 59 individual research projects, 20 of which have U.S. working groups.
The United States has played a prominent role in IGCP since its establishment.
U.S. geoscientist helped design the Program and are members of the IGCP Board
and Scientific Advisory Committee. The USNC/IGCP provides coordination and
oversight of U.S. IGCP activities. Support for this role is provided by the U.S.
Geological Survey (USGS) in the amount of $30,000 annually for travel expenses
for the Committee and administrative support costs within the USGS. NSF Funds
underwrite domestic meetings of U.S. project working groups, travel by U.S.
representatives to project conferences and field excursions abroad, and general
clerical and technical assistance to the working group chairman.