* 9017135
* The Diversity of Basic Magmas in a Continental Volcanic Arc and its Relationship to Tectonism
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1991,12/31/1993
* Ian S. Carmichael, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 12/31/1993
* USD 160,700.00

Field work in the last decade has led to the discovery of Plio- Quaternary
eruptions of potassium- and water-rich basic lavas in the fore-arc region of the
western Mexican Volcanic belt (Fig. (Fig. 2), contemporary with the main calc-
alkaline andesitic central volcanoes. The association of this volcanism with
rifting, both within and at the margin of the Jalisco block (Fig. 2), may have
general implications for the magmatic and tectonic regimes along a continental
convergent margin. This project will investigate the relationships between
tectonism, distribution of volcanic centers, magma output rates, and
compositional diversity in order to gain a better understanding of the extent
and scale of the heterogeneity of magma source regions, as well as the factors
which influence the ascent and eruption of magma. The proposed field work will
focus on volcanism in a 50,000 km2 region in central Mexico, particularly the
Valley of Mexico. This region contains over 400 monogenetic cones, flows, and
other eruptive centers about which little is known. A comprehensive study of the
temporal and spatial distribution of this volcanism is a crucial constraint on
models of magma genesis and diversification. This region is also one of the most
densely populated in Mexico so that the assessment of volcanic hazards, which
the P.I.s will conduct in collaboration with Mexican scientists at UNAM, will
contribute to its significance.