* 9017161
* Influence Of Industrialization On Social And Economic       Security (U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Science; Science In        Developing Countries)
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1990,11/30/1992
* Saad Nagi, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Edward Murdy
* 11/30/1992
* USD 20,000.00

Description: This proposal supports the collaboration of Drs. Saad Z. Nagi and
Sharon K. Houseknecht, Ohio State University (OSU), and Dr. Mohamed Abdel Aal,
Cairo University, Egypt. The purpose of this collaboration is to study the
influence of industrial development on social and economic security arrangements
in Egypt. Project funding will allow Dr. Houseknecht to visit study communities
in Egypt and to participate in discussions with their leaders and for Dr. Aal to
analyze data for a period of time at OSU with Drs. Houseknect and Nagi. Dr.
Nagi, as Principal Investigator, will provide overall project supervision.
Scope: This proposal brings together research scientists from two countries
working in the area of Egyptian socio-economics and culture. It is anticipated
that this collaborative research will result in a report on the influence of
industrial development on social and economic security arrangements in Egypt.
The Egyptian scientist, Dr. Aal, will gain experience in the application of
advanced statistical techniques and be exposed to sophisticated methods of
research during his stay at OSU. Conversely, Dr. Houseknecht will get an
opportunity for cross-cultural research experience and her exchanges with
Egyptian researchers will be highly beneficial to her future research and
instructional endeavors. Therefore, this proposal fulfills the objectives of the
Science in Developing Countries program in its exchange and transfer of
scientific knowledge through an international collaboration.