* 9017040
* Quality Through Engineering Design, a U.S.-India-Japan      Conference, Bangalore, India, February 1992, Group Travel   Award- Supplement
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1991,04/30/1993
* K. Bowman, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 04/30/1993
* USD 49,000.00

Description: This project supports U.S. participants to a U.S.-India-Japan
Conference on Quality Through Engineering Design, planned for February 1992 in
Bangalore, India. The trilateral conference is intended to accelerate the
exchange of information on computer based and statistical approaches to the
engineering design of quality products and processes. The conference is expected
to last 5 days, and will consist of mainly invited papers and few contributed
papers, and will allow for extensive formal and informal discussions. Seven
major sessions are planned: materials formulation and processsing design;
metrology in materials development; electro-mechanical design; metrology in
electro-mechanical design; statistical quality engineering techniques for
design; total quality control; and computer-aided design system requirements.
The Indian organizer is Dr. B. K. Pal of the Indian Statistical Institute in
Bangalore, India. The conference proceedings are expected to be published.
Scope: Several organizations in the three countries are expected to support the
conference including the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore, Baharat Heavy Electric Co., Bangalore, The
National Aeronautical Laboratory and the Bureau of Indian Standards in India,
the National Institute for Standard and Technology (NIST) in the U.S., and the
Union of Japanese Scientists and Engineers in Japan. The topic of the conference
is quite important to the U.S. and to India. The publication of the proceedings
will be helpful to workers in this field in the U.S. academic and industrial
organizations, and could lead to collaboration with Indian scientists. The
project fits well with the objectives of the U.S.-India Cooperative Science
Program.