* 9017447
* Novel Probes of Photochemical Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1996
* Marye Anne Fox, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 08/31/1996
* USD 653,400.00

The structure, chemical properties, photoreactivity, and new routes for the
generation of anions, stable radicals, and radical ions will be investigated in
this project. Structure will be determined for these intermediates by a
comparison of solution phase and solid state nmr spectroscopy, by
electrochemical techniques, and by employing transient and steady state
illumination as probes for excited state reactivity. Of particular interest will
be the determination of how structure influences the acidities and oxidation
potentials of several families of dianions, radical ions, and stable radicals.
Fundamental thermochemical information will be attained by correlating rates of
photochemical and thermal electron transfer with redox potentials derived by
high speed cyclic voltammetry or photomodulation voltammetry. A new thrust
exploring photochemistry in supercritical fluids will seek to probe solvation
effects under carefully controlled conditions. In these studies, scientifically
important questions will be probed of how aggregation, environment, and
solvation affect chemical reactivity, particularly electron transfer reactions.
This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the continuing work of
Professor Marye Anne Fox at the University of Texas, Austin Campus. This
research will generate results of a fundamental nature about reactive
intermediates in chemical reactions. The mechanistic basis of organic chemistry
rests on an understanding of the properties of reactive intermediates and their
involvement in chemical transformations. Knowledge of these intermediates will
provide chemists with a better ability to predict the course of chemical
reactions.