* 9017104
* Cell Biology of Echinoid Host Defense Reactions
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1991,02/28/1993
* Kenneth Edds, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 02/28/1993
* USD 35,000.00

The long term goals of this research are to understand the cellular and
molecular basis for host defense reactions in selected invertebrate systems.
These systems offer relative simplicity and may represent a paradigm for
vertebrate blood cells. This proposal deals with defining which of two cell
types is involved in the formation of a large multicellular syncytium that
functions in a host encapsulation response in echinoderms. Two distinct subsets
of coelomocytes will be separated from other coelomic fluid components, the
subsets will be marked and their fate during fusion will be followed. The
ultrastructure of apparent syncitia will be studied to establish whether cell-
cell interaction results in the formation of true synsytia, and cytoskeletal
linear elements that may orient cortical flow and/or influence the formation of
the cellular aggregate will be identified. The relationship between cytoskeletal
motility and cell fusion events will be determined using high resolution,
digitally enhanced video microscopy. Cortical motility of cells that do and do
not fuse will be compared, and patterns of cortical motility in cells after
fusion will be studied. In sea urchins migratory phagocytic cells known as
coelomocytes play important roles in the organisms' defense mechanisms such as
engulfing foreign micro-organisms, wound repair, and blood clotting. Some
aspects of the defense reactions in these animals involve the ability of the
phagocytic cells to fuse with each other, which may be related to their ability
to encapsulate invading parasitic organisms or to their clot forming ability.
Very little research on the cell biology of these important defense reactions in
invertebrates has been done taking advantage of modern techniques. The results
of this project will provide a detailed analysis of the cellular events
underlying the process of coelomocyte fusion and will lay the groundwork for
further analysis of the function of defense responses in these organisms.