* 9017385
* Cambrian Ichnostratigraphy of the Eastern Basin and Range   and Western Rocky Mountains
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1991,12/31/1993
* Allan Ekdale, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Felicia Fauntleroy
* 12/31/1993
* USD 80,500.00

The proposed research focuses on the utility of ichnofossils (biogenic
sedimentary structures) for biostratigraphy and paleoenvironmental studies in
the eastern Great Basin and western Rocky Mountains. Four aspects of Lower
Cambrian trace fossils will be studied: ichnotaxonomy (systematic
classification); mode of production (tunnels, open furrow, etc.);
ichnostratigraphy; paleoecologic and paleogeographic implications. Preliminary
work has revealed a great diversity and abundance of ichnofossils in this area.
In addition, diverse fossil assemblages of potential trace-makers also are
present. A revision of the taxonomic classification of arthropod trace fossils
will be undertaken, and a set of taxonomic criteria that can be applied
consistently across the group will be formulated. Consideration will include
patterns of morphology, mechanics of construction, the type of structure
(endogenic or epigenic), and inferred trace-makers. The stratigraphic
distribution of trace fossils within the Lower Cambrian of Utah and adjoining
areas will be documented, and the global significance of Cambro-Ordovician
stratigraphic models using ichnospecies of Cruziana and Rusophycus will be
assessed. The mode of production of Cruziana and Rusophycus will be investigated
by the examination of samples and the reproduction of traces in sediment flume
and aquarium experiments, using modern trace-makers (e.g., insects and
crustaceans). Characterization of relationships between ichnofacies and
lithofacies (or lithotopes) will be made to document benthic community
relationships in the early Paleozoic. Trace fossils also can furnish detailed
information about important environmental factors, such as substrate
consistency, salinity, and sediment anoxia. Patterns in the distribution of
these factors allow local paleogeography to be inferred, which will allow
existing regional paleogeographic models to be defined more clearly than they
are at present.//