* 9017003
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Purification and Physio- logical Activity of Lobster Cholecystokinin-Like Peptides
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1993
* Allen Selverston, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 09/30/1993
* USD 12,970.00

This award will support collaborative research in behavioral neuroendocrinology
between Dr. Allen I. Selverston, University of California at San Diego, and Dr.
Dr. Allain Van Wormhoudt, Laboratory for Marine Biology, College of France,
Concarnu, France. The objective of the project is to purify, sequence and
synthesize a crustacean CCK-like peptide from the spiny lobster Panulirus
interruptus, and to determine its physio- logical activity on the gastric mill
network in the stomato- gastric ganglion. This peptide has profound modulatory
effects on a simple neural circuit, the gastric mill circuit of crustaceans, and
is involved in the feeding- induced activation of the gastric mill. Obtaining a
sequence from this peptide will allow the investigators to study in detail the
mechanisms by which a neuropeptide activates and modulates a well understood
neural circuit. This project is of particular importance, since the lobster CCK-
like peptide is the first peptide modulating the stomatogastric rhythms, whose
patterns of release in the lobster have been shown. The stomatogastric system
has been for many years one of the most important and instructive model systems
available for studying both the control of rhythmic patterns and its modulation
by various neurotrans- mitters. This project will take advantage of the known
information to enhance our understanding of these modulatory processes. The
project will benefit from the mutual expertise of the two investigators: Dr.
Selverston is a leader in the field of small systems neurobiology and Dr. Von
Wormhoudt is an experienced biochemist who has studied CCK in other crustacea.