* 9017817
* Mechanics of Fish Interactions with Habitat Protuberances
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1991,01/31/1995
* William Schultz, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 01/31/1995
* USD 194,500.00

Swimming is a key factor in energy acquisition, energy expenditure, and
survival of fishes. The ability to efficiently obtain food while avoiding
becoming food for predators is strongly affected by the presence of structures
such as rocks, weeds, windfall trees, corals, artifical reefs etc. These
structures are especially important in streams, oceanic currents, and tidal
flows. The ability of fish to use structures depends on morphology and behavior
which vary among species. Consequently interactions with habitat structure
affect population dynamics, community compostition and the evolutionary biology.
In spite of the importance of structure to so many apsects of the lives of
fishes, there has been little research on mechanisms employed. Our research will
be the first attempt to provide a common mechanistic understanding and
predictive model for fish interactions with the complex structures they prefer.
We examine behavior and swimming performance as fish use complex structure,
determining imposed current velocity and fish morphology. We expect our results
will help explain habitat preferences in relatively stable or predictable
situations such as lower river reaches, many inland lakes, and offshore marine
habitats. We also believe our results will help explain how fish survive in or
are excluded from more naturally stressful habitats, such a temperate streams
and intertidal zones. We believe our research will have impact on fisheries
management. Addition of structure is a common habitat improvement practice and
field experience show that various stuctures can be used to attract different
fish species. Our results should provide a predictive basis for such habitat
improvement practices.