* 9017695
* Systematics of Clibadium (Compositae, Heliantheae)
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1991,12/31/1993
* Tod Stuessy, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 12/31/1993
* USD 7,000.00

This Science in Developing Countries award will help to support thesis
dissertation work of Mr. Jorge Arriagada of Concepcion, Chile working under the
supervision of Professor Tod Stuessy of Ohio State University. The main
objectives of the proposed research are: (1) to produce a taxonomic revision of
the species of Clibadium, a Neotropical genus of approximately 40 species
distributed from Mexico to Peru; (2) to determine the evolutionary relationships
among these species; (3) to establish generic limits relative to Desmanthodium,
Ichthyothere and Stachycephalum; and (4) to determine biogeography and suggest
modes of speciation of the species. An ancillary objective of this research is
to study variations and evolution of capitulescence structure and development of
unusual drupe-like fruits in Clibadium for help in reconstructing phylogeny. As
time permits, the ethnobotanical activities of the Indians in Latin America will
be documented as they relate to use of Clibadium species as fish-poisons. The
ethnobotanical role of the genus should provide an extra dimension to
understanding the systematics and biogeography of the genus. To achieve these
goals, a complete collection of plant material and field observations along the
distributional range is needed. Morphological (including anatomical) and
cytological data will be gathered, and reconstruction of phylogeny will be done
by cladistic techniques. The proposed research is significant for several
reasons. It will produce the first modern revision of the genus, including keys,
descriptions and a predictive classification, valuable to botanists working on
Neotropical floras. It will also provide the first phylogenetic reconstruction
of the genus. In addition, understanding of evolutionary relationships within
Clibadium should lead to an improved understanding of affinities with the
related genera Desmanthodium, Ichthyothere, and Stachycephalum.