* 9017220
* Parameterization of Vegetation for Meterological Models
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1991,03/01/1994
* Roger Pielke, University of Novi Sad
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 03/01/1994
* USD 0.00

The objective of this three-year U.S.-Yugoslav cooperative research project in
climate change and mesoscale meteorology between Dragutin Mihailovic of the
University of Novi Sad's Institute of Field and Vegetable Crops and Roger A.
Pielke of Colorado State University is to investigate land surface - atmosphere
interactions. These studies will contribute to improved weather and climate
prediction models and enhance understanding of climate impact on ecosystems and
the environment. Yugoslav collaboration adds an international dimension to Dr.
Pielke's NSF research grant on the Influence of Surface Heat and Moisture Fluxes
on Mesoscale Climate and Weather. In his NSF grant, Dr. Pielke developed the RAM
model (Regional Atmospheric Modeling). The objective of this cooperation is
improvement of the RAM through the development of finer specifications of land
surface parameters. Yugoslav involvement consists of integrating soil and
vegetation parameterizations into the Colorado State RAMS model and testing its
accuracy by using field data derived from the agricultural belt of Yugoslavia.
This project was approved by the U.S.-Yugoslav Joint Board on Cooperation in
Science and Technology and is supported through a joint fund consisting of
matching contributions from the U.S. and Yugoslav governments. The U.S.
contribution is provided annually by the Department of State. No NSF funds are
involved. The award, except for funds for U.S. scientist travel, is made to the
Yugoslav institution. NSF's objective of advancing scientific knowledge will be
promoted through this joint scientific effort and complementary expertise of the
Yugoslav and U.S. scientists.