* 9017565
* Identification and Decentrialized Control of Critical Modes in Electrical Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1993
* Ali Feliachi, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 02/28/1993
* USD 100,001.00

Electric power systems are examples of integrated complex nonlinear large-scale
systems. These systems contain a variety of components from a simple linear
time-invariant continuous or discrete-time system to a complex nonlinear time
varying stochastic system, each of which can be modeled. Because of these
characteristics conventional analysis and control design methods cannot be
applied to present and future electric power systems. The research supported in
this project is to develop analytical tools suitable for analysis and control of
complex electric power systems. Specifically, the project focuses on: (1)
methodology to identify the critical modes in a given power system and expand
this algorithm to derive coherency measures, (2) an algorithm to determine the
minimum number of decentralized actuators and sensors and their most effective
locations, (3) a method to design robust decentralized controllers, and (4)
applications of these techniques to power system stability and control problems.
These algorithms are effective for a wide range of operating conditions. The
methods are developed by investigating eigenstructure dynamics, sensitivity
analysis, transfer function residues, and robust control design theory. The
problem is formulated in deterministic as well as stochastic frameworks using
time and frequency domain techniques. Issues such as model uncertainties,
nonlinearities, wide range of loading conditions, structural changes, controller
structures, and computational efficiency will be the foci of the research.