* 9017210
* RUI: Cytoskeletal Systems and Calcium in Ooplasmic Movementsand Cytokinesis in the Egg of a Teleost Fish, the Medaka    (Oryzias latipes)
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1991,10/31/1994
* Richard Fluck, Franklin and Marshall College
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 10/31/1994
* USD 187,910.00

The goals of the proposed research are: 1) to determine the roles of
microfilaments and microtubules in movements of the ooplasm in the medaka egg,
2) to determine the role of cytoplasmic calcium pulses, gradients, and waves in
movements of the ooplasm of the medaka egg, and 3) to determine the relationship
between the mechanical events of cytokinesis and microfilaments, calcium pulses,
gradients and waves in the blastodisc during the first two cleavages of the
medaka egg. Ooplasmic movements and cytokinesis will be studied with time-lapse
video microscopy, using phase contrast, Nomarski DIC, and epifluorescence optics
where appropriate. The role of cytoskeletal systems will be studied by 1)
applying or microinjecting drugs that disrupt these systems, and 2) localizing
microfilaments and microtubules with fluorescent phalloidins and by indirect
immunofluorescence, respectively. The role of calcium will be studied by 1)
looking for calcium pulses, gradients, and waves with the calcium-sensitive
photoprotein, Aequorin, and 2) injecting calcium buffers into the cytoplasm of
the egg. Using the fish egg as a model, these studies should provide new
insights into the physiological bases of two fundamental activities of the
cytoplasm of the fertilized egg: its structural rearrangement and its division
into daughter cells. This research will also provide the opportunity for
undergraduates to participate in an active research program using state of the
art techniques of light microscopy.