* 9017368
* Radial Velocity Variations of K-Giants
* MPS,AST
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1993
* William Cochran, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Edward G. Schmidt
* 09/30/1993
* USD 83,100.00

This award is for a two-year pilot study of an innovative instrumental technique
to obtain precise radial velocities of stars. The technique is to insert a
recently constructed container filled with iodine gas in beam of a coude
spectrometer at McDonald Observatory. This gas will absorb starlight at well
known wavelengths, thereby providing a set of calibration lines interspersed
with the stellar lines in the spectrum. With this innovation, the PI expects to
obtain radial velocities to an accuracy of +-5 m/sec (roughly 8 mph). He will
then obtain a time series of spectra for several bright red giant stars and
search for pulsations in them. The PI has already used a related instrumental
technique to verfify the existence of a 1.8-day period in the red giant
Arcturus. If this pulsation in Arcturus is typical of other red giants, then a
new class of variable stars will have been discovered. The data will be used for
a variety of other astrophysical purposes, including the study of convective
circulation cells and magnetic "activity" on these stars surfaces. Either
pulsations, magnetic activity, or both of these phenomena, could be responsible
for heating the outer atmospheres ("chromospheres") of red giants.
Chromospheres, in turn, are thought to cause a mass loss, which can
significantly affect the subsequent history of the star's evolution.