* 9017179
* Passive Optical Sensing for Automatic Stationkeeping of     ROVs
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1991,08/15/1991
* Shahriar Negahdaripour, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* A. Frederick Thompson
* 08/15/1991
* USD 0.00

Last decade has seen an increasing demand for use of underwater robotic vehicles
for various ocean applications, for example pipeline laying, inspection, repair,
geological survey, etc. Reliability safety, flexibility, and economics are
amongst some of the major factors that demand the development of intelligent
Remotely Operated Vehicles (ROVs). This permits more efficient use of the
vehicle, operator, and their support ships. The ultimate goal is the realization
of systems with all the intelligence required to function autonomously in a
variety of undersea tasks. One general capability essential to building some
degree of autonomy into the ROV systems is accurate sensing of position and
movements relative to a fix coordinate system or nearby objects. A particular
application, as these vehicles become more widely used, is near-bottom
stationkeeping; that is, maintaining a desired position to perform some task
near ocean floors. With the current technology, near-bottom stationkeeping can
be done via active sensing, using acoustic or optical beacons that need to be
positioned accurately on the ocean floor, and recovered upon completion of the
task. This is costly, tedious, and highly impractical in applications where
active sensing is to be avoided. This three-year project involves the
investigation of an alternative solution to the problem, passive optical sensing
by exploiting the bottom natural features as beacons. The goal is to develop
computer vision techniques for extracting information about position and motion
of the vehicle by interpreting images of the undersea environment.