* 9017432
* Ultraviolet Light and Temperature Effects on Reef-Building  Corals
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/1991,02/28/1993
* Gerard Wellington, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/1993
* USD 196,232.00

Recent explanations for the 1987 Caribbean-wide, mass coral bleaching event
suggest that increased sea surface temperatures and enhanced ultraviolet light
penetration were major contributing factors. This project will investigate this
hypothesis by conducting a series of experiments designed to partition the
relative effects that UV light and temperature have on coral growth and
survivorship. Appropriate experimental levels for UV irradiation will be based
on data derived from: i) long-term UV flux measurements recorded in 1989, ii)
preliminary field experiments assessing effects of enhanced UV exposures, and
iii) UV measurements to be taken in clear tropical oceanic waters. Experimental
corals (Montastrea annularis and Agaricia lamarcki) held outdoors in UV-
transparent acrylic aquaria will be subject to two UV light regimes: 1) ambient
UV flux, based on values obtained form prior long-term monitoring (controls),
and 2) maximum UV flux simulating the conditions that occurred during the 1987
bleaching event (based on results from preliminary field experiments identifying
UV levels leading to coral stress, or on treatment, corals will be subjected to
three controlled temperature regimes: 28oC (control), 30oC and 31oC (peak or
near- peak temperatures recorded on reefs in the Caribbean during 1987) for up
to two months. Treatment effects will be assessed by quantifying changes in
colony color, chlorophyll concentration, zooxanthellae densities, mitotic
indices and the concentrations of UV blocking pigments form coral tissues (using
HPLC). A second experiment will separate the differential, and combined, effects
of UV-A and -B. In addition to these experiments, we will establish a long- term
UV monitoring program on Grand Cayman Island, Cayman Island (site of the NOAA
Aquarius habitat program) and will relate these findings to observed intra- and
interspecific differences in concentrations of UV pigments in reef corals along
a depth gradient. These data will constitute an important baseline that can be
used to document yearly and decadal changes in UV light levels resulting from
continued deletion of stratospheric ozone.