* 9017187
* The Social Implications of Changing Knowledge in the Life   Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1991,01/25/1999
* Sheila Jasanoff, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael M. Sokal
* 01/25/1999
* USD 928,779.00

Current rapid developments in the biological sciences are enlarging and altering
our understanding of living systems, from individual cells to global ecosystems.
These changes in knowledge carry profound, but insufficiently explored
implications for social institutions and policies. Historians, social scientists
and biologists in the Program on Science, Technology and Society of Cornell
University are addressing these implications in a series of five interrelated
research projects: (1) biology and the legal order, (2) environmental change,
(3) communication and use of scientific knowledge, (4) historical studies of
scientific change, and (5) women and biology. In the first research project,
historians, lawyers and ethicians are examining the legal, social and ethical
implications of recent developments in genetic screening, gene therapy, and
environmental regulations. Family, employment, health, education, and criminal
justice are all affected by the advances in biological sciences and issues of
privacy, equal protection, due process, free exercise of religion, academic
freedom, and separation of powers immediately come to the fore. Environmental
scientists, historians and social scientists are joining together in the second
project to investigate questions like the socioeconomic implications of global
change, the pattern and scale in spatially explicit ecological models,
integrated resource management for an ecologically and economically sound
agriculture, and social construction of environmental modeling. Research in area
3 focuses on the role and activities of scientists and other social actors in
the dissemination of scientific information through varied channels of
communication. In area 4, researchers aim to develop an understanding of current
developments in the life sciences within the framework of historical and
philosophical perspectives on science in general; and to apply ideas about the
meaning and nature of scientific change to assessing the significance and
direction of contemporary trends in the life sciences. Under "women and biology,
investigators are examining the historical phenomenon of why American women
scientists have more often gone into biological fields rather than into
physical, mathematical or engineering specialties and the implications of this
phenomenon for the "style" of work in the life sciences. Over five years, this
grant supports postdoctoral fellows, graduate and undergraduate student to
participate in research and training in each of these areas of research.