* 9017264
* RUI:  Fate of Xenografts in Biomphalaria glabrata           (Mollusca:  Pulmonata)
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1991,02/28/1995
* John Sullivan, Lamar University
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 02/28/1995
* USD 125,212.00

When tissue gafts are transplanted from one species of mollusc to another
(xenografts), the grafts reportedly fail, i.e., die. The goal of the proposed
research is to understand the mechanisms of xenograft failure in molluscs.
Specifically, the study will assess the relative roles of (1) physiological
incompatibility between donor and recipient and (2) immunological rejection by
the recipient. Methods will include implantation of hearts from phylogenetically
close and phylogenetically distant species into a single recipient snail
species. Fates of the implants will be followed histologically and
histochemically, and will be compared to fates of hearts maintained in vitro,
and to fates of implants from donors of the same species. In addition, the role
of the immune system will be ascertained by conducting implants in
immunosuppressed recipients, i.e., snails infected with larval trematodes.
Finally, initial information on the types of determinants on the xenograft
recognized as non-self will be gained by subjecting grafts to chemical
modification such as neuraminidase digestion and lectin binding prior to
implantation. The potential significance of this project is that it may help to
elucidate the mechanisms of immune-like self recognition in molluscs, serve as a
model for studying primitive forms of self recognition that also occur in
vertebrates, and provide information on phylogenetic relationships within an
important group of molluscs.