* 9017224
* The Role of Phytoplankton in the Biogeochemical             Cycling of Iodine
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1991,02/28/1994
* Steven Manley, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/1994
* USD 83,541.00

Phytoplankton, as dominant primary producers of the world's oceans, are
important components in the biogeochemical cycling of many elements. There is a
lack of information, however, as to the role of phytoplankton in the
biogeochemical cycling of iodine specifically in terms of fluxes, metabolism and
reservoir size. This project seeks to address this deficiency by using important
marine phytoplankton (diatoms, dinoflagellates, coccolithophores, cyanobacteria)
in experiments to determine: 1) iodide and iodate uptake rates (using
radioactive 125I); 2) the concentration and chemical speciation of cellular
iodine by using iodide selective electrodes, extraction techniques, and 125I
labeled cultures; 3) release rates of both volatile (primarily methyl iodide,
using gas chromatography with an electron capture detector) and non-volatile
cellular iodocarbons (125I labeled cultures), and 4) the presence of
haloperoxidases in phytoplankton (spectrophotometric and radioisotopic methods).
The data obtained from these investigations will allow for the unambiguous
assessment of the degree in which phytoplankton are involved in the chemical
speciation of iodine in surface waters and their participation in the transport
of iodine from the surface waters to the atmosphere and to deeper waters. This
research has application to the marine and atmospheric iodine cycles, which
takes on added importance based on past and potential releases of anthropogenic
radionuclides of iodine.