* 9017737
* Cycling of Labile Intermediates at the Oxic/Anoxic Interface
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/1991,02/28/1994
* Mary Scranton, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 02/28/1994
* USD 255,771.00

More than 90% of the organic carbon buried in marine sediments each year is
found in sediments which are anoxic within a few centimeters of the sediment-
water interface. In addition, the amount of organic carbon which is
remineralized under anoxic conditions has been estimated to be between about 10%
and almost 100% of the amount remineralized in oxic environments and anaerobic
decomposition plays an important role in determining the quantity and chemical
composition of the material which is ultimately buried. However, the effect of
anoxic conditions on the decomposition rate of specific organic compounds is
poorly understood. One environment in which we can study the relative importance
of changes in turnover rate constant and changes in production rate to
concentrations of organic compounds is the oxic/anoxic transition zone. The
oxic/anoxic interface is a region of stratified microbiological populations, and
of rapidly changing properties. This study will be one of the first to focus on
the processes affecting the distribution and turnover of fermentation
intermediates (hydrogen, acetate, propionate, low molecular weight amines) and
of DOC near the oxic/anoxic interface, and will thus provide valuable
information on sites of water column carbon regeneration in such systems. The
results also will provide insights on how turnover rates of labile compounds
vary within redox gradients, and whether variations in the turnover rates or in
production rates are responsible for concentration maxima. When compared with
microbiological data, the results will also provide qualitative information
about the roles played by the different microbial populations in carbon
turnover.