* 9017234
* Dissertation Research:  Settlement and Agriculture in       Tiwanaku, Bolivia
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/1990,07/31/1992
* NONE NONE, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 07/31/1992
* USD 8,450.00

Under the direction of Dr. Alan Kolata, Mr. James Mathews will conduct
archaeological survey and excavation to collect data for his doctoral
dissertation. He will examine the relationship between the rise of the Tiwanaku
state and changes in methods of agricultural production. The Tiwanaku
civilization emerged in the Lake Titicaca Basin of Bolivia between 200 BC and
1100 AD. During its height, it controlled an area encompassing much of present-
day Bolivia, southern Peru, and northern Chile. Preliminary evidence indicates
that during this period the state economy was based on surplus agricultural
production through the use of an intensive system which employed raised fields.
However, it is unclear how the early stages of this process developed. To shed
light on this question Mr. Mathews will conduct an intensive systematic survey
of prehispanic settlement and agricultural features in one section of the
Tiwanaku region. These data will be supplemented with limited archaeological
excavation. Correlations between change in settlement pattern and agricultural
expansion should then provide a better understanding of the long-term
development of these linked political and economic systems. This research is
important for several reasons. First, it will increase our understanding of how
large preindustrial states arise and are maintained. Secondly, it may contribute
to the development of appropriate technologies for third world countries. In
Bolivia today these same areas are much less intensively cultivated than in the
past, and hopefully, Mr. Mathews will gain useful information about how the
prehistoric agricultural system functioned. Finally, this project will assist in
the training of an extremely promising young scientist.