* 9017704
* Spectroscopic and Structural Studies of Primary             Photochemical Processes in Photosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1991,12/31/1994
* Richard Malkin, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1994
* USD 293,964.00

The photochemical reaction center complex known as Photosystem I is
characterized by the presence of bound iron-sulfur centers that function as
electron acceptors. Preparations of the photochemically active native
Photosystem I complex contains at least one dozen subunits, most of which have
no well established function. The overall objective of this project is to define
the function of these subunits and to determine their structural organization.
The major experimental techniques will be those of biochemical resolution and
reconstitution and these methods will be supplemented with biophysical
measurements to monitor the functional state of many of the electron carriers.
In addition to characterizing this complex, the project will also consider the
structural organization of polypeptide subunits in a reaction center complex
isolated from anaerobic photosynthetic bacteria known as green sulfur bacteria
since there is compelling biophysical evidence that indicates this complex has
functional components that are similar to those in the plant-type Photosystem I
complex. Results from this project will aid in defining the mechanism of
photoinduced electron transfer in a photochemical reaction center complex and
will provide information on the evolution of the photosynthetic reaction center
complex from primitive to more advanced systems.