* 9017722
* Oxygen and Sulfide Delivery to Intracellular Bacterial Symbionts
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1991,07/31/1994
* Jonathan Wittenberg, Yeshiva University, Albert Einstein College of Medicine
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/1994
* USD 227,464.00

Cytoplasmic hemoglobins characteristic of nearly all bivalves and gastropod
molluscs in which chemoautotrophic bacteria are present as internal symbionts
appear vital to the symbiosis. Three such hemoglobins, from gills of the clam
Lucina, have been isolated and their interactions with either sulfide or oxygen
determined. The role(s) of these hemoglobins in the symbiotic association will
now be examined using broken-cell systems containing symbiotic bacteria,
kpurified gill hemoglobins, sulfide, and oxygen. The molecular mechanisms of
cytoplasmic hemoglobin-mediated oxygen delivery and sulfide delivery to the
bacterial symbionts will be studied; the effects of reduction of either heme or
the ligand on ligand dissociation will be examined. Our understanding of the
means whereby the bacteria utilize carbon dioxide using energy gained from
sulfide oxidation, thus supporting life of this clam and other similar macrobes
should be enhanced by these studies. The particular roles and mechanisms whereby
hemoglobins, present in the cytoplasm of certain marine invertebrates in which
an unusual symbiosis involving internalized chemoautotrophic bacteria exists,
will be studied in terms of the ability of the invertebrate's hemoglobins to
transport oxygen and sulfide to the bacteria. This inter-dependence of micro-
and the macro-organism is an increasingly recognized one; an understanding of
the means whereby sulfide, toxic to the invertebrate, reaches the symbiont and
is protected from oxygen should be enlarged by this study. //