* 9017752
* Mechanisms of Regulation of Cholesterol Transport in        Steroidogenic Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1995
* Vassilios Papadopoulos, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 02/28/1995
* USD 240,000.00

The long term goal of this project is the understanding of the hormonal
regulation of steroidogenesis. Steroid biosynthesis begins with the transport of
the initial substrate, cholesterol, from intracellular stores to the outer
mitochondrial membranes. Following this process, the rate limiting step in
steroidogenesis occurs, which is transport of cholesterol from the outer to the
inner mitochondrial membrane, where its metabolism to steroid hormones starts.
This investigator has identified an intrinsic outer mitochondrial membrane
protein participating in mitochondrial cholesterol transport. This protein is
known as the peripheral- type benzodiazepine receptor (PBR). An investigation of
the mechanisms by which PBR regulates cholesterol transport in adrenocortical
and testicular Leydig cells is proposed. At first, the hypothesis that PBR
regulate the release or migration of the outer mitochondrial membrane
steroidogenic pool of cholesterol will be examined using in vitro reconstitution
experiments of mitochondrial membranes. Electron microscope studies on the
localization of the receptor will be performed. The role of PBR in hormone-
stimulated steroid biosynthesis will be investigated. Phosphorylation of PBR,
identification of the protein kinase responsible for this, and its correlation
with the function of PBR will be examined. This research is based on a novel
finding that a receptor for certain neurotransmitter antagonists that had been
known for their effects on the nervous system is also found on the outer
membranes of mitochondria. Preliminary results suggest that this receptor is
involved in regulating a key step in the regulation of steroid hormone
biogenesis. The results of this research should elucidate the role of this
receptor in the physiologically important process of steroid hormone production.