* 9017764
* Characterization of Quartz Coarse Silt Using Laser Micro-   probe and Objective Cathodoluminesence
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1993
* Stephen Kennedy, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 11/30/1993
* USD 59,403.00

The quartz sediment provided by various source rocks can be characterized on
the basis of physical and chemical properties. Both have been used to evaluate
the sources of quartz sand although the physical properties have been
emphasized. Chemical properties have been used to characterize whole sediment
samples (a mixture of sediment size and mineral composition) or multiple grains
of a single mineral component but generally not for individual grains and
specifically not for fine-grained quartz. Indirect chemical properties observed
using subjective cathodoluminescence (CL) petrography is applied to individual
sand grains, but generally not for the finer quartz grains. Quartz coarse silt
is an important component of mudrocks. The purpose of this pilot study is to
characterize attributes of quartz not previously determined on these fine
particles. LAMMA laser microprobe and objective CL petrography will be used to
document characteristics of quartz coarse silt liberated from various source
rocks in a single drainage system. Quartz coarse silt will be collected from
several first order streams each draining a single known source rock in the
James River drainage basin. This quartz sediment from each source as well as the
quartz in the source rock will be characterized using the two techniques. This
quartz, thus fingerprinted, can then be attributed to specific source rocks.
There are two immediate and major applications of this pilot study. First,
demonstration of the ability of these techniques to identify source rock of
quartz sediment will allow further studies to determine the dominant lithologies
contributing silt to modern muddy environments, a topic presently debated but
possibly not solvable with the commonly used tools at present. Second, because
the characteristics analyzed by these techniques are not expected to be affected
by diagenetic processes, they have the potential to evaluate the sources of silt
in mudrocks if it can be shown that source rock types have unique and
predictable characteristics.