* 9017692
* Small Silver Particles: Characterization by NMR Maganetic   Resonance Catalytic Behavior in Partial Oxidation Reactions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1994
* W. Nicholas Delgass, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 08/31/1994
* USD 141,532.00

This project is funded by two awards: CTS 90-17692 to Purdue University and CTS
90-19612 to the Pennsylvania State University. It is a study of the correlations
between crystallite size, electrical properties, and catalytic behavior of
highly dispersed silver particles on alumina or silica with particle diameters
of 1 to 30 nm. Experiments performed include solid-state nuclear magnetic
resonance of adsorbed species containing carbon-13 on clean silver and on silver
covered with oxygen-16 or oxygen-17; conduction electron spin resonance of the
conduction electrons of small (less than 5 nm) silver crystallites; and isotopic
transient kinetic studies of the partial oxidation of ethylene (to ethylene
oxide) over silver. Previous studies have shown that well-dispersed, silica-
supported silver catalysts do not sinter during partial oxidation; these
catalysts also exhibit selectivities comparable to poorly dispersed
silver/alpha- alumina catalysts, but at much lower promoter (dichloroethane)
concentrations. The detailed mechanism of ethylene oxide formation on silver is
not known, but subsurface oxygen has been shown to be present and dynamically
coupled to the reaction. This study examines these phenomena under a series of
controlled conditions. The expoxidation of ethylene is a worldwide, very
competitive, multibillion-dollar business; even modest improvements in process
efficiency can have major impact on competitive position. This work addresses
this issue directly, and also has implications for other processes.