* 9017112
* High Performance Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometer Upgrade    of Advanced Scanning Ion Microprobe
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/1990,05/31/1994
* Riccardo Levi-Setti, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 05/31/1994
* USD 877,552.00

We propose a biological instrumentation development program aimed at a radical
upgrade of the mass discrimination capability and secondary ion detection
sensitivity of the University of Chicago high resolution Scanning Ion Microprobe
(UC SIM). This is to be accomplished by replacing the existing RF quadrupole
mass filter with a high performance magnetic sector mass spectrometer. The
design and construction of appropriate transfer optics, and modification to the
present secondary ion extraction system, together with high voltage and hardware
construction, will be required to implement this goal. The pursuit of
fundamental biological studies at a much improved level of performance with this
instrument, that has already contributed substantial advances in many areas that
benefit from imaging microanalysis, justifies the proposed upgrade. Established
biologists from several academic institutions will collaborate with us in
exciting applications of the upgraded microprobe, in all cases continuation and
amplification of successful pilot experiments already carried out with the UC
SIM. These applications will aim at: (a) Director mapping of the distribution of
isotope-labelled nucleotides in human chromosomes and evaluation of the
nucleotide content of fragile sites. (b) Identification of the mineral phases
involved in bone formation and of the mechanism of bone resorption initiated by
osteoclasts. This will entail experiments with Ca isotopes as tracers, and the
detection and measurement of phosphorus. (c) Localization and kinetics of trace
elements in tooth and bone tissues, relative to microstructure. Microstructural
study of organs (bone, brain) affected by aluminum. (d) Study of the role of
calcium in neuronal ischemia using retinal neurons as model system. These
studies will make use of Ca isotopes and isotope-labelled nucleotides as
tracers.