* 9017273
* Ternary Porosity Effects on Organic Attenuation by Clays in Clay/Organic/Electrolyte Ternary Systems Studied by Clay-   Modified Electrodes and Low Angle X-ray Diffraction
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/1991,06/30/1994
* Alanah Fitch, Loyola University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Charlene D. Crawley
* 06/30/1994
* USD 185,000.00

The main focus of this project in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program
is the utilization of the electrochemical properties of clay modified electrodes
to study the transport of species that should mimic the movement of organic
pollutants through a clay bed. Models for the kinetic process of ion exchange
(adsorption) followed by partitioning reactions in a porous medium will be
developed for multisweep cyclic voltammetry. These will be fast quasi-explicit
finite difference models, and will be tested experimentally at a clay-modified
electrode with a variety of compounds which should fall into different kinetic
regions. The model will be used to predict the effect of electrolyte speciation
in maximizing retention of an organic compound diffusing through a clay bed. The
role of porosity in controlling the reaction will be monitored in situ by an
electroactive probe whose current will be controlled purely by diffusion, which
is, in turn, controlled by the porosity of the medium. A model has been
developed which relates the porosity of a well-oriented film to the interlayer
spacing. The results are expected to provide an improved understanding of
several important processes which occur in the clays which are used to line
chemical waste disposal sites. Among these are the adsorption and absorption of
chemicals by clays and the shrinking and swelling of clays as solvents and
electrolytes are absorbed. It is also possible that the project will lead to the
development of a rapid electrochemical method for measuring the porosity of
clays.