* 9017152
* International Society of Developmental and Comparative      Immunology for the Vth International Congress; to be held   August 4-9, 1991 at Reed College
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1991,05/31/1992
* Stephen Kaattari, Reed College
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 05/31/1992
* USD 10,000.00

A remarkable variety of organisms inhabit the Earth. Regardless of their
phylogenetic position, their survival depends on their capacity to adapt to
their changing environments. Environmental pathogens are a part of that changing
milieu. All animals and many plants display cell surface glycoproteins that
serve in discrimination of self from non-self molecules. This appears to be a
fundamental aspect of living cells and organisms. In addition to the ability to
discriminate "self" from "foreign", organisms must possess protective mechanisms
to contend with the plethora of potential pathogens and parasites in their
environments. These defense responses may involve contact or short-range cell-
cell interactions, or the synthesis and secretion of defensive molecules with
agglutinating or lytic properties. The International Society of Developmental
and Comparative Immunologists (ISDCI), which meets triennially as a Congress, is
the only international organization of investigators dedicated to the study of
defense mechanisms in the diversity of organisms in the greatly disparate
phylogenetic groups inhabiting this planet. This proposal seeks support for the
Vth International Congress of this society which will be held August 4-9, 1991
at Reed College in Portland, Oregon. The exchange of ideas and data at this
international meeting will contribute greatly to the advancement of knowledge in
this important area.