* 9017043
* Tibetan Plateau and Summer Monsoon
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/1991,06/30/1994
* Peter Bannon, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pamela L. Stephens
* 06/30/1994
* USD 491,200.00

Most of the heat energy that drives and shapes atmospheric circulation patterns
comes from the sun via the underlying surface of the atmosphere. Thermal
contrasts on the surface are generated, e.g., by continent-ocean and pole-
equator differences on the large scale. The Tibetan Plateau in the summer-time
can function as an "elevated hot-plate", reinforcing the thermal contrast
provided by the massive Eurasian continent and its surrounding oceans. It is
conceivable that this reinforcement explains the occurence of the much more
pronounced seasonal reversal of circulation over South Asia than over other
regions. Bannon proposes to use a set of developing theoretical tools to explore
this possibility. His proposed parallel study will use variations of these tools
to analyze the role of the underlying surface in the reinforcement or
elimination of strong temperature contrasts already present in its overlying
(traveling or stationary) air masses. A successful analysis of this process will
help reduce the frequency of a particularly vexing set of weather forecasting
errors, in which frontal passages occur when they were forecasted, but their
associated precipitation patterns, wind conditions, and temperature changes are
either much weaker or stronger than forecast. Bannon's previous work has both
built and applied the tools to be used in problems of this type.