* 9017680
* Paleoenvironmental Analysis of the Yakataga Formation, Gulf of Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1991,05/31/1994
* Martin Lagoe, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Felicia Fauntleroy
* 05/31/1994
* USD 72,071.00

The proposal is a request for renewal of work documenting the
paleoenvironmental history of the glaciomarine Yakataga Formation in the Gulf of
Alaska. This 5 km thick unit is a potential high- resolution record of late
Cenozoic glacial, climatic and depositional history. This record is being
reconstructed on the basis of detailed physical sedimentologic studies and
benthic foraminiferal biofacies analysis. The prior research grant has funded
detailed studies of extensive Yakataga sections at Yakataga Reef, Icy Bay and
Middleton Island. These have provided preliminary models of glaciomarine
depositional processes which involve the periodic advance and retreat of
tidewater ice margins across the continental margin. The present proposal seeks
to initiate an offshore subsurface study utilizing petroleum exploration wells
and publically-available seismic lines. This will provide insights into the
youngest Yakataga Formation which does not crop out, and better control on
depositional geometries in the formation. Once these studies are complete we
will be better able to "read" the depositional and paleoenvironmental record of
the Yakatage Formation and establish it as a high- resolution climatic and
glacial record for the late Cenozoic of the North Pacific. It will also serve as
the basis for increasingly detailed glaciomarine facies models.