* 9017732
* RUI:Theoretical and Experimental Investigation of Viscous   Flow and Convective Heat Transfer in Helicoidal Heat        Exchangers (REU Supplement)
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1991,01/31/1996
* M. Ebadian, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Tong
* 01/31/1996
* USD 259,880.00

This investigation is both experimental and theoretical. The objectives of the
proposed research are as follows: (1) to develop a complete general solution for
viscous laminar and turbulent flows in helicoidal pipes; (11) to obtain the
complete general solution of convective heat transfer for laminar and turbulent
flows in helicoidal pipes and; (iii) to repeat (i) and (ii) experimentally. The
specific objectives ar to obtain the flow fields and thermal properties in the
listed cases for which rigorous analytical/numerical or experimental results are
not available, and to present correlations, tables, and graphs for use in
industrial application. It is believed that the availability of accurate
analytical, numerical and experimental results for these fundamental problems
are important from academic and practical points of view and they will further
enhance the research in this area. The governing equations are non-linear. These
equation, by using the method of perturbation for laminar flow will be reduced
to a set of ordinary differential equations. By the use of numerical methods, an
algorithm will be developed for the evaluation of these equations. The modified
K-. Turbulent Model will be used to solve the governing equations. For part
(iii), an experimental set-up will be designed and used to obtain experimentally
the fluid flow using laser doppler anemometry (LDA) and temperature field using
data acquisition. Experimental findings will be compared with the results of
theoretical/numerical analysis to check the validity of basic assumptions and of
various models available in literature.