* 9017590
* RUI:  The Effect of Ash Flows on Shallow Marine             Sedimentation:  An Example from the Ordovician Capel Curig  Volcanic Formation, North Wales
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1992
* William Fritz, Georgia State University
* Standard Grant
* Felicia Fauntleroy
* 08/31/1992
* USD 39,999.00

The purpose of the research is to investigate two hypotheses involving
sedimentation associated with the emplacement of shallow marine ash-flow tuffs.
Specifically, these hypotheses are: 1) that Ordovician ash-flow tuffs of the
Capel Curig Volcanic Formation were emplaced and welded underwater, and 2) that
explosive volcanism has a significant impact on influencing patterns of shallow
marine sedimentation. Ordovician volcanic and volcaniclastic rocks of the Capel
Curig Volcanic Formation provide an ideal laboratory for testing these
hypotheses. Sedimentary rocks associated with ash-flow tuffs in the Ordovician
of North Wales are well exposed and contain numerous sedimentary structures.
Detailed mapping by the British Geological Survey has provided a well-defined
stratigraphic context for this work. Furthermore, many of these ash-flow tuffs
have been interpreted to have been emplaced and welded underwater, although this
hypothesis has been controversial. Yet the tuffs of the Capel Curig Volcanic
Formation have remained one of the textbook examples of welding in shallow
marine water. The study will determine environments of deposition in the
associated sedimentary rocks beneath the tuffs and paleowater depths from
numerous bedding plane exposures of wave ripples. Determination of the
environments of deposition will test the likelihood of subaqueous welding.
Comparing pre-tuff environments with ones that existed following tuff
emplacement will determine the effect that these tuffs had on patterns of
sedimentation. Successful completion of this work will provide data far beyond
that of solving a local geological problem in Wales. This project will bear
directly on the question of subaqueous welding and on the specific examples that
have been most often to support welding in intermediate depth water. Also,
models of volcaniclastic sedimentation from the Capel Curig Volcanic Formation
will be developed that can be applied in many future studies and used to
determine the influence that explosive volcanism plays on patterns of marine
shelf sedimentation.