* 9017307
* Excavations at the Middle Paleoithic Site of La Quina       (Charente), France
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1991,01/31/1995
* Arthur Jelinek, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1995
* USD 114,663.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Arthur Jelinek will conduct three
seasons of archaeological research at the site of La Quina which is located in
the Charente region of France. This important Mousterian site has been the focus
of this group for several years and the results to date well justify continued
excavation. The site itself contains a series of stratified deposits which are
extremely rich in both faunal and cultural remains. Human skeletal material has
also been recovered. To date, approximately 6,000 lithic objects and 11,000
bones have been catalogued. Over the next three field seasons, the team will
expand the excavations in all levels. Several approaches will be attempted to
provide absolute dates for each level and archaeological materials will be
analyzed to shed insight into Mousterian cultural and subsistence practices.
Mousterian culture dates from the most recent part of the Pleistocene (Ice Age)
and is associated with Neanderthal peoples who were the immediate predecessors
to modern humans. In recent years, these Neanderthals have been the subject of
intense archaeological debate. Some have argued that this group acted in ways
significantly different from the succeeding Upper Paleolithic groups and lacked
the capacity for modern culture. Others argue that Mousterian industries and the
behaviors they reflect are quite complex. Unfortunately, little well collected
data exists to permit examination of the issue and in this context the site of
La Quina is particularly important because of the rich cultural materials it
contains. The large faunal assemblage should permit reconstruction of Mousterian
hunting techniques and demonstrate how these changed and developed over time.
This research is important for several reasons. It will yield data of interest
to a large group of archaeologists. It will provide insight into the background
from which physically modern humans emerged and shed light on the process which
led to this development. Because Dr. Jelinek includes many students in this
project, it should aid in the scientific recruitment.