* 9017419
* Functional Domains in Rubisco SSU
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1991,07/31/1994
* Richard Jensen, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 07/31/1994
* USD 261,000.00

Subunits of multimeric enzymes have evolved interactive protein domains by which
assembly and activity are determined. Ribulose- 1,5-bisphosphate
carboxylase/oxygenase (rubisco), with its two subunits, LSU and SSU, is an
excellent model for studying such subunit assembly and interactions. Extensive
biochemical and physiological studies are available, including protein/gene
sequences and crystallographic structures. Rubisco SSU, which does not
contribute any active site residues, is essential in the L8S8 rubisco holoenzyme
for activity. This project will focus on the functions of domains in SSU in
determining i) folding of SSU, ii) assembly of active L8S8, and iii) SSU
influence of kinetic parameters. Two of these aspects have been extensively
studied by us (Wasmann et al., 1989; Ramage, 1990; Smrcka et all, 1990a,b)
providing the basis for specific mutations which we will introduce into SSU by
site directed mutagenesis. After site- directed mutagenesis, SSU genes will be
expressed in bacteria and assembled with soluble cyanobacterial L8 in vitro.
Assembly of modified SSU will also be investigated following transport into
chloroplast. Kinetics of activation, stability of substrate and effector
binding, and binding parameters of substrate analogs will be measured with
holoenzymes composed of homologous and heterologous subunits. Similar studies on
higher plant rubisco are prevented as LSU is extremely insoluble in the absence
of SSU. Therefore, altered SSU will be expressed and assembled in vitro, in
isolated chloroplasts, and in vivo, following inactivation of resident SSU
expression by a ribozyme gene construct. (As an intermediary step to
establishing the functionality of ribozymes, ribozyme constructs and mutated SSU
will be tested in vitro, after electroporation of genes into mesophyll
protoplasts). The effect of modified SSU on several parameters of activity of
higher plant rubisco will be determined. The hypothesis is that SSU
(cyanobacteria and in higher plants) compensates conformational changes induced
by the binding of substrate to the active site.