* 9018579
* Invertebrate Dormancy: Mechanisms of Metabolic and          Biosynthetic Arrest
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1991,12/31/1994
* Steven Hand, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 12/31/1994
* USD 251,600.00

There are widespread examples of animals in nature that suppress metabolism and
enter dormant states in response to suboptimal environmental conditions. Such a
metabolic response would seem to require coordinated suppression of both energy-
producing pathways and biosynthetic, energy-utilizing processes. One objective
of the proposed studies is to identify the mechanisms responsible for the
simultaneous, yet independent, arrest of protein biosynthesis and of catabolic
pathways during anaerobic dormancy in embryos of the brine shrimp Artemia.
Regulation of protein synthesis will be examined in the cytoplasmic as well as
the intramitochondrial compartments. The same intracellular signal (acidic
intracellular pH) may directly or indirectly mediate arrest of anabolic and
catabolic pathways, and that rates of macromolecular degradation may ultimately
limit the duration of dormancy. Secondly, the importance of intracellular
solutes in disrupting metabolic organization during cellular dehydration will be
studied. Thirdly, studies will be directed toward understanding the nature of
developmental and metabolic arrest during diapause in Artemia embryos. Methods
employed in these studies will include simultaneous microcalorimetry-
respirometry, a cell free translation system for quantifying protein synthesis,
permeabilization of embryos, and in vitro studies with isolated organelles.
Results of these studies should have implication for a variety of biological
systems that experience stress as a result of desiccation, oxygen deprivation an
temperature extremes, or in general, for any tissue or cell where acute
modulation of biosynthesis and energy metabolism is known to occur. //