* 9018392
* Effects of the 1982-83 El Nino Event on Tropical            Eastern Pacific Coral Reefs:  Disturbances, Causes,         Recovery and Retrospective Analyses
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/1991,03/31/1995
* Peter Glynn, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/1995
* USD 548,704.00

This long-term study focuses on the ecological disturbances to eastern Pacific
coral reefs that accompanied the severe and historically unprecedented 1982-83
ENSO (El Nino-Southern Oscillation) event. During the first 3-year segment
(1985-87) of the study a strong causative link was established between prolonged
sea warming and numerous kinds of primary disturbances. During the first and
second 3-year (1988-90) study periods the team of workers involved in this study
have (a) demonstrated the importance of several secondary (long-term)
disturbance processes, (b) revealed the extent of recovery and continuing reef
destruction to date, and (c) provided some indication of the frequency of severe
El Nino disturbances to coral reefs in an historical context. Because some
important secondary disturbances are still occurring, and reef recovery has been
slow (Costa Rica, Panama) or non-existent (Galapagos Islands), it is necessary
to continue with this study in order to understand the variety of changes
involved and the full impact of a major disturbance on coral reef survival and
the potential for continued reef building. ENSO warming disturbances can provide
some clues to the probable changes in coral reefs worldwide if global warming
causes repeated and/or protracted sea temperature increases comparable to the
1982-83 El Nino event.