* 9018922
* Tectonic Setting and Uplift History of Metamorphic Rocks,   Kigluaik Mountains and Vicinity, Seward Peninusla, Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1991,12/31/1993
* Elizabeth Miller, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Roy K. Dokka
* 12/31/1993
* USD 97,957.00

Dome-shaped uplifts of high temperature-low to medium pressure metamorphic rocks
with cores of Cretaceous granite are flanked by high pressure-low temperature
Jurassic (?) blueschists in the Seward Peninsula of Alaska. The origin and
tectonic setting of these complexes is controversial, and their uplift has been
attributed to thermal relaxation following crustal thickening. Preliminary new
work in the Kigluaik Mts. indicates patterns of deformation, metamorphism and
magmatism that are similar to those in Cenozoic metamorphic core complexes of
the Basin and Range province. Field mapping, structural analyses,
andgeochronologic/ thermochronolgoic studies will elucidate the timing and
mechanism of uplift of the blueschists rocks on Seward Peninsula. Areas of
concentrated study include: the highest structural levels exposed; low angle
faults between feebly metamorphosed Paleozoic rocks and greenschist to
blueschist facies rocks beneath; and the high temperature core rocks of the
domes. This approach will also establish whether uplift was single or multi-
stage. The results will bear on the age, regional tectonic setting, and uplift
of blueschist facies rocks in N. Alaska and will address the possible history of
extension leading to the offshore shelf region beneath the Bering and Chukchi
Seas. The results will also provide insight on the interplay between magmatism,
metamorphism and strain in regions of the crust that undergo large vertical
uplift.