* 9018062
* RUI: The Regulation of a Drosophila Accessory Gland Gene
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1991,08/31/1994
* Kevin Kraus, Luther College
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 08/31/1994
* USD 125,491.00

The Drosophila melanogaster accessory gland is a male specific tissue whose
cells synthesize and secrete a variety of products which are transferred to
females during copulation. These transferred products are involved in several
processes in the female. These include increased egg production and oviposition,
storage of viable sperm, and lowered receptivity to further mating. Dr. Kraus
has obtained a cloned gene which is expressed only in the accessory gland. The
RNA encoded by this gene is approximately 400bp in length, making the
determination of gene structure and sequence a relatively simple task. The goal
of the proposed research is two fold; 1) to define the DNA sequences responsible
for the regulation of this gene, and 2) to begin to identify the function of
this gene's polypeptide product. Dr. Kraus will first sequence the gene, and
then define the sequences responsible for the sex and tissue specific expression
via deletion mutagenesis and germline transformation. A polyclonal antibody
against the polypeptide will be raised in rabbits. Dr. Kraus will then study
this gene's expression during the processes of aging and mating by a combination
of Western and Northern analyses. Finally, he will begin to examine the role of
the polypeptide in the reproductive process by determining whether or not it is
transferred to females.