* 9018138
* Characterization of a Growth Inhibitory Activity from         Urogenital Sinus
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1991,01/31/1993
* David Rowley, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Thomas E. Brady
* 01/31/1993
* USD 184,000.00

During prostate gland organogenesis the fetal urogenital sinus mesenchyme
induces and directs the phenotypic differentiation of the apposing epithelium.
This leads to the formation of glandular ducts and acini, typical of the adult
gland morphology. Previous studies from Dr. Rowley's laboratory have used organ
cultures of fetal urogenital sinus to identify potential growth and
differentiation regulatory factors from mesenchyme. These studies have
identified a growth inhibitory factor in the conditioned medium from urogenital
sinus organ cultures and derived mesenchymal cell lines. In addition, the growth
inhibitory activity affects bladder and prostatic epithelial cell lines,
suggesting this activity may affect cell differentiation. The protein
responsible for activity has been purified to near homogeneity. The long term
goals of this project are to understand the fundamental role of this factor,
termed UGIF, in mesenchymal epithelial interactions during organogenesis. The
immediate objectives of the studies proposed here are: to develop antibody and
oligonucleotide probes specific for the UGIF protein; to isolate and clone the
cDNA encoding UGIF and; to determine the spatial and temporal pattern of
expression of UGIF in vivo. The proposed studies will set the foundation to
determine the potential significance of UGIF as a regulatory factor in vivo, and
its specific role in the basic mechanisms of mesenchymal epithelial interactions
and associated organogenesis.