* 9018902
* Import of Polypeptides into Chloroplasts and Mitochondria
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1994
* Anthony Cashmore, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 09/30/1994
* USD 244,750.00

Plant cells are unique, among eukaryotic cells, in that they contain two
organelles, the mitochondria and the chloroplasts, thought to be derived from
prokaryotic endosymbionts in an ancestral organism. Most of the proteins in
these organelles are encoded in the nuclear genome and are synthesized in the
cytoplasm. These proteins are produced as precursors, with N-terminal extensions
of their polypeptide chains known as transit peptides. These precursors bind to
receptors on the two organelles and are transported inside, where the transit
peptides are proteolytically removed. Although the two import systems are
similar in many respects, the transit peptides seem capable of conferring
complete targetting specificity, in vivo, if they are fused to a "passenger
protein." Analysis of the structure of the two types of transit peptides have
revealed differences related to proposed domain structures. The aim of this
project is to determine what structural properties of the transit peptides
confer targetting specificity, distinguishing them, if possible, from properties
required simply for import into the isolated organelles. In order to do this,
artificial transit peptide / passenger protein fusions will be prepared and
assayed for their ability to be imported into isolated plant organelles and in
transgenic tobacco plants. The prototype transit peptide sequences will be
derived from a chloroplast pre-protein of pea and from a mitochondrial pre-
protein from Arabidopsis. The project addresses a very important problem in cell
biology, that is, intracellular compartmentation. In order for cells to function
properly, it is necessary that the macromolecules of the cell be organized in
such a way as to facilitate cellular processes. This compartmentation is
achieved through molecular specificity and recognition at the cellular level. In
the case of the two organelles under study in this project, mitochondria and
chloroplasts, the macromolecular components of each consist of a mixture of
nuclear gene encoded and organelle-specific gene encoded products. The two
organelles have striking similarities: they contain electron-transporting
protein complexes and catalyze bioenergetic reactions; they contain specific
DNA, RNA, and functional ribosomes; the internal spaces are separated from the
cytoplasm by a double set of membranes; and the mechanisms by which nuclear-
encoded proteins enter the organelles seem very similar. However, nuclear
chloroplast proteins do not find their way into mitochondria, and nuclear
mitochondrial proteins do not find their way into chloroplasts. The molecular
mechanism which confers this critical organelle specificity to the import
process is unknown. This set of experiments is likely to shed light on this
important question.