* 9018154
* Cloning of Tomato Fruit Polygalacturonase (PG) Converter    Protein :  Analysis of PG Isozyme Function
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1991,08/31/1994
* Dean DellaPenna, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 08/31/1994
* USD 180,000.00

The activity of the tomato the tomato fruit pectin-hydrolyzing enzyme
polygalacturonase (PG) increases dramatically during ripening due to the
presence of three closely related isoforms, PG1, PG2A and PG2B. The Pg2 isoforms
are composed of single catalytic PG polypeptides while PG1 is a heterodimer
consisting of one PG2 polypeptide in tight association with an ancillary
glycoprotein, the PG converter. The involvement of each isoform in pectin
degradation and other aspects of fruit ripening remain unclear. The PG isoform
levels in planta appear to be determined by the level of converter protein. In
order to increase our understanding of the biosynthesis, assembly and biological
activity of cell wall enzymes such as PG, the levels of individual PG isoforms
will be manipulated in vivo by altering the levels of converter protein in
transgenic wild-type plants. To accomplish this the converter protein will be
purified, cloned and its structure and expression during wild-type fruit
ripening studied. Converter protein levels will be manipulated by expressing a
converter cDNA in sense and antisense orientations in transgenic wild-type
tomato plants presumably resulting in accumulation of only PG1 or PG2. These
studies will increase our knowledge of the effect of individual PG isoforms on
polyuronide degradation and other physiological parameters associated with fruit
ripening. Several enzymes and structural proteins are secreted from plant cells
into the cell wall. The activities of these proteins are essential for normal
growth and development as well as specialized functions such as fruit ripening
and plant defense. An important question is how the activities of such important
proteins is controlled when they are secreted from the cell and not subject to
the normal mechanisms associated with the regulation of cytoplasmic enzymes.
This proposal describes an interesting approach to studying the processing and
function of an extracellular enzyme, polygalacturonase, which degrades
polyuronides in the cell wall during fruit ripening. //