* 9018747
* Provenance, Age and Biomechanics of SuperContinental        Weathering
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1991,01/31/1993
* George Brimhall, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 01/31/1993
* USD 195,457.00

There are a number of intrinsic properties of cratons unified in their pre-
dispersal position in Gondwana. Exposure of deep crustal levels of this
supercontinent is an essential precursor to continental weathering being vital
to the on set and nature of the continental weathering process itself. These
cratonal attributes include: the petrological and imeralogical character of the
bedrock parent material, its unique thermal history, depletion in water and
heat-producing elements, uplift, erosion and ultimate stability necessary for
attainment of a state of tectonic quiescence when subjected to intense
weathering. This transcontinental belt of deep continental crust exposed as
graulite-charnockite-anorthosite bodies parallels the Gondwanide Orogen of
Paleozoic and Early Mesozoic plate convergence affecting South America, Africa,
India, Australia and Antarctica implicating Gondwana supercontinental scale
weathering as the appropriate crustal unit of analysis rather than individual
continental land masses. The necessity of viewing lateritic weathering on a
supercontinental scale is further accentuated by the fact that the classical
"residual" origin of lateritic bauxites is inconsistent with a recent discovery
that wind-blown foreign dust consisting of gibbsite, hematite and goethite also
bearing a component of resistant detrital minerals derived from basement rocks
elsewhere (zircon, ilmenite, rutile and monazite) dominates near surface metal
enrichment of bauxites and laterites. By considering the crustal processes
preceding continental weathering as well as the surficial recycling and
redistribution of chemically-resistant minerals accessed as a direct consequence
of the petrology and mineralogy of the deep crust, we have formulated a testable
model of deep crustal weathering systems. An integrated three-part project is
planned addressing (1) the provenance of chemically-stable detrital minerals,
especially zircon contaminating the upper portions of laterites, (2) age and
duration of lateritic weathering in combination with correlations of paleo-
weathering surfaces in Australia, West Africa and Brazil, and (3) mechanisms of
subsurface transport and incorporation of detritus into the lateritic regolith
during dilational biomechanical mixing of eolian dust by root growth cycles.
Part I utilizes U-Pb ion microprobe dating of zircon using the SHRIMP to define
the sources of mobile minerals and the depths of their translocation into
laterite and bauxite weathering profiles. Part II involves 40Ar/39Ar laser
dating of jarosite as well as manganese and iron oxides. Part III is laboratory
experimentation using a soil mechanics cell capable of simulation root growth
cycles. The proposed interdisciplinary research can contribute to further
development of a much-needed long-term continental record of surficial
environments to complement the marine stratigraphic record of global processes.