* 9018833
* Marine Viruses Infecting Phytoplankton:  Host-Specificity,  Temporal Variability, Decay Rates and Effects on Natural    Phytoplankton Communities
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1993
* Curtis Suttle, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/1993
* USD 165,490.00

There are four specific objectives to this research program which, together,
will yield answers to important questions regarding indigenous marine viruses
which infect phytoplankton. First, the investigator will characterize the host
specificity of viruses that have been isolated and which infect eukaryotic and
prokaryotic phytoplankton. Each of the viral isolates will be screened against a
large number of potential hosts with close and distant phylogenetic
relationships, to the original host. Second, the temporal variability of a virus
which infects Synechococcus sp. will be determined monthly in natural waters by
plaque assay. Third, Dr. Suttle will determine the decay rates (turnover times)
in natural waters of three viruses which have been isolated and developed plaque
assays for. Fourth, the effect of natural virus communities on phytoplankton
productivity and community structure will be ascertained. Almost nothing is
known about viruses which infect marine phytoplankton; yet, data included in
this proposal suggests that viruses are important and can affect rates of carbon
fixation. This research will answer fundamental questions concerning
phytoplankton-virus interactions and persistence of infectious viruses in the
sea. Only studies such as these will provide the requisite data to enable
incorporation of viral-mediated processes into comprehensive models of nutrient
and energy cycling in the global oceans.