* 9018733
* Molecular Genetics of Pectin Lyase Regulation in Erwinia
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1991,12/31/1994
* Arun Chatterjee, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 12/31/1994
* USD 285,000.00

Erwinia carotovora subsp. carotovora (hereafter Ecc) and most other soft-rot
Erwinia spp. produce an assortment of extracellular degradative enzymes such as
pectin lyase (Pnl), pectate lyase (Pel), polygalacturonase (Peh), cellulase,
protease and phospholipase. A long-term goal of our research is to clarify the
genetic and physiological aspects of extracellular enzyme production in soft-rot
Erwinia and to elucidate the role of these enzymes in bacterial plant
pathogenicity. We have shown that while pectinolytic (Pnl) and pectolytic (Pel
and Peh) enzymes cause maceration of plant tissue, they are regulated
differently. In contrast to pectolytic enzymes, most of which are induced by
catabolic products of polygalacturonate or pectin, Pnl is induced by DNA-
damaging agents such as mitomycin C, nalidixic acid, or ultraviolet light. In
Ecc strain 71 (Ecc71) the induction of pnlA, the pectin lyase structural gene,
by these DNA-damaging agents requires products of recA and an activator gene,
digR (= regulator of damage-inducible genes). These products also appear to
control bacteriocin (carotovoricin, Ctv) production and cellular lysis in this
bacterium. We have reconstituted and inducible Pnl system in a RecA+ E. coli
strain carrying a pnlA+ plasmid and a digR+ plasmid. The E. coli strain responds
to the same regulatory signals as the Ecc71 Pnl producing system. Moreover, our
recent findings indicate that digR and not pnlA is induced by DNA damaging
agents in a RecA+ LexA+ E. coli. These observations suggest a cascade type of
regulation wherein a regulatory gene (digR), required for the transcription of
pnlA and possibly other damage-inducible genes, is controlled by DNA damaging
agents. The objectives of this research are (a) to identify and characterize
upstream DNA segments of pnlA that regulate transcription, (b) to characterize
the activator gene, digR and to identify its product, (c) to elucidate the
expression of digR, and (d) to understand the mechanism by which DigR activates
pnlA transcription. In these studies we intend to utilize genetic and molecular
technologies and various tools already available in E. coli and in Ecc71. The
emerging knowledge should help in defining the regulatory circuit and in
understanding the molecular events in the expression of a plant virulence factor
by DNA-damaging agents.