* 9018028
* Protein (s) that Catalyze Extension of Plant Cell Walls
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1991,07/31/1994
* Daniel Cosgrove, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 07/31/1994
* USD 225,000.00

This proposal outlines experiments to characterize a recently identified
protein that appears to be directly involved in the induction of plant cell wall
expansion. The protein will be purified in quantities sufficient to raise rabbit
polyclonal antibodies. The antibodies will be used (i) to identify the
anatomical and cytological location of the protein, (ii) to quantify
developmental changes in the protein, and (iii) to test whether this or
homologous proteins are involved in growth of other organs and other species.
The purified protein will be assayed for enzymatic activities and binding
properties that might provide clues about the biochemical mechanism of its wall-
extension activity. Cell walls will also be analyzed for evidence of post-
translational modification (e.g. thiolreduction or protein phosphorylation) of
this or other proteins, under the influence of auxin and other growth-control
agents. The results will test the hypothesis that plant cell expansion is
developmentally regulated by this protein, which appears to be the first
endogenous protein shown to cause expansion of isolated plant cell walls. The
growth of plants is controlled primarily by the relaxation and expansion of the
polymeric wall. The precise molecular structure of the plant cell wall and the
molecular mechanism of cell wall relaxation and expansion is not known. The
identification of a specific protein that can induce these processes in isolated
cell walls provides strong evidence that the protein is directly involved in
this phenomenon. The purification and characterization provides for the first
time the ability to directly investigate the molecular mechanism of cell
enlargement. Understanding the mechanism of cell wall loosening may also provide
new information about the molecular architecture of the plant cell wall.//