* 9018047
* Predator-Prey Interaction at the Cellular Level in a        Protozoan System
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1991,11/30/1994
* Christine Sundermann, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 11/30/1994
* USD 131,994.00

Investigations of cell recognition in free-living protozoa have, in the past,
been limited mainly to mating type recognition in ciliates. One other example
that has been partially investigated is the predator-prey relationship between
suctorians and their prey. Prey are selected by recognition of surface antigens
displayed on the prey's cilia. During proveious work, monoclonal antibodies
specific for ciliary antigens of the prey, Tetrahymena, were generated and
localized on the prey. The proposed work will utilize these monoclonal
antibodies and identify which antigens are responsible for recognition.
Inhibition of recognition (and therefore feeding) will be assayed by selectively
masking the prey's surface antigens with monoclonal antibodies. In order to
characterize the predator's surface receptor that selects prey, monoclonal
antibodies directed against the suctorian will be used to block receptors in a
set of assays of feeding inhibition that are complementary to the assays
mentioned above. Binding of all monoclonal antibodies that are important in
recognition/receptor function will be localized at the light and electron
microscope levels with labeled secondary antibody. The ciliated larva of the
suctorian, which is not recognized as prey, also will be probed with monoclonal
antibodies and lectins to determine its similarity to the adult suctorian and to
prey. Suctorians are tentacle-bearing protozoa that feed upon other free-
living, ciliated protozoa. Some microorganisms that swim against the tentacles
of the suctorian are not captured and remain unharmed, while other ciliated
protozoa are immediately captured, immobilized, and ingested. A variety of
evidence suggests that receptors for prey are located on the tentacle and that
these receptors recognize only certain components of the ciliary membrane of the
prey. The goals of the proposed research are to understand the specificity of
the receptors on the suctorian tentacle involved in recognizing prey vs non-
prey, and to identify the proteins of the prey's ciliary membrane that are
recognized. The results of this research will contribute to a new understanding
of recognition phenomena in protozoa.