* 9018604
* Mother-infant interaction and attachment in Mexican and      Mexican-Americans
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1992
* Marlene Zepeda, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* None
* 09/30/1992
* USD 11,999.00

This project will endeavor into an important area of study. The P.I. intends to
study comparisons across generations within the Mexican and Mexican-Americans
cultural groups. It has been identified that Mexican and Mexican-Americans have
the highest fertility rate in the U.S. and are projected to comprise the
majority of the population in certain parts of the country by the end of the
century. Information regarding the early socialization practices of Mexican and
Mexican-Americans would provide valuable assistance to social scientists and
practitioners interested in understanding how cultural background interacts with
early experiences to influence developmental outcome in children. Prior research
has pointed out that one of the most important factors affecting a child's
development is the quality of the mother-infant attachment relationship.
Attachment has been defined as an affectional tie that one person develops with
another person that transcends time and space. The goal of the attachment
relationship is that of felt security in the infant. The development of a secure
attachment is thought to encourage exploratory behavior, promote social
competence with peers, and assist with the development of ego resiliency by
school age. The proposed study intends to build upon Beckwith and Cohen's
findings on attachment by comparing and contrasting the quality of the mother-
infant relationship and security attachment.