* 9018798
* Characterization of a Streptococcal Conjugative Transposon
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1994
* Moses Vijayakumar, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 11/30/1994
* USD 270,000.00

This research proposal deals with a novel class of transposons capable of
intracellular as well as intercellular transposition. Besides being causative
agents for the horizontal spread of multiple antibiotic resistance among
clinical streptococci, this group of genetic elements has been shown to transfer
from Gram positive to Gram negative bacteria. Thus, an investigation of the
properties of these is of biological interest, and of medical relevance.
Experimental observations seem to indicate that the larger conjugative
transposons such as omegaBM6001 and omegaBM4200 are made of smaller discrete
units at least one of which is capable of independent movement when removed from
its original context. The objectives of the proposed study are to distinguish
between and to isolate the component units, and to identify the transfer related
regions. Recent experiments demonstrating the retention of conjugal properties
of the BM6001 element subsequent to the in vivo deletion of a Tn916 like element
from within it strongly suggest the existence of a separate class class of
mobile elements whose properties could be distinct from those of the Tn916 class
of elements. Mutant donor strains would be created to define the transfer--
related regions within the omegaBM6001 devoid of the tet element. The details of
the preferred target sites for the omegaBM6001 and the omegaBM4200 elements
would be obtained by dideoxy DNA sequencing. The role of the termini and the
preferred target site of the BM6001 element in conjugal transfer would be tested
following construction of mutant strains carrying in vivo induced deletions of
these regions and using them in filter-mating experiments. Besides
characterizing the structural and functional details of this novel class of
transposable DNA segments, the proposed investigation could enlarge our
understanding of the origin and autoaccumulation of heterologous elements some
of which include antibiotic resistance determinants.