* 9018395
* Low-Frequency Measurements of the Cosmic Microwave          Background Radiation
* O/D,OPP
* 01/01/1991,06/30/1993
* George Smoot, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* John T. Lynch
* 06/30/1993
* USD 301,454.00

This project will make cosmological measurements of two distinctly different
types. 1. The experimenters will make cosmic microwave background radiation
(CMBR) measurements of the absolute brightness of the sky above South Pole at
three frequencies, 1.0, 1.5 and 7.5 GHz. Similar measurements were made at the
higher two frequencies from Pole in 1989, but the 1.0 GHz radiometer is new. The
purpose is to determine if there are deviations from the CMBR temperature of
2.735 K which has been measured at higher frequencies, most notably by the new
NASA satellite Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE). Deviations, at different
wavelengths, from the 2.736 K figure would indicate that there has been an input
of significant energy into the universe since the time of the big bang. 2. They
will attempt to measure microwave radiation coming upwards from the polar ice
sheet, which is over two kilometers thick at South Pole. It has been
hypothesized that extremely energetic neutrinos that have passed entirely
through the Earth can interact in the ice, or rocks just below, and cause a
electromagnetic shower that could result in detectable radio emissions. If this
is true, then the polar ice sheet could be used as a vast detector for the new
field of neutrino astronomy. This project is jointly funded by the Divisions of
Polar Programs and Astronomy.