* 9018599
* Microorganisms on Burrow Walls of Infauna:  Predictable or  Fortuitous Occurrence?
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/1991,08/31/1992
* Fred Dobbs, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/1992
* USD 44,042.00

The burrows of macro-infaunal organisms are generally sites of intense
microbial activity and often harbor abundant populations of microorganisms.
Since the various infaunal species differ greatly in their biology (e.g.,
feeding guild, motility) and specifically, in aspects of their burrow
construction and ventilation, it is reasonable to anticipate that the
microbiology of their burrows will also vary. This project will test whether a
burrows' increased microbial abundance and activity simply represents
enhancement of ambient microorganisms or whether there are specific microbial
populations that predictably occur in burrows, independent of the ambient
microbial community. A comprehensive assessment of these complex microbial
communities will require non-selective methods; the microbes' phospholipid,
ester-linked fatty acids (PLFA), the chief constituent of membrane lipids in
eubacteria and eukaryotes will be examined. These PLFA, which have already been
extracted from field samples of burrows and ambient sediments, are powerful,
discriminating tools for determining microbial biomass, composition, and even
physiological condition. These biochemical markers will be used to compare the
burrow microbes of five infaunal species, representing three phyla, sampled
across six sites. Comparisons will be made at interspecific and intraspecific
levels using multivariate analysis. This project will test an intriguing
biogeochemical hypothesis and impinge on the very attractive concept of
"microbial gardening".