* 9018880
* Phloem in Plant Tissue Cultures:  An Alternative Approach
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1994
* Richard Sjolund, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/1994
* USD 268,879.00

Phloem sieve elements differentiate in tissue cultures of Streptanthus
tortuosus (Brassicaceae). The cell walls of the callus sieve elements are
thicker than the walls of the surrounding parenchyma cells. When treated with a
solution of cell wall- digesting enzymes, the callus parenmchyma cells form
wall-less protoplasts. The sieve elements, however, retain their walls during
this procedure, especially the walls which form sieve plates between the sieve
elements. As a result, it has been possible to separate sieve elements from
parenchyma cells in these cultures. Using the sieve element fractions as
immunogens, monoclonal antibodies directed against the antigens present in sieve
elements have been produced. The monoclonal antibodies were screened for
reactivity with phloem cells in frozen sections of S. tortuosus callus tissue.
These antibodies will be used to identify phloem- specific proteins using
immunoblotting techniques and to identify specific sieve element organelles and
membranes that contain the identified proteins. Since the antibodies are also
able to cross- react with sections of Arabidopsis plant tissues, the antibodies
will be used to screen an Arabidopsis expression library in order to identify
phloem-specific genes. Specialized cells known as phloem sieve elements play a
vital role in the biology of higher plants. These conducting elements are
responsible for passage of nutrients from leaves to non- photosynthetic organs
such as roots and meristems. In addition, long-distance transport of assimilates
is a key step in the movement of nutrients into the harvestable grains, fruits,
and tubers that form the basis of agriculture. Despite the critical role that
these cells play in higher plants, many key aspects of phloem development,
structure and function remain to be determined. The proposed research will
address the basic cell biology of phloem sieve elements. The phloem-specific
antibodies that will be produced in this study should allow new approaches to
determining the genetic basis of phloem development and function.