* 9018718
* Enhancement of DNA Replication
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1991,01/31/1995
* Maria Gennaro, Public Health Research Institute of New York
* Continuing grant
* Philip Harriman
* 01/31/1995
* USD 323,000.00

With the exception of plasmid copy control, the mechanisms regulating initiation
of DNA replication are still to be defined. The goal of this proposal is to
understand how initiation of DNA replication is regulated by cis-acting elements
that are located outside of the origin of replication. The present studies will
focus on cmp, a cis-acting enhancer of plasmid replication which is located
about 1 Kilobase away from the plasmid's origin of replication. The effects of
cmp on plasmid replication ( demonstrated by plasmid competition studies and by
analysis of exponential replication rates) appear to derive from a change in the
efficiency with which the plasmids's replication origin interacts with its
initiator protein. cmp activity is orientation-independent and can be detected
over a wide range of distances from the origin. cmp is recognized by a site-
specific DNA-binding protein 9CBF) encoded by the bacterial host. The goal of
this proposal is to understand the molecular mechanism by which cmp enhances
plasmid replication and to define the role of host factors in cmp enhancing
activity. To achieve this goal, genetic and biochemical studies willbe
performed, often in parallel. Deletion analysis of cmp DNA will define the
minimal sequence for cmp and the DNA site for CBF binding within cmp will be
identified by footprinting. In vivo, cmp activity will be studied using a
replication assay; footprinting and nicking assays will define the effect of cmp
on the interaction between replication origin and initiator protein. The role of
CBF will be studied by inactivating the gene encoding CBF and determining the
effect of the mutation on plasmid replication. Purified CBF protein will be
obtained to design appropriate probes to screen a library of bacterial
chromosomal DNA. Host involvement will be also investigated by isolating host
mutants that suppress the plasmid's Cmp defect. The regulatory interaction
between cmp and ori may be mediated by a protein-protein bridge involving CBF
and the initiator protein, with the intervening DNA looping out. Formation of
such a protein complex will be investigated by chromatographic and
electrophoretic techniques, and the configuration of the protein-bond plasmid
molecules will be examined by electron microscopy. Interactions between cmp and
other cis-acting elements in the plasmid and/or other plasmid encoded factors
will also be addressed by genetic studies involving isolation of plasmid-linked
second-site mutations that suppress the Cmp-phenotype. A knowledge of the loaf-
range regulatory interactions in the activity of cmp will contribute to our
understanding of how initiation of DNA replication is regulated by cis-acting
elements distantly located from the origin of replication. cmp will provide a
novel model system to investigate "action at a distance (along DNA)" in general