* 9018076
* The Role of Cutinase in the Determination of Tissue Specificity of Fungal Plant Pathogens
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1991,05/31/1994
* Harvey Hoch, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 05/31/1994
* USD 180,000.00

Plants have evolved an effective arsenal of defense systems and are resistant to
the vast majority of attempted infections by fungal pathogens. In sharp contrast
to cultivar and non-host resistance, the acknowledged fact that specific plant
tissues (e.g., stems and leaves) are either susceptible or resistant to a
particular pathogen has not been under investigation as a source for durable
disease resistance. We have provided first evidence that fungal cutinases are
involved in the determination of fungal tissue specificities. Conclusive
evidence exists that they are generally involved in the penetration of the
pathogens through the protective and polymeric cuticle layer. Although this
function of cutinases appears identical for most of the pathogens investigated,
the enzymatic properties are surprisingly diverse. Evidence exists that one of
these parameters, the pH-dependency of cutin hydrolysis, is related to the
tissue specificity of the respective pathogens. This hypothesis will be tested
with Alternaria brassicicola, an non-specific pathogen that produces both
prototypes of cutinase. The enzymes will be purified and characterized.
Antibodies will be used to clone both cutinase cDNAs and, ultimately, both
genes. The ultimate goal is the disruption of each of the cutinase genes
independently, and to study the impact of these changes on the pathogenicity on
different host tissues. The ability of a pathogen to infect plant tissues
depends on factors in both the host and the pathogen. The pathogen must be able
to invade the plant tissue and avoid a variety of host chemical defenses. To be
resistant to infection, the host must effectively recognize the pathogen and
respond appropriately. Some pathogens need a portal of entry, such as a wound,
to infect plant tissues; whereas other more virulent pathogens have the ability
to digest the outer protective layers of the plant and, hence, only need to come
in contact with the plant to initiate infection. The outer layer of the plant is
composed of an insoluble polymer called cutin, and invading pathogens must first
degrade this layer with enzymes known as cutinases. The work supporting this
proposal has shown that tissue specificity of plant pathogens may depend in part
on the different specificities of the cutinase enzymes. This also implies that
host resistance may depend in part on the heterogeneity of the cutinase polymer
produced by the plant. This work should provide a better understanding of this
heterogeneity that will add to our knowledge of pathogenic specificity that can
be used in the design of new forms of plant defense through changes in cutin
structure.//