* 9018890
* Dissociation of Molecular Nitrogen
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1994
* Hanspeter Helm, SRI International
* Continuing grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 03/31/1994
* USD 220,000.00

This project is concerned with developing basic data on atomic and molecular
nitrogen that is needed to better understand energy flow and chemistry in the
upper atmosphere. Electron impact dissociation and photodissociation of
molecular nitrogen produce atomic nitrogen in either the ground state N(4S) or
in one of its excited states, N(2D) or N(2P). The reactivity of atomic nitrogen
and its role in the odd nitrogen cycle depends sensitively upon the state of
excitation of the nitrogen atom. Changes by 100% in thermospheric NO
concentrations are predicted when the ratio of ground to excited states produced
in dissociation is varied from 50:50 to 46:54. While a ratio of 50:50 is assumed
on theoretical grounds, the ratio itself has never been determined
experimentally. The principle investigator has developed a novel technique that
permits direct measurement of the excitation state of both nitrogen atoms
produced in N2 dissociation. The measurement is carried out in a fast beam of
nitrogen molecules using laser excitation to study excited states of N2 in the
region from 10 to 18 eV. This technique will be used to determine precisely the
rate of predissociation of excited states of N2 and the state of excitation of
the atomic nitrogen products formed. Branching ratios to N(4S), N(2D), and N(2P)
are then obtained by summation over all the states involved in photodissociation
and electron impact dissociation of N2.