* 9018807
* Conformational Dynamics of Block Copolymer Liquids
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1991,06/30/1996
* Timothy Lodge, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/1996
* USD 438,000.00

Block copolymers enjoy increasing use in a wide range of materials applications,
due primarily to properties derived from the thermodynamic interactions between
blocks. With increasing chain length and/or interaction strength, block
copolymer liquids undergo an order-disorder transition (ODT) to a
microstructured state. Although much has been learned about the accessible
morphologies in the strong-segregation limit, i.e., well into the ordered state,
the behavior in the vicinity of the ODT, i.e., the weak-segregation limit, is
much less understood. We will use a powerful optical technique, oscillatory flow
birefringence (OFB), to both diagnose and characterize the ODT and associated
order-order transitions. In addition, extensive calculations have shown that the
dilute- solution OFB properties of block copolymers are uniquely sensitive to
the lengths and chain locations of the various blocks; both quantities are
otherwise difficult to determine. We will explore the potential of OFB as a
characterization tool for block copolymers, and in so doing assess the effect of
the block-block interaction on the relaxation spectrum. Finally, the
investigation will be continued of the role of the solvent in conformational
dynamics experiments such as OFB, both in terms of solvent dynamics and solvent
quality. In particular, a remarkable relationship between solvent rotational
relaxation and the high-frequency viscoelastic properties of polymer solutions
will be examined further.