* 9018751
* Structural/Functional Analysis of Chicken and Lamprey C3
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1991,10/31/1994
* John Lambris, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 10/31/1994
* USD 285,000.00

C3 plays a critical role in complement activation due to its ability to bind to
other complement proteins, and interact with several cell surface receptors. The
elucidation of the molecular features related to these C3 associated functions
requires further analysis of its structure. The goal of this project is to
analyze the structure and functions of C3 from two phylogenetically key species,
the chicken and the lamprey, and to compare and correlate this information with
what is known about mammalian C3 in order to further our understanding of this
molecule. At the protein level, the objectives will be to purify C3 from the
plasma of chickens and lampreys and test their ability to react with human
complement proteins CR1, CR2, CR3, C5, H, B, I, and P as well as with autologous
complement receptors. Previously established purification procedures will be
used. The binding of C3-binding proteins to C3 from the two species will be
analyzed by direct binding ELISA, by binding to C3 fragment-coated erythrocytes,
and by inhibition assays. Amino acid sequences for the different C3s will be
obtained by sequencing proteolytic fragments of C3 . In order to obtain
N-terminal amino acid sequences of fragments generated by autologous C3
convertases and factor I (in the presence of H), serum of the two species will
be activated by zymosan, the zymosan bound C3 fragments will be eluted,
separated by SDS-PAGE, and then blotted to PVDF membranes. The different C3
fragments will be sequenced directly from the PVDF membranes. The presence of
carbohydrates and thiolester bonds will also be determined. Oligonucleotide
probes constructed from the determined amino acid sequences, cDNA probes or
affinity purified anti-C3 antibodies will be used to screen lambda gt11 cDNA
liver libraries to obtain complete primary structure for the various C3s.
(Lambda gt11 cDNA liver libraries from the two species have been prepared
already, and four candidate clones for chicken C3 have been isolated thus far.)
The obtained sequences will be compared and correlated to functional data. Of
special interest are the C3 segments known to mediate the binding of C3-binding
proteins. The interaction of the protein, "C3", with other plasma proteins and
with several cell surface receptors make it a key participant in phagocytic and
immunoregulatory processes involved in animal defense mechanisms. Preliminary
experiments suggest that it is possible to identify the structural features of
C3 that are important for its functions by comparing the C3 amino acid sequences
between species, and correlating this information with the ability of these C3s
to bind to different C3-binding proteins. The proposed studies, in addition to
providing new information on the phylogenetic history of C3, will provide basic
information on how the structural features of C3 relate to its multiple
functions.