* 9018243
* Advances in Chemical Metallurgy - Conference and Workshop,  Bombay, India, January 9-13, 1991 Group Travel Award in U.S.and Foreign Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 11/15/1990,10/31/1991
* Neil Birks, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 10/31/1991
* USD 72,830.00

Description: This project supports the participation of 17 U.S. scientists at
an International Conference and Workshop on Chemical Metallurgy, to be held in
Bombay, India, between January 9 and 13, 1991. The Indian organizer is Dr. C.K.
Gupta of the Bhabha Atomic Research Center (BARC). The topics of the conference
will include: physical chemistry of metal extraction; experimental techniques
and measurement in metallurgical thermodynamics and kinetics; advances in pyro-
and hydro-metallurgy of metals and of sulphides; oxide and halide reduction
processes with special reference to the extraction and refining of refractory
and reactive metals; nuclear metals and materials processing; rare earth metals
technology; electrothermics, melting and refining; fluidized bed processes;
minerals processing; chemical vapour deposition; plasma and laser applications
in material processing; vacuum metallurgy; ultrapurification; computer
applications in process metallurgy; process modelling and optimization; and
energy conservation and pollution control in metallurgical processes. The
binational workshop will identify areas for future collaboration between U.S.
and Indian scientists in the following broad topics: process metallurgy and
optimization; energy conservation and pollution control in metallurgical
processes; reagents in mineral industries; and solvent extraction and
electrowinning of base metals. A workshop proceedings is planned to be published
and distributed to U.S. and Indian interested scientists. Scope: The field of
the conference and workshop is very important for the recovery and utilization
of metals in view of the energy and environmental concerns in the U.S. and in
India. The two cooperating scientists, and the proposed U.S. participants are
all well known and respected researchers in the field. BARC is one of the
largest and most productive research organizations in India. The binational
workshop should greatly enhance the potential for scientific collaboration
between India and the U.S.