* 9018618
* Pattern Formation and Gene Regulation in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1991,08/31/1994
* Ronald Blackman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 08/31/1994
* USD 300,000.00

The long term goal of this project is to understand the molecular events
underlying tissue growth and development. Working with Drosophila melanogaster,
Dr. Blackman is studying the expression of the decapentaplegic (dpp) gene in the
group of cells, called imaginal disks, that give rise to much of the adult's
epidermis. The dpp gene is a member of the TGF-beta family of secreted growth
factors and is required for normal pattern formation in the developing disks.
Its expression during disk growth is controlled by a 30 kb cis-regulatory region
lying downstream (3') of the transcription unit. Distributed throughout this
region are numerous regulatory elements, suggesting that many genes interact
with dpp to control its pattern of expression. During the project period, Dr.
Blackman proposes to: 1) continue his molecular analysis of the cis-regulatory
sequences controlling dpp transcription in the imaginal disks and 2) identify
genetically those genes responsible for the trans-acting regulatory factors
which interact with these sequences. The products of the TGF-beta family are
involved in a broad range of growth regulatory events in mammals, amphibians,
and insects. While the vertebrate systems have provided a wealth of information
on the cell biology and biochemistry of the factors, Drosophila affords the
ideal system for examining the role of these molecules during development.