* 9019669
* Phylogeny of Anseriformes and Galliformes Using mtDNAs:  The Role of Rate Heterogeneity and Alignment Strategies
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1991,02/28/1995
* David Mindell, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* None
* 02/28/1995
* USD 215,000.00

The primary challenge facing systematists working with DNA sequence characters
is to distinguish plylogenetically informative change from the larger set of
character change determined. Sequence informativeness varies due to variable
rates of evolutionary change within and among nucleotide sequences. Meeting the
challenge stated above, thus, requires systematists to learn about the variable
nature and rate of change for DNA sequence characters. The early history of
extant avian lineages remains poorly known, with conflicting hypotheses denoting
a shortage of informative characters. Resolution of relationships among avian
orders is central to a larger debate concerning the reliability and merits of
alternative phylogenetic methods. In seeking to address issues of molecular
systematics methods and avian phylogeny together, the objectives of the proposed
research are: 1) to determine phylogenetic relationships for the avian orders
Anseriformes and Galliformes, and their placement relative to Paleognathae
(ratites and tinamous) and Neognathae (all other extant birds); 2) to determine
relative rates of change for DNA sequence characters, and assess their
application to phylogenetic analyses; and 3) to assess effects of different
alignment strategies in phylogenetic analyses. Mitochondrial DNA will be
extracted from tissues, and 12S ribosomal RNA and cytochrome oxidase I genes
will be amplified via the polymerase chain reaction and sequenced using standard
dideoxy chain termination techniques. The proposed research is expected to
improve significantly our knowledge of phylogenetic relationships among early
diverging avian lineages, and to provide fundamental information regarding
phylogenetic methods broadly applicable within the field of systematics.