* 9019174
* Role of Aminoacylation in the Replication of Viral RNA
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1991,07/31/1995
* Theo Dreher, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1995
* USD 285,000.00

The genomic RNAs of some plant viruses contain tRNA-like structures at their 3'
ends. There is a highly developed tRNA mimicry, with aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase
and elongation factor interacting efficiently with the Viral RNAs. The
advantages to the virus of this elaborate tRNA mimicry remain unclear, but are
probably involved in (-) strand synthesis, the first step of the viral
replication cycle. The goal of this proposal is to understand the function of
the tRNA mimicry for turnip yellow mosaic virus (TYMV). The 82 nucleotide-long
tRNA-like structure of TYMV specifically accepts valine and appears to include
the (-) strand promoter. We have shown that alteration of the -CAC-valine
anticodon to a non- valine anticodon results in dramatic loss of valylation in
vivo. Experiments are proposed to test whether the anticodon is important (a)
primarily in directing the valylation of the viral RNA, or (b) because it is an
essential recognition element of the (-) strand promoter. TYMV replicase will be
purified in order to determine which subunits- viral or host-encoded (e.g.
elongation factor) - are responsible for the recognition of the tRNA-like
structure as promoter. While mimicry at the phenotype level has been recognized
as a biological phenomenon for many years, mimicry at the DNA level is new and
unexpected. The information resulting from this award should give some insight
into cause.