* 9019990
* Mathematical Models of Dynamics and Evolution in Structured Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1993
* Shripad Tuljapurkar, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 12/31/1993
* USD 79,598.00

The observed changes and evolution of natural populations are closely
influenced by the life history of the organisms involved, and their responses to
environmental change. Environments can drive temporal changes in the rates of
vital events such as birth, death and growth. They can also result in resource
limitations that reveal themselves in density-dependent population responses.
This proposal aims to explore the consequences of both of these kinds of
environmental effects for dynamics and evolution. One direction of study is the
analysis of changing environments as they affect the rate at which organisms
develop, and the distribution of reproduction over the lifespan of organisms,
with special attention to repeated reproduction and developmental delays. This
will be the first systematic analysis of the effect of environmental pattern on
the evolution of complex life cycles, and will also explore the relationship
between population growth and the components of the life cycle, when the
environment is changing unpredictably over time. A second direction of study
focuses on resource limitation and density effects in shaping the dynamics of
population change; in particular, the ways in which such effects can drive
cyclical change in population numbers and composition. These effects have been
studied in experimental populations, and the theory will be applied to these
data.