* 9019883
* Sulfur Biogeochemistry in Freshwater Wetlands:  The         Potential for Accumulation of Anthropogenic Sulfur          Deposition
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1991,03/31/1996
* Mark Morgan, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Richard F. Dame
* 03/31/1996
* USD 359,930.00

This research is designed to assess the potential of freshwater wetlands to
accumulate anthropogenic sulfur. The work is predicated on the observation that
under certain circumstances, stable sulfur isotope analysis can distinguish the
origin of sulfur compounds within sediments. These analyses, combined with
precise measurements of sulfur pool sizes and sulfate reduction rates, can
determine if and to what extent, sulfur is accumulating within wetland peat, in
what form, and from what source. Both a modeling and an experimental approach
(including laboratory and whole watershed manipulation) are used to detail the
important processes affecting sulfur cycling. The total sulfur pool is
considered as three separate subfractions: reduced inorganic sulfur (RIS),
organic ester sulfate (ES), and organic carbon bonded sulfur (CBS), and analyzed
for pool size, stable sulfur isotope ratio, and rate of formation and breakdown.
The role of organic substrates and sulfate concentration in controlling the rate
of reduced sulfur formation is also examined. The bulk of this research will be
carried out in a well studied wetland in the New Jersey Pinelands. An important
adjunct to this research will be participation in an interdisciplinary and
international research effort called HUMEX in Norway. HUMEX is a whole watershed
acidification of a Sphagnum-dominated wetland and humic lake that is similar to
wetlands and surface waters in the Pinelands. The results from this study will
make important contributions to ecosystem ecology by 1) documenting the
importance of wetland S biogeochemical cycling in regulating watershed S flux,
2) providing the first direct evidence on the long-term storage products of
dissimilatory sulfate reduction in freshwater wetland peat, 3) identifying the
important processes regulating S flux in wetland peat, and 4) testing the
generalizability of these mechanisms to other systems. Dr. Morgan is a leading
wetland ecosystem scientist with expertise in sulfur biogeochemistry. The
facilities for this research are outstanding.