* 9019181
* Structure of Antibodies Binding Similar Sites on Cytochromes
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1991,07/31/1994
* Ronald Jemmerson, University of Minnesota Saint Paul
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 07/31/1994
* USD 269,200.00

The physicochemical parameters which guide antibody recognition of a protein
antigen will be studied employing cytochrome c (cyt) as a model antigen. Of
particular interest is the basis for differences in the antibody repertoires
responding to variant cyts. Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) will be elicited
against several cyts that differ by as little as one amino acid in an antigenic
region. The epitopes recognized will be determined from antibody binding assays
employing a number of cyt variants prepared by site-directed mutagenesis or
obtained from natural sources. The amino acid sequences of the heavy and light
chains of the mAbs will be deduced from the nucleotide sequences of cDNA. mAbs
binding similar epitopes will be compared in terms of primary structure and any
differences that occur as a result of an amino acid change in an epitope will be
determined. The three-dimensional structures of mAbs showing such differences
will be modeled using computer graphics as will their interaction with cyt to
obtain insight into the chemistry of the interaction. Some of these models will
be tested by X-ray crystallography in a related study. Preliminary data indicate
relatively restricted antibody gene usage with distinct V region genes used in
response to the two major antigenic regions of cyt. An effect of epitope
topography on complementary determining region length is also apparent. These
observations will be studied further to advance our understanding of antibody
recognition of native protein antigens. The results should serve as a model for
protein-protein interactions, in general.