* 9019559
* The Calibration of Indicator Dyes for the Measurement of    Oceanic pH
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/1991,06/30/1993
* Andrew Dickson, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 06/30/1993
* USD 157,578.00

The final goal of the research is to establish spectrophotometric pH
measurements as a key analysis in the study of the oceanic carbon dioxide
system. The bulk of the work will be focussed on calibrating the dyes for use as
pH indicators by direct reference to measurements using the highly reproducible
hydrogen/silver- silver chloride cell. Additional work will be performed to
assess the stability of the indicator dyes and the importance of impurities in
commercially available chemicals. Experiments will also be conducted to
demonstrate that these pH measurements of dissolved inorganic carbon, total
alkalinity, and f(CO2). Furthermore, an additional pH buffer for use in the
electrometric measurement of oceanic pH, will be established. Detailed and
precise pH profiles will be obtained in the North Pacific Ocean in conjunction
with the CO2 system measurements of NOAA personnel. The proposed work entails
measurements of spectrophotometric pH on each seawater sample analyzed by NOAA
personnel for total inorganic carbon, CO2 partial pressure, and total
alkalinity. These measurements will be used to assist in long term NOAA
investigations of oceanic-atmospheric CO2 exchange and will also be used to
verify the accuracy of pH determinations involving in alkalinity, total CO2,
pCO2 and pH data sets.