* 9019624
* Cranial Develpment in Direct-Developing Anurans
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1991,06/30/1995
* James Hanken, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 06/30/1995
* USD 252,780.00

Direct development is an evolutionarily derived life history mode in
vertebrates and invertebrates in which the free living, aquatic larval stage is
lost. This project examines the pattern and mechanisms of cranial development in
direct developing anurans, and how these differ from those in metamorphosing
taxa. Experimental and descriptive methods include immunohistochemistry (to
localize the embryonic distribution of type II collagen and visualize the
initial skeletal pattern); scanning electron microscopy (to document neural
crest morphology and migration); heterospecific transplantation of premigratory
cranial neural crest and cranial ectoderm (to examine inductive tissue
interactions that underlie the development, and loss, of cranial tissues); in
vivo administration of thyroid hormone and TH- blocking agents; TH
radioimmunoassay (to measure the contribution of TH from maternal and embryonic
sources); and conventional histology. Analyses will focus on Eleutherodactylus
coqui (Leptodactylidae), whose ontogeny is among the most derived of any direct
developing anuran with respect to the ancestral metamorphic pattern of cranial
development. Reference data concerning the ancestral pattern will be obtained
from several phylogenetically diverse species,including Bombina orientalis
(Discoglossidae), Xenopus laevis (Pipidae), and Rana pipiens (Ranidae). Results
will contribute to our understanding of the basis of direct development in
amphibians and how this important life history mode has evolved. They also will
be used to address a series of issues in developmental and systematic biology,
concerning the relation between development and morphological evolution. These
include the evolutionary implication of mechanisms of cranial pattern formation;
the importance of ontogenetic repatterning vs. heterochrony; the role of
inductive tissue interactions; and the hormonal mediation of embryonic
development. finally, they will allow comparison of direct development in
amphibians with that in other groups with complex life cycles.