* 9019981
* Development of a High-Resolution Photoelectron Spectrometer for the Study of the Electronic Structure of High           Temperature Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1991,04/30/1995
* David Lynch, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 04/30/1995
* USD 330,000.00

This specialized beam line is under development at the Synchrotron Radiation
Center, University of Wisconsin. The project includes the construction of a new,
high-efficiency undulator based beam line on the storage ring, Aladdin, to be
used to address the science and technology of high-temperature superconducting
materials. The beam line will have higher angle and energy resolution
capabilities than presently available in the United States, and will provide a
complementary capability to the efforts now under development in France,
Germany, and Japan. This beam line will be ideally suited for high-resolution
photoelectron spectroscopic studies of high-temperature superconductors. The
source will be a specially designed undulator. The radiation will be dispersed
by a Wadsworth monochromator, with the grating being the only optical element in
the photon path. The monochromatic radiation will impinge on a two-hundred and
fifty micron size spot on the sample, which typically will be at low
temperatures. The photoelectrons will be energy analyzed by a hemispherical
capacitor analyzer with a position-sensitive detector on a goniometer.
Completion on this beam line is anticipated for late 1993, and will be available
to general users about one-fourth of the operating time for broader
applications.