* 9019814
* Synthesis and Study of Non-Keukule Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1991,06/30/1994
* Paul Dowd  DECEASED, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Seymour Lapporte
* 06/30/1994
* USD 295,000.00

This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the continuing work of
Professor Paul Dowd at the University of Pittsburgh. The research is directed to
the synthesis of reactive intermediates which possess two unbonded electrons.
The project will further characterize the electronic state of these biradicals.
There is an interest in biradical intermediates, since they are involved in
ferromagnetism and some biological processes. Dr. Dowd's research will provide a
bridge between theory and experiment in the area of biradical chemistry. In one
project, the electronic structure of tetramethyleneethane will be probed
experimentally in a rigid molecule. Previous studies in flexible systems have
suggested that this biradical is a triplet, while molecular orbital calculations
indicate a singlet. The use of a rigid system here will allow for an adequate
comparison to the molecular orbital calculations. Simple molecular orbital
theory predicts that non-alternant biradicals will be ground state singlets, yet
this has not been tested. As a test of this theory, these biradicals will be
generated and studied by spectrocopic methods and chemical trapping. Two other
biradical systems, semilocalized biradicals and methylenecyclobutanone
biradical, are to be prepared and characterized as well. Since biradicals are
important intermediates in several chemical reactions, this work should add to
our ability to understand and predict the course of reactions.