* 9019303
* Fundamental Studies of Heteorogeneous Procesess on Model    Polar Stratospheric Cloud Surfaces
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/1991,12/31/1991
* David Golden, SRI International
* Continuing grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 12/31/1991
* USD 116,000.00

This is a laboratory study of the chemistry of atmospheric trace gases in
contact with solid surfaces, representative of the particulate matter of polar
stratospheric clouds (PSCs). The solid matter will be ordinary water ice or
frozen nitric acid trihydrate, which are believed to be constituents of the
PSCs. Trace gases whose chemical reactions will be studied on the ice surfaces
will be chlorine nitrate and nitrogen pentoxide. The ice solids will be studied
both with and without dissolved impurities like hydrogen chloride, hydrogen
bromide, and hydrogen fluoride. Solubilities of the impurities in the ices will
be determined under a range of experimental conditions. The progress of chemical
interactions between the gases and the solids will be followed by simultaneous
mass spectroscopy of the gases and by infrared spectroscopy of the solids. This
will allow real-time observations of the mutual interactions of the gases and
the ice solids. Water ice and frozen nitric acid trihydrate in the polar
stratospheric clouds are believed to act as catalysts for chemical reactions of
chlorine- and nitrogen-containing gases involved in ozone depletion in the
stratosphere. These laboratory studies will develop new information about
detailed chemical and physical mechanisms of transformations of chlorine and
nitrogen compounds in the stratospheric ozone layer. Such information will help
to confirm (or modify?) present beliefs about ozone depletion in the
stratosphere and will help us understand the timing of ozone depletion and its
relationships to geographic factors.