* 9019818
* Numerical Simulation of Premixed Turbulent Combustion
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/1990,03/31/1992
* Lance Collins, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* None
* 03/31/1992
* USD 12,000.00

The investigator and his research group are starting a program to develop more
sophisticated models of premixed turbulent combustion, in which the interactions
between the fast chemical reactions typical of combustion and the fluctuations
in density, concentration, and temperature that accompany turbulence are
addressed in more detail. These interactions appear as integrals along the flame
surface separating the hot product gases from the cold reactant gases. The major
difficulty in approximating these integrals is that distortion of the flame
surface by turbulence at all scales is relevant and ultimately impacts on the
rate of reaction in the flame. Experimental information about the interactions
is required to develop a more thorough understanding of the fundamental
processes at work in the flame brush. The investigator proposes to study these
processes using numerical simulations of a hypothetical flame sheet passing
through homogeneous turbulence, as an experimental tool. The most important
limitation of simulations is the relatively modest Reynolds numbers that are
achievable, due to constraints of computational speed and storage. However, for
simple flow systems they have shown that they can accurately represent
turbulence over a range of scales that is sufficient for the purposes of this
proposal. The MRI planning grant is intended to fund preliminary studies that
will allow to 1) develop the capability to simulate turbulent flames, and 2)
develop tools to interpret the results of those simulations to improve the
overall modeling effort.