* 9019977
* Remote Sensing Data Acquisition and Connectivity Initiative for the LTER Network
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1993
* John Vande Castle, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1993
* USD 310,290.00

This project will carry out two initiatives in support of the research
activities of the Long-Term Ecological Research Network (LTER). Specifically,
these initiatives are acquisition of remote sensing imagery for each of the LTER
research sites, and for the installation and development of a system to enhance
connectivity of the LTER Network. The remote sensing acquisition will provide a
consistent and comparable database for collaborative research within LTER as
well as providing a historical record for future research. This acquisition will
provide a common database for LTER as well as the larger ecological community
associated with LTER research. The remote sensing initiative requests digital
satellite, and hard-copy aircraft imagery for each of the LTER research sites.
The connectivity initiative will enhance communication within and beyond the
LTER Network and will be fundamental for future database management activities.
This initiative is seen as a first step in connectivity efforts within LTER as
recommended in the LTER Connectivity Report. The connectivity initiative will
support the installation and development of a computer communication system for
mail and data exchange, which will be accessible via wide-area networks, by
members of the LTER Network as well as outside researchers working with LTER.
This system is envisioned as a major link for information exchange not only with
LTER, but also for the larger ecological community.