* 9019788
* Mycorrhizal Root Compeiition for Nutrients in Infertile     Forests Soils
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/1991,12/31/1994
* Nicholas Comerford, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 12/31/1994
* USD 320,994.00

There is intense competition for nutrients between understory vegetation and
trees in forest ecosystems. Yet, there has been a notable lack of mechanistic
analyses of belowground resource competition and the development of competition-
induced resource partitioning in plant communities. This research will
quantitatively evaluate belowground competition for nutrients. Mycorrhizal fungi
will affect the competitive exploitation of soil resources by plants, Despite
the importance of external hyphae to the function of mycorrhizae, few
researchers have attempted to quantify their distribution. The objectives of
this research are (i) to determine the small-scale spatial patterns of roots and
hyphae of mycorrhizal fungi and assess their significance in regards to
overlapping depletion zones and nutrient uptake and (ii) to examine the effects
of understory roots and mycorrhizae on the seasonal and annual pattern of pine-
root growth and nutrient uptake. The research will evaluate the field
distribution of roots in species mixtures and monocultures. Under controlled
environmental conditions, competition between external hyphae of ectomycorrhizal
pine roots and external hyphae of vesicular- arbuscular mycorrhizal grass roots
will be examined. Mass flow/diffusion supply models will be used to elucidate
how patterns of root and mycorrhiza growth affect nutrient competition. The
project will contribute basic ecological concepts which maybe infertile soils.