* 9019893
* High Resolution Studies of Solar Flares, Active Regions     and the Quiet Sun at Centimeter and Millimeter Wavelengths
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/1991,06/30/1994
* Mukul Kundu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth H. Schatten
* 06/30/1994
* USD 440,000.00

This study will continue investigations of solar radio emissions in the
millimeter and centimeter wavelength domain, making use of the Very Large Array
(VLA) of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory, and the Berkeley-Illinois-
Maryland Millimeter Array (BIMA) at Hat Creek. The observed magnetic structure
of sunspot associated microwave sources will be compared with model computations
to determine the vertical and horizontal components of the magnetic field at
specific locations in the low corona. Along with simultaneous soft X-ray
observations, estimates will be made of the electron temperature and emission
measure and magnetic field in coronal loops. The VLA microwave data along with
Spacelab 2 observations of the transition region and coronal lines will be used
to study the temperature and density structure of the sunspot atmosphere in
three dimensions. Microwave imaging data will also be compared with hard X-ray
burst data to compare the power law index of energetic electrons based on radio
and X-ray data, to try to reconcile the two indices through appropriate
energization mechanisms. Using VLA observations of flares simultaneously
acquired with balloon/rocket borne X-ray and UV measurements, flare physics
including the origin of microbursts will be studied. Using BIMA, high spatial
resolution studies of flares at millimeter wavelengths will be conducted. In
particular, the size and spectra of millimeter burst sources, the problem of
electron and proton acceleration in gamma ray/millimeter flares and the
anisotropy of these flares will be investigated. The relative timing of mm wave
vs. cm wave bursts should help distinguish among the possible causes of the
simultaneous flare brightening in H, EUV, and hard X-rays. Observations of
filaments at mm and cm wavelengths will also be made to determine the nature of
bright lanes (at 15 GHz) spanning filaments, and to determine the density-
temperature structure of the transition sheath and coronal cavity. Other
proposed studies include mm active regions including their polarization and
magnetic fields, mapping of coronal holes and quiet regions such as
supergranulation network boundaries at mm wavelengths, and to search for
acoustic waves in the chromosphere. ***