* 9019854
* Neural Networks and Fuzzy Sets with Applications to Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/1991,07/31/1994
* Ronald Yager, IONA UNIVERSITY
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 07/31/1994
* USD 187,470.00

Fuzzy set theory and neural network approaches are two technologies which have
proved to be useful in the development of intelligent control systems. The
central focus of this research is to investigate the linking of these two
methodologies for the analysis and construction of intelligent systems.
Particular benefit will come on one hand from the use of fuzzy logic structures
to help in the crafting of these systems while on the other hand the use of
neural concepts will help in the learning and parallel implementation. The work
in this project will focus on four areas. This first area is fuzzy logic
controllers. Part of the work here will concentrate on improving the performance
of these kinds of systems by (among other methods) the development of a neural
implementation of fuzzy logic control. This will involve alternative procedures
for defuzzification as well as the development of a formal mathematical
understanding of these control systems. A second focus of the research is new
learning system, emphasing a new model called participatory learning. This model
emphasizes the role the current belief system plays in the learning process.
Another important aspect of this model is an independent critic which monitors
the performance of the current belief system. The third part of the research
concentrates on the fundamental relationship between fuzzy set and neural
network theory. Here, the P.I. will look at the relationship between the neural
aggregation process and the basic operations of fuzzy set theory. A major goal
is to make some connection between the set based operations of fuzzy set theory
and the vector algebra approach of neural networks. The final part of the
research looks at the implementation of fuzzy expert systems rules in a neural
framework, to see if these two technologies can provide some insight into the
manner in which experts develop rules.