* 9019508
* Molecular Mechanisms of RNA Processing
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1993
* Richard Spritz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1993
* USD 170,000.00

Many eukaryotic genes are interrupted by intervening sequences which are excised
from mRNA precursors (pre-mRNAs) during pre mRNA splicing. The long-term
objective of our research is to understand how pre-mRNA splice sites are
accurately and efficiently recognized, cleaved and ligated during splicing.
Recognition and cleavage of 5' splice sites is mediated by U1 small nuclear
ribonucleoprotein, a sub-assembly of the spliceosome. The approach has been to
first characterize the structure and function of U1 snRNP and have shown that
the U1 snRNP-specific U1-70K and U1-A proteins are sequence-specific RNA-binding
protein. Elucidating the functions of the various components of U1 snRNP during
pre-mRNA splicing is being planned. This will involve extending the studies of
U1 snRNP structure, determining the mechanism(s) of sequence- specific RNA-
binding by the U1-70K and U1-A proteins, and defining the properties of various
components of U1 snRNP. As members of the RNP sequence domain class of RNA-
binding proteins, the U1-70K, U1-A, and U2-B" proteins will also be used as
models to study this class of sequence-specific RNA-protein interactions. The
functions of these snRNP proteins during pre-mRNA splicing may be modulated,
through regulation of the biosynthesis of the human U1-70K snRNP protein, via
alternative splicing of its own pre-mRNA will be studied.