* 9019271
* The Function of Low Molecular-Weight Polypeptides in        Photosystem II
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1991,02/28/1994
* Andrew Webber, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 02/28/1994
* USD 174,000.00

Photosystem II contains at least 10 polypeptides, approximately 50% of the total
number of known plant photosystem II polypeptides, with molecular weights of
under 10,000 whose function is mostly unknown. Some have been shown to be
encoded by small open reading frames in chloroplast DNA. Still other small open
reading frames encode putative membrane polypeptides speculated to be additional
photosystem III components. The aim of the proposal is to use techniques of
specific mutagenesis to delete the complementary genes from the cyanobacterial
chromosome. Because of the similarity of photosystem II complexes from plants ad
cyanobacteria this will provide a rapid method to assess the function of the
small polypeptides in photosystem II. Site directed mutagenesis will then be
used to determine the role of specific amino acids, or specific regions of the
polypeptides, in photosystem II assembly and function. Antisera will be raised
against synthetic polypeptides matching the products of the open reading frames
and used to identify the products in plant photosystem II core preparations. The
impact of mutations on photosystem II function and assembly will be studied
using a range of techniques including chlorophyll fluorescence emission
spectroscopy, oxygen polarography, rapid absorption spectroscopy, and western
and northern blotting.