* 9019530
* Protein Structure and Folding at Low Temperature
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1995
* Anthony Fink, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 03/31/1995
* USD 260,000.00

This proposal concerns two aspects of protein folding and stability: the nature
of partially-folded species, especially the molten globule state, and the
factors which determine a particular folding pathway. The long-term goals are to
learn how the amino acid sequence of a polypeptide guides the folding to the
native state, and determines the stability of protein conformations. A
relatively compact protein conformational state, often referred to as the molten
globule state, has been shown to be an intermediate in the refolding of certain
proteins, and to be stable under certain denaturation conditions for some
proteins. One of the goals of this research is to increase the understanding
about the molecular details and physical properties of molten globules. The
molten globule state will be studied under both equilibrium and transient
refolding conditions. In addition the pathway of folding will be mapped out by
using specific signals from different regions of the molecule in stopped-flow
kinetics experiments at both ambient and subzero temperatures. A variety of
biophysical techniques will be used to structurally characterize the molten
globule state from several different proteins (in order to establish
generalities); these include FTIR, circular dichroism (CD), fluorescence and
hydrodynamic radius measurements. In addition kinetic experiments using stopped-
flow fluorescence and CD will be performed.