* 9019687
* Enzymology of the Hydroxylamine Oxidizing System of         Nitrosomonas
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1991,07/31/1994
* Alan Hooper, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 07/31/1994
* USD 302,250.00

In soils, fertilizer ammonia is oxidized to nitrite (NH3 +1.502 - &gt;HNO2 +H2O)
by the chemoautotrophic nitrifying bacterium Nitrosomonas europaea. Nitrite is
oxidized by Nitrobacter to nitrate, a primary source of N for food protein in
non-leguminous crops. Thus the initial transformation of most food nitrogen is
carried out by Nitrosomonas. Of great economic importance is loss of N in soils
as N-gases produced by Nitrosomonas during oxidation of NH3 or by reduction of
nitrate by denitrifying bacteria. Control of agricultural loss by
denitrification is attempted by the use of inhibitors of ammonia oxidation by
Nitrosomonas. This lends significance to improved knowledge of the mechanism of
oxidation of ammonia to nitrite. NH3 is oxygenated by O2 to NH2OH which is then
oxidized (NH2OH +H2O)-&gt; HNO2 + 4e- +4H+) by the enzyme hydroxylamine
oxidoreductase "HAO". HAO is a large and unusually complex hemoprotein (7
c-hemes and 1 substrate binding "P460" group per 60,000 MW protein). Four
electron pass from HAO to a tetraheme cytochrome c-554. Two electrons then pass
to a membrane electron transfer chain and finally to a terminal oxidase,
producing water. Two additional electrons pass from cytochrome c-554 in a
separate electron transfer chain to the ammonia oxidizing reaction. Goals of the
project include an analysis of the enzyme HAO, the cytochrome c-554 and the
electron transport chain to dioxygen. They intend to determine the structure of
the two proteins. Particular attention will be paid to the active site of HAO.
The mechanism of turnover in the active site and electron transfer from active
site to HAO hemes and then hemes of cytochrome c-554 will be pursued. The
approach involves protein purification, optical spectroscopy, peptide analysis,
DNA sequencing, kinetics, suicide substrates, electron paramagnetic resonance
spectroscopy, Mossbauer spectroscopy and X-ray crystallographic analysis.