* 9019970
* Solar System Laboratory Aeronomy by Electron Impact with    Emphasis on Terrestrial Processes
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/1991,02/01/1992
* Donald Shemansky, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 02/01/1992
* USD 112,120.00

In order to understand the details of the way solar energy is transferred to and
within the earth's atmosphere it is essential to have a good understanding of
the fundamental properties of the various states of the atoms and molecules that
exist at each level of the atmosphere. It is also important to develop means to
accurately calibrate the instruments that measure the energetics directly in the
atmosphere. This program combines laboratory measurements with advanced models
of atomic and molecular species to provide basic data to advance research in
upper atmospheric processes. Detailed models will be used to simulate the
excited night or day upper atmosphere, with particular attention paid to the
energy budget. Concurrently, laboratory measurements of the light emitted in a
crossed beam collision processes will provide calibrated spectra over a large
wavelength region to provide a primary reference data set for the simulations.
Electron impact studies of the species N2, 02, NI, OI, HI, NO and ArI will be
performed, and energy dependent collision strengths will be obtained through
model analysis to allow the construction of collision models capable of
producing results for a broad range of relevant conditions. H2 emission will be
studied because it can provide accurate calibration of spaceflight and
laboratory instrumentation. Also included will be the determination of
dissociation and predissociation yields, absolute transition probability tables,
and high resolution absorption properties for selected species.