* 9019735
* Characterization of the Cyanide-resistant Oxidase in Plant  Mitochondria
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1994
* James Siedow, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1994
* USD 200,000.00

The research outlined in this proposal is designed to continue the purification
and characterization of the cyanide-resistant, "alternative" oxidase associated
with the electron transfer chain of mitochondria in most plants, many fungi and
some protozoa. The role of this energetically wasteful oxidase in plant energy
metabolism is not known and only recently has progress been made identifying
protein species associated with the oxidase. The PI has successfully carried out
a partial purification of the alternative oxidase from the highly cyanide-
resistant spadices of flowering skunk cabbage. This preparation will be further
purified and the cofactors associated with the oxygen reduction reaction
catalyzed by the enzyme will be identified. More specifically, the nature and
amount of an auto-oxidizable quinone found to be associated with the enzyme will
be determined as will the nature of any metals bound to the purified enzyme.
Studies will also be carried out to determine the relative contributions of
steric factors, redox potentials and quinone lipophilicity to the ability of a
given quinone species to serve as an electron donor to the alternative oxidase.
These studies will lead to a better under understanding of this unusual oxidase
and the nature of its interaction with the mitochondrial electron transfer
chain. Unlike animals, such as humans, plants have two respiratory pathways in
their mitochondria. One is similar to that found in animals and is sensitive to
(poisoned by) cyanide. The second pathway, which shares the initial steps of the
first pathway, does not occur in animals and is cyanide resistant. This second,
alternative pathway is less efficient than the first in energy production.
Interest in the two pathways is heightened by the fact that plants can regulate
the flow of electrons between the two pathways. Hence there are environmental
and biological conditions that favor the use of one pathway or the other. The
fact that the alternative pathway is less efficient energetically raises the
question of why the second pathway exists and is preferred under certain
conditions. The experiments outlined in this proposal to study the alternative
oxidase will help to characterize the alternative oxidase and how it functions.