* 9019873
* Regulation of Heterotrophic Microbial Processes in Lake     Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1991,12/31/1996
* Jonathan Cole, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* John R. Gold
* 12/31/1996
* USD 666,404.00

New York Botanical Garden, Institute of Ecosystem Studies Heterotrophic
microorganisms are responsible for a major portion of the biological
productivity and biogeochemical cycling in ecosystems. Regulation of microbial
processes, however, is poorly understood. This project will examine how two key
properties of aquatic ecosystems, primary production and food web structure,
regulate the biomass, respiration, and productivity of heterotrophic microbes
including bacteria, flagellated protozoans and ciliated protozoans. This
research will take advantage of whole lake experiments already funded by NSF.
Food webs in four lakes will be manipulated to enhance dominance by either
planktivorous or piscivorous fish. Nutrient loading in two of these lakes with
alternative food webs will be increased to elevate phytoplankton primary
production and biomass. Pace and Cole hypothesize that heterotrophic microbial
processes are a relatively conservative feature in aquatic ecosystems. Changes
in heterotrophic microbial processes in these experiments will be primarily a
result of changes in primary production and phytoplankton biomass and
secondarily a result of changes in phytoplankton community structure. To
strengthen the general applicability of the experimental results, these
hypotheses will be tested by a comparative study of bacterial productivity and
biomass in 20 lakes. Simulation and inverse food web models will be used to
examine how variability in food web structure and primary production influences
microbial processes and how variability in microbial processes influence other
components of the system. Pace and Cole are productive young scientists. The
institutional support for this research is excellent.