* 9019249
* Genetics of Maize Mitochondria
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1994
* Kathleen Newton, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 12/31/1994
* USD 360,000.00

The analysis of mitochondrial mutations has been informative in several
organisms, including yeast, fungi and humans. The genetic analysis of plant
mitochondrial genomes has been limited due to the fact that only a few mutations
with known progenitors have been described. We have focused on a set of lethal
maize mutations (Nonchromosomal stripe; NCS) that survive in heteroplasmic
plants. Different NCS mutants are associated with distinct phenotypes and the
mutations have been shown to be deletions affecting the expression of a least
three different mitochondrial genes (cox2, nad4 and the co-transcribed S3 and
L16 ribosomal protein genes.) The major goal of this proposal is to elucidate
the mechanisms by which the NCS lesions cause altered gene expression. We will
analyze the mutant and normal transcripts in NCS2 and NCS3 plants and generate
antibodies to determine whether the transcripts affected by NCS mutations are
translated within nonmutant plant mitochondria. The long-term objective of this
project is to understand the effects of individual plant mitochondrial genes on
organelle biogenesis and overall cellular function. The proposed studies should
clarify aspects of transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation in plant
mitochondria. A second goal of this proposal is to attempt to develop a system
for demonstrating maize mitochondrial transformation using the NCS6 mutant,
which carries a partial deletion of the well-characterized cox2 gene. The
availability of a transformation system should facilitate studies of putative
regulatory sequences in plant mitochondria.*** //