* 9019807
* International Workshop on Strong Ground Motion:             Santiago de Chile, June 4-7, 1991
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1991,08/31/1992
* John Anderson, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Emily B. Rudin
* 08/31/1992
* USD 17,580.00

This award supports an international workshop on earthquake research to be held
in Santiago, Chile from June 4-7, 1991. The U.S. organizer is John Anderson of
the University of Nevada at Reno and his Chilean counterpart is F. Lund of the
University of Chile who chairs a local organizing committee consisting of four
Chilean scientists, three from U. Chile and one from the Catholic University
(PUC). There is also an international scientific committee consisting of
scientists from the U.S., France, Italy, Japan and Chile. The par- ticipants
will come from all these countries, from Austria and, in Latin America, from
Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
This workshop aims to bring together seismologists and earthquake engineers who
share an interest in research problems that utilize strong motion data. The
strong motion program in Chile has collected significant data in recent years,
especially from the March 3, 1985 earthquake. Analysis of that data is
contributing to our understanding of the earthquake source, wave propagation,
and site effects as they affect strong shaking. For the United States and Chile,
specific benefits arise because the Cascadia subduction zone off Washington and
Oregon, as well as the Alaska subduction zone, are similiar to the Chilean
subduction zone. Apart from the attendance of established workers in the field,
we expect to have a large participation of younger scientists and engineers from
the region who will thus be exposed to the state of the art in strong-motion-
related work. This workshop will provide a place for the exposure of U.S.
research efforts in the field, and the close contact among participants will
generate interest among talented students from Latin America to pursue graduate
studies in the U.S. and/or to do postdoctoral work. Thus, it will fulfill the
goals of the Science in Developing Countries Program and address education and
human resource concerns.