* 9019709
* Ultra Low Temparature Electron Microscopy and Spectroscopy
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/1991,01/31/1993
* Kenneth Taylor, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 01/31/1993
* USD 90,000.00

We will study the stability of specific chemical elements and measure the mass
of certain types of biological substances and embedding materials as a function
of irradiation and temperature. We will use an electron energy loss spectrometer
interfaced to a computer to make quantitative measurements. While this work is
going on, we will develop a more efficient data acquisition system based on new
interfaces and computer programs. To measure very cold specimens, we will mount
our spectrometer on a special electron microscope with a superconducting
objective lens operating at liquid helium temperature. This will help future
research efforts because very low temperature will probably stabilize some
elements, hence improving the accuracy of concentration measurements and
allowing the use of certain chemical elements as site-specific stains. We will
learn which elements are "caged at low temperature or "frozen" onto surfaces.
Improved stability of embedding materials will allow more accurate three-
dimensional views of sectioned specimens. Studies of major classes of molecules
(like DNA) will indicate which materials are most helped by low temperature.
Development of new instrumentation will improve the efficiency of our studies of
radiation effects and will allow our techniques to be used more widely by other.