* 9019243
* Uplift and Exhumation of Eclogites and Blueschists in       Venezuela:  Constraints Based on Structural Analysis,       Geothermobarometry, and Geochronology
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1991,06/30/1993
* Hans Ave Lallemant, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Roy K. Dokka
* 06/30/1993
* USD 121,867.00

A recently proposed model by the PI explains the uplift and exhumation of high
pressure/low temperature rocks in NE Venezuela as the result of oblique
subduction beneath an arcuate island arc zone that was convex to the ocean. The
normal component of convergence is thought to cause arc-normal contraction
structures (folds, thrust faults) and the strike-slip component is thought to
cause arc-parallel transcurrent faults and shear zones. An increase in curvature
of the arc along strike may increase the strike-slip component of convergence,
which in turn causes arc- parallel extension and thickness reduction. The
terrane is then uplifted to maintain isostatic equilibrium. On Margarita Island
and the Araya Peninsula of NE Venezuela, a Late Cretaceous subduction
complex/forearc terrane was extended parallel to the Leeward Antilles volcanic
island arc during its uplift and retrograde metamorphism. The model outlined can
explain the structural geometry of these uplifted subduction-related rocks, but
has not yet been rigorously tested. This project will test the model by
collecting data from North Central Venezuela for structural analysis and
geothermobarometry. Fission track 40Ar/39Ar, U/Pb, and fluid inclusion studies
will be combined with the structural and geothermobarometric data to produce
pressure- temperature-time-deformation paths for these rocks. The results of
this study will greatly enhance our understanding of Caribbean tectonics, and
will give significant insight to the problem of rapid uplift of high
pressure/low temperature rocks during collisional tectonic processes.