* 9019971
* Workshop on Random Materiass and Processes; Barbados,       December 18-22, 1990
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1990,11/30/1991
* H. Eugene Stanley, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 11/30/1991
* USD 18,250.00

This Science in Developing Countries award will help to support a regional
workshop on random materials and processes in Barbados. The workshop, organized
by Professor Eugene Stanley of Boston University and Professor Leo Moseley of
the University of the West Indies in Barbados, together with Professor Miguel
Octavio of the Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Cientificas (IVIC) in
Venezuela, will bring together scientists from the Caribbean, Latin America and
Europe as well as from the U.S. Random materials and processes is a relatively
new interdis- ciplinary field whose goal is to understand a large class of
phenomena and structures, which at the microscopic level are random and
unpredictable but reveal structure and predic- tability in the large. Indeed, a
very large part of our natural environment as well as a substantial fraction of
man- made objects, including glasses, polymers and amorphous materials are
examples of these materials. Thus the area is one of interest to a broad range
of scientists and subject to various approaches: from the purely mathematical to
the level of direct engineering applicability. In keeping with the goals of the
Science in Developing Countries Program, the workshop has been designed to reach
engineers, scientists, and mathematicians interested in recent progress in this
multi-disciplinary field.