* 9019657
* Plant Density Effects on Competitive Performance
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1993
* Alice Winn, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 06/30/1993
* USD 32,000.00

Competition among plants for resources such as water and light generally
results in a size distribution in which there are some large plants and many
small, suppressed plants. It is well known that growing plants at higher
densities increases the magnitude of competition. From this, one would expect
that traits that confer competitive ability would be increasingly favored as
density increases. The principal investigators suggest that this may not be true
at very high densities. Under extreme competition, growth of all plants is very
suppressed, resulting in smaller differences between large and small plants.
Consequently, traits that confer competitive ability may not be increasingly
favored beyond some intermediate to high density. The investigators propose to
determine the relationship between plant density and the favorability of traits
that increase competitive ability by growing plants across a wide range of
densities and comparing the performance of individuals with different traits.
They will also measure the same relationship in a field population to determine
if natural densities reach the threshold necessary for decoupling density and
the favorability of traits that confer competitive ability. Competition is
recognized as a widespread, important ecological force. Almost all agricultural
plants, as well as those grown in natural environments, are strongly suppressed
by competition. This work will permit an assessment of the role of density as a
force shaping the evolution of traits that affect competitive ability in a
natural environment. Results will also be of use to agriculturalists,
particularly in determining the correct density at which to breed plants for
enhanced competitive ability.