* 9019563
* Regulation of Calcium Entry in Cerebral Arteries
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1991,09/30/1995
* Mark Nelson, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 09/30/1995
* USD 320,736.00

Small arteries control blood flow to various organs. These arteries are
normally contracted from which they dilate or constrict depending on the need
for blood. The arteries in the brain have a special requirement for blood flow;
they must maintain blood flow even when the blood pressure changes. Calcium
(Ca2+) ions play a critical role in the narrowing and opening of arteries. Ca2+
ions inside the muscle cells in the wall of the arteries cause the muscle cells
to contract and consequently cause blood vessels to narrow. We study the
mechanism by which Ca2+ enters these muscle cells. Ca2+ enters the smooth muscle
through specialized proteins that form pores through membrane that separate the
outside of the cell from the inside. These pores are called "calcium channels"
and are the targets of a major class of cardiovascular drugs called "calcium
channel blockers" that are used to treat hypertension, angina, and stroke. The
proposed project will examine the properties of "calcium channels" in arteries
that regulate blood flow in the brain. This should be the first study of its
kind and should provide vital information to the understanding of how the
diameter of some of the most important arteries is regulated. This study has
been made possible by new techniques to isolate small arteries and single smooth
muscle of genetic strain of rats called WKY. The rats are anesthetized and
rapidly killed. The arteries are then rapidly removed. All experiments are done
on the isolated arteries or single smooth muscle cells isolated from these
arteries. These studies should be the first of their kind and should provide a
foundation essential for understanding the regulation of Ca entry in tonic,
autoregulating arteries. //