* 9019680
* Drosophila Mitotic Mutants
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1993
* G.Nigel Godson, New York University Medical Center
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 12/31/1993
* USD 183,571.00

This laboratory has identified Drosophila mutations which disrupt the release
of sister chromatids at anaphase and the process of cytokinesis in mitosis.
Experiments proposed will examine in molecular detail the products of two genes,
"rough deal" (rod) and "spaghetti squash" (sqh), whose proper functioning are
essential for the successful execution of anaphase and cytokinesis,
respectively. The following studies are proposed: 1) To characterize the rod and
sqh proteins by immunocytochemsitry and trace their intracellular distribution
and behavior during mitosis; 2) to determine the role of phosphorylation of the
sqh gene product in regulating cytokinesis; 3) to dissect the function of the
sqh gene product through classical and in vitro mutagenesis. The process of
mitosis is fundamental to all eukaryotic organisms. It has evolved to deliver a
complete complement of chromosomes to each daughter cell. Two critical and, as
yet, poorly understood late events in mitosis are the release of sister
chromatids at anaphase and the process of cytokinesis. This research will take
advantage of two Drosophila mutations which distrupt these processes in specific
ways. The identification and analysis of the products of these two genes should
contribute important new information on the molecular mechanisms underlying
mitosis.