* 9019394
* Long-Term Temporal Variability of Pelagic Bird Abundance in the California Current
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/1991,03/31/1995
* John McGowan, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/1995
* USD 81,134.00

This award provides for three year's support to establish a time series of
abundance and spatial pattern of pelagic birds in the California Current System
(CCS). The study involves a sampling regime that has been operational for 40
years and is already funded by other agencies: the cruises of the California
Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries Investigations (CalCOFI). Data has already been
collected for birds on 12 sequential CalCOFI cruises (four per year) beginning
in May 1987. Thus, the study will yield a continuous time series of six years
length. The intent is to continue the project for a much longer time. This
inexpensive project provides an ideal opportunity to study spatial and temporal
variation of bird populations at a range of spatial scales meaningful to their
life histories. The primary objectives are to calculate a mean and variance in
time and space of bird abundance and dispersion based on the time series
collected between 1987-1993. Once the long-term patterns have been determined,
the magnitude of variation at different temporal scales will be examined. Long
term patterns of bird abundance which emerge will be compared to patterns in the
physical and biological data collected simultaneously on the cruises.