* 9019074
* Minority Research Opportunities in Interfacial Engineering: A Joint Program Between the Naval Research Laboratory and   Atlanta University Center
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1991,09/30/1994
* Bruce Gaber, Department of Navy Naval Research Laboratory
* Interagency Agreement
* Robert M. Wellek
* 09/30/1994
* USD 152,000.00

This project is a program of cooperative research and training at the Naval
Research Laboratory for minority students of the Atlanta University Center. Six
undergraduate students will be selected to spend two months working in the
Center working on small research projects for the Bio/Molecular Engineering
group of the Naval Research Laboratory. The program will first identify areas of
research overlap between the cooperating institutions. The students chosen will
work within these research areas, thus establishing a continuity of their summer
research with that at their home institutions. The Atlantic University Center
(AUC) comprises four undergraduate institutions (Morehouse, Spelman, Morris
Brown Colleges, and Clark-Atlanta University) and the Clark-Atlanta graduate
School and Morehouse School of Medicine. The AUC is the largest center for
predominately black higher education in the country. The plan is for up to six
students and two faculty members to spend 2 summer months working at the Naval
Research Laboratories on projects of mutual interest to the two centers in the
area of interfacial engineering. The major focus of research projects at NRL's
Center for Bio/Molecular Science and Engineering is on the way in which
biological molecules (particularly lipids) self-assemble into microstructures.
Other projects will involve molecular modeling, non-linear optical properties of
large organic molecules, polymeric ferroelectric liquid crystals, and
fundamental studies of liquid biophysics. The NRL Center has wide experience
with summer research projects for undergraduate students.