* 9019461
* A New Strategy for Mild, Continuous Solution and Solid PhasePeptide Synthesis (U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Science; Science  in Developing Countries)
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1991,06/30/1993
* Louis Carpino, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Edward Murdy
* 06/30/1993
* USD 19,998.00

Description: This proposal supports the collaboration of Dr. Louis A. Carpino,
University of Massachusetts, and two faculty members (Drs. El-Sayed Mansour and
Ahmed Kassem) and one graduate student (Mr. El-Faham) from the University of
Alexandria, Egypt. Project funding will allow the team from the University of
Alexandria to work for various periods of time in Dr. Carpino's laboratory and
also allow Dr. Carpino a research visit to the University of Alexandria. Dr.
Mansour, the senior member of the Egyptian team, will supervise research
activities at the University of Alexandria and also spend three months at the
University of Massachusetts conducting laboratory studies. Dr. Kassem will
initiate work on the synthesis of FM ethers and Mr. El-Faham will work on N-FM
peptide bond protection. Dr. Carpino, as Principal Investigator, will provide
overall project supervision. Scope: This proposal brings together research
scientists from two countries working in the area of peptide synthesis and
coupling. It is anticipated that this collaborative research will result in
novel techniques for the synthesis of insect hormone peptide segments. The
Egyptian scientists will have the opportunity to become familiar with research
techniques and equipment at the University of Massachusetts as well as
contribute to the overall success of the project. Therefore, this proposal
fulfills the objectives of the Science in Developing Countries Program in its
exchange and transfer of scientific knowledge through an international
collaboration.