* 9019625
* Sensitivity, Distribution, Characterization and Production  of Ultramicrobacteria
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/1991,01/31/1995
* Don Button, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/1995
* USD 292,030.00

Heterotrophic bacteria recycle carbon, regulate dissolve organics, and comprise
much of the biomass of the oceans. Typical organisms are culture resistant, and
a factor of 20 smaller with one-tenth the DNA of commonly studied bacteria. To
study these oligotrophic ultramicrobacteria, Dr. Button has developed several
new techniques. One is high resolution flow cytometry which gives a rapid
accurate analysis of populations in seawater and cultures derived from them,
including measurements of population, cell size and DNA content per cell.
Another is janusian kinetics which bases nutrient transport rates on molecular
composition and allows improved descriptions of the ability of whole cells to
collect nutrients. Third is a dilution- culture procedure which greatly expands
the number of oligotrophic bacterial species that can be cultured.
Representatives of what appear to be typical marine bacteria are now on hand.
Preliminary data indicate peculiar sensitivity exhibited as a growth-dependency
of individual organisms on the presence of others. Dr. Button will to explore
these peculiar population dependencies, bacteria and the distributions of
organisms that have them, their nutritional requirements, kinetic
characteristics, and ability to attain high population densities, in an effort
to understand the dynamics and ecology of marine microorganisms in the context
of kinetic control of dissolved organics.