* 9019284
* Molecular Organization in Mutable Collagenous Tissues
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1991,04/30/1995
* Thomas Koob, University of New Mexico School of Medicine
* Continuing grant
* Elvira Doman
* 04/30/1995
* USD 260,000.00

Collagen fibrils are the principal components that give tensile strength and
stiffness to animal tissues. The fibrils are always found together with other
macromolecule - combinations of specific carbohydrates and proteins: the
association of collagen fibrils with these other constituents creates tissues
with diverse structural and functional properties. Collagenous tissues are thus
properly thought of as biological fiber-reinforced composites. In most
instances, the tensile properties of collagenous tissue are constant over short
periods of time, because the collagenous and noncollagenous components are
stable, as are their associations with one another. In these stable tissues the
interfibrillar molecules can only be guessed at. No reliable measurements have
been made. Echnioderms, in contrast, developed at an early stage of their
properties. under the control of the nervous system, these tissues can be
rapidly switched from a strong and stiff state to a state in which they easily
flow. In the extreme, this ability allows echnioderms to escape predation, as in
the autotomy of a portion of the arm of a brittle star, or of the viscera of a
sea cucumber. Sea urchin spines are held against the body wall by a conical
ligament. When the spine moves, this ligament easily changes length. At other
times (for instance when the animal is resisting being forcibly removed from an
underwater crevice), the ligaments become stiff and the spines are nearly
immovable. The body walls of sea cucumbers can flow, permitting the animals to
move into and through narrow openings, but can also become stiff, preventing a
predator from dislodging the animal from a protected niche. The collagen fibrils
in these and other echnioderm connective tissues are as stable as those of other
animals. But they are able to slide past one another when the tissues are int
heir compliant state, and are prevented from sliding when the tissues are stiff.
The surfaces of the fibrils and the material between the fibrils must sometimes
permit the fibrils to slide, while at other times they lock them in position.
The experiments described in this proposal are designed to tell us what
molecules are present on the surfaces and between the collagen fibrils in
selected echinoderm tissues, how they are organized, and how they are altered to
change the tissue properties between stiff and flowing states. Besides
contributing to an understanding of these inherently interesting tissues, the
results of the planned research h may lead to a better understanding of the
composite structure of collagenous tissues in general, including those of
vertebrates.//