* 9019536
* USSR Cooperative Research on Heat and Mass Transfer During  Directional Solidification in a Centrifuge
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1995
* Frederick Carlson, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 03/31/1995
* USD 19,882.00

This is a joint research project between Clarkson University and the Laboratory
of Materials Science in Space at the Space Research Institute (IKI) of the USSR
Academy of Sciences to elucidate the transport phenomena that occur during
directional solidification in a large centrifuge. Clarkson University and the
Space Research Institute (IKI) are uniquely configured to accomplish this goal.
Prior research on transport phenomena in large centrifuges has shown unexpected
results that have not yet been fully explained. For example, a critical rotation
rate was found for the onset of temperature oscillations, with a higher critical
rotation rate for cessation of temperature fluctuations. Several directional
solidification experiments exhibited a "magic g" at which impurity segregation
and microstructure became what one would expect from a complete lack of
convection in the melt during solidification. Theoretical models will be
developed at Clarkson University to predict convection and mass transfer in the
melt, temperature distribution in the solid, solid-liquid interface shape, and
freezing rate during solidification in the centrifuge. Predictions of these
models will be compared with experiments carried out on the Soviet apparatus.
Clarkson and IKI scientists will work together to modify the Soviet apparatus to
permit temperatures to be measured inside the material during solidification,
and to determine the heat transfer coefficient between the material and the
steel cartridge. We will add either current interface demarcation or vibration
interface demarcation to allow us to determine the interface shape and freezing
rate versus time. We will also cooperate in development and execution of flow
visualization experiments in the centrifuge.