* 9020237
* Systematics, Floral Structure and Reproductive Biology of   Mid-Cretaceous Magnoliid Angiosperms
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1994
* Peter Crane, Field Museum of Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* B. Jane Harrington
* 09/30/1994
* USD 210,923.00

The flowering plants comprise the largest group of plants, Angiospermae with
approximately 500,000 species. In addition to sheer diversity, the angiosperms
are of tremendous economic importance to humans. Angiosperms are also major
elements of many or most terrestrial ecosystems, and dominate all non-coniferous
terrestrial biomes. Understandably, botanists have been interested in developing
models and inferences concerning the origin and radiation of this highly
significant group. Within the past two decades techniques (molecular systematics
and cladistics) have become available to permit rigorous scientific inquiry into
the problem of the origin of the flowering plants and phylogenetic models of the
group. Accordingly hypotheses of phylogenetic relationships are now available
for the base of the angiosperm tree. The origin and primary radiation of the
angiosperms was in the Cretaceous; however, the fossil records from the
Cretaceous are relatively poor. Crane proposes to examine the diversity of
fossil angiosperms in Cretaceous deposits in what is now the eastern United
States and Portugal. These samples include flowers, pollen, fruits, and seed,
all of which are of diagnostic utility in understanding and classifying
flowering plants. He intends to explore relationships among the fossil forms by
integrating them into the current models of relationships and to test those
models. Based on these findings, he proposes to explore the paleoecology and and
pollination of the earliest angiosperms. New models of relationships will be
developed as appropriate. Examination of the specimens, which are already in
collections, will be via electron and light microscopy. The described research
will have a salutary effect on our understanding of the angiosperms and their
evolutionary history. This, in turn, should stimulate additional research using
molecular and cladistic approaches.