* 9020583
* REU:  Peatlands and Global Climate Change:  Insights        Obtained Through Comparative Studies of Northern and        Southern Sites
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1995
* Joseph Yavitt, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 01/31/1995
* USD 470,628.00

This research will gain insights into carbon balances in peatlands and measure
gaseous exchanges of carbon between peatlands and the atmosphere. Drs. Wieder
and Yavitt will use a series of descriptive and experimental field and
laboratory studies to evaluate historical development and present function of
peatland ecosystems. This research will focus on comparisons between Sphagnum-
dominated peatlands that have developed over thousands of years in relatively
warmer climates (southern peatlands in the Appalachian Mountains of West
Virginia) and Sphagnum-dominated peatlands that developed in cooler regions.
Specific research objectives are: to characterize changes in chemical nature of
organic matter during long-term peat accumulation, to determine the relative
importance of methane production versus sulfate reduction in peatlands subjected
to differing atmospheric sulfur depositions, to quantify transfers of
photosynthetically fixed 14CO2 within a northern and southern peatland, to
experimentally evaluate effects of biotic versus abiotic factors on the transfer
of photosynthetically fixed 14CO2, and to evaluate the effects of temperature
and water table level on gaseous carbon fluxes from peatlands to the atmosphere.
Information obtained from this research will improve our ability to predict
possible changes in peatland ecosystem function, particularly with regard to
carbon balance, peat accumulation/degradation, and exchange of carbon gases with
the atmosphere under various projections of global climate change. Drs. Wieder
and Yavitt are leading peatland researchers. The facilities available for this
research are outstanding.