* 9020667
* Micro Statistics in Signal Decomposition and the Optimal    Filtering Problem
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/1991,07/31/1993
* Gonzalo Arce, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/1993
* USD 125,777.00

Optimal Filtering is a statistical signal processing problem of major
engineering importance. Historically, the most frequently used signal processing
tools have been linear in nature, but despite rich linear systems theories, many
signal processing problems have not been satisfactorily addressed through the
use of linear schemes. This research aims at the theoretical development of a
large class of non-linear filters which are based in combination of either the
observation vector, the sorted observation vector, or in general a non-linear
transformation of the observation vector. Thus, we achieve non-linear filter
response characteristics but with the machinery of linear systems theory
available for their optimization and design. The optimal solution requires the
statistical characterization of the set of decomposed signals (micro-
statistics). The filtering problem reduces to a set of filters operating on the
decomposed signals (micro-statistic filters) where the output is a weighted sum
of the decomposed filtered signals. In this work, a theory will be developed for
robust micro-statistic filters in which linear operations are executed in a
sorted observation vector. For environments with unknown or non-stationary
characteristics, we develop adaptive micro-statistic filters and address issues
such as convergence, lattice structures, fast algorithms, and complexity.