* 9020736
* SGER:  Southern Andes Glacial Chronology:  Test of Abrupt   Global Climate Change
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1991,07/31/1992
* George Denton, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 07/31/1992
* USD 27,324.00

What drives glacial climate cycles? This fundamental question lies at the heart
of understanding global changes of recent ice ages. The PI and others have
suggested that abrupt reorganizations of the ocean-atmosphere system are the key
events linking orbital perturbations to global ice-age climate changes. This
hypothesis has fundamental implication about understanding past climate changes
as well as anticipating changes in the earth's present climate. It is suggested
that major ocean and atmospheric changes begin abruptly and synchronously on a
global scale during major climate transitions. To test such a prediction the PI
proposes to compare detailed paleoclimatic records of glacier margins and
equilibrium-line altitudes (which are sensitive indicators of atmospheric
temperature changes) at mid latitudes in both polar hemispheres through the last
glacial-interglacial transition. For this test, he seeks a precise Southern
Hemisphere alpine glacier record. This is a grant to support obtaining the
necessary glacial record while avoiding the inherent and time-consuming gamble
of mapping a moraine sequence and coming up empty for radiocarbon age control.
Most projects on alpine glaciation have not been particularly helpful because of
lack of radiocarbon dates. After examining Southern Hemisphere alpine areas in
New Zealand and South America, the PI proposes reconnaissance field work in
southern Chile in the area covered by a former alpine glacier system that
extended form the crest of the Andes westward to Chile Island. This field work
will involve reconnaissance mapping multiple moraines and outwash bodies of
Llanquihue (late Wisconsin/marine isotope stage 2) age on Chiloe Island and the
adjacent mainland. Existing radiocarbon sites will be tied into this map and
abundant new stratigraphic sites with organic material will be examined and
dated to determine if they can yield additional chronologic control. Pollen and
spore stratigraphy will be examined for intertill peats. Finally, the PI will
determine if minimum ages for ice recession deep into the mountains can be
obtained from basal dates in lakes and bogs. The resulting preliminary
chronology will clarify whether this region of the Southern Andes is capable of
producing a paleoclimatic record with the detailed age control necessary to test
the hypothesis of abrupt ocean-atmosphere reorganizations. Hence, the
feasibility of a long-term study in the southern Andes will emerge from this
preliminary chronology. This work is supported by a Small Grant for Exploratory
Research and is important because it seeks to understand climate changes on time
scales relevant to human activities.