* 9020411
* US-USSR Workshop on Geodynamics and Ecology of Lake Baykal, Southeastern Siberia:Perspectives for Global Change Research(Columbia and Charleston, SC: October 17-25, 1990)
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1990,02/29/1992
* Douglas Williams, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Gerson Sher
* 02/29/1992
* USD 29,933.00

In addition to being the deepest and largest (by volume) freshwater lake in the
world, Lake Baykal in southern Siberia is intrinsically important to both
geologists and biologists because of its central position in the tectonically
active Baykal Rift Zone, its long stratigraphic record containing the
paleoclimatic history of southeastern Siberia, and its rich endemic flora and
fauna, establishing it as an important ecological system. The purpose of this
joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. workshop is to identify scientific priorities for
international geological, geophysical, and ecological cooperative research on
Lake Baykal and in the Baykal Rift Zone. The meeting will be held October 17-25,
1990 in Columbia and Charleston, South Carolina. Particular attention will be
focused on the importance of the Baykal region to research in global change,
global tectonics, the evolution of sedimentary basins, and biodiversity. It will
also provide opportunities for discussions between U.S., Soviet, and third-
country scientists about common research objectives in the Baykal region and to
develop specific plans and proposals for cooperative research. The U.S.
Geological Survey is also contributing to the cost of this meeting. This project
fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling
leading researchers in the United States and the U.S.S.R. to combine
complementary efforts and capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and
competence in the field of basic scientific research on the basis of equality,
reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.