* 9020395
* Workshop on Voltage Collapse and Voltage Regulation, Lagos, Nigeria (Science in Developing Countries U.S.-Sub-Saharan   Africa), November 17-22, 1991.
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1993
* Peter Bofah, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 02/28/1993
* USD 43,520.00

This conference grant supports an international workshop on voltage collapse
and voltage regulation for U.S. and Sub-Saharan African scientists/engineers.
Power system engineers from several African countries will be invited to
participate in a four-day tutorial/lecture in Nigeria with experts in the power
field from U.S. academia, industry, and government. A major objective of the
workshop is to increase participation of Third World countries in providing
solutions to these problems. Participants will define the common needs for
development, and formulate research priorities for cooperative research or
exchange programs. Reliable power is a prerequisite for most activities in
modern society, including most scientific endeavors. The problems to be dealt
with in the power system become increasingly important as the complexity of the
power grid increases. The current modelling tools and experimental data are not
sufficient for understanding the problems. The workshop promises to be mutually
beneficial for U.S. and African engineers by helping them in the development of
a new theory for large scale nonlinear systems such as power systems. This
project is relevant to the objectives of the Science in Developing Countries
(SDC) Program with regard to strength- ening the scientific and engineering
infrastructure in developing countries, and increasing the level of cooperation
between U.S. scientists and engineers and their counterparts in developing
countries.