* 9020079
* Features of Machine Learning and Other Topics in            Foundations of Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 04/15/1991,09/30/1993
* Carl Smith, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Dana S. Richards
* 09/30/1993
* USD 187,876.00

This project will contribute toward the goal of understanding how a computer can
be programmed to learn by isolating features of incremental learning algorithms
that theoretically enhance their learning potential. The features are chosen to
resemble features of human learning. For example, learning devices that use the
results of one learning episode to aid in the next learning endeavor will be
considered. Another powerful learning technique, for both humans and machines,
is the ability to ask questions. Investigations into the relative learning
potential of algorithms as the language they use to pose questions will be
conducted. Preliminary results indicate that the more powerful the query
language used, the greater the learning potential of the device asking
questions. Parameters of query language strength such as the number of
quantifiers and the number of alternations of quantifiers will be vigorously
examined. Current program testing techniques do not and cannot determine
correctness precisely. The purpose of these techniques is to reveal errors in a
program; however, if no errors are found, no measure is given as to how reliable
the program is. Therefore there is no notion of how "close" to correct the
tested program is. The goal of this research is to develop a theory whereby it
is possible to say precisely how reliable a program is when it passes a given
test.