* 9020525
* RUI: Metabolism of Carbofuran: Cloning and Characterization of Catabolic Genes
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1991,07/31/1994
* G. Rasul Chaudhry, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 07/31/1994
* USD 116,000.00

A number of carbamates and benzofurans which are either commercially used or
generated as industrial waste are highly toxic. The N-methyl carbamates used as
pesticides inhibit cholinesterase activity. They persist in some environments,
causing serious health hazards. These compounds are generally biodegraded via
hydrolysis or oxidation. Hydrolysis processes are relatively slow. While the
oxidation mechanisms are rapid generate highly toxic metabolites, for example
aldicarb (LD=0.9 mg per Kg) is oxidized to equally toxic aldicarb sulfoxide and
then to aldicarb sulfone. Therefore, knowledge of the metabolic pathways
involved in the detoxification of carbamates and benzofurans is important for
their safe use and disposal. We have selected carbofuran (2, 3 dihydro-2.2-
dimethyl-7 benzofuranyl methylcarbamate) as model compound represented both
carbamates and benzofurans to investigate the biochemical pathways and genetic
determinants involved in its degradation. In our previous studies several
microorganisms capable of degrading carbofuran and other carbamates were
isolated. These isolates utilize carbofuran as sole source of carbon or
nitrogen. A Flavobacterium sp. 50085, harboring a plasmid pRC200 encodes
functions for the hydrolysis of carbofuran. Another bacterium, a Pseudomonas sp.
50432 harbored several plasmids and rapidly detoxify carbofuran. One of the
plasmids, pCF2 was determined to be involved in the oxidation of this compound.
The proposed study is designed to investigate the mechanism of biochemical
oxidation of carbofuran in strain 50432. These studies will involved the
following: 1) physical mapping of the plasmid pCF2:2) purification of the
enzymes responsible for the oxidation of carbofuran: and 3) generation of
transposon insertion mutants. The results of this study are expected to improve
our understanding of catabolism of carbofuran in Pseudomonas sp. 50432. This
should then help in developing microbial agents capable of decontaminating
soils/waters polluted with carbamate and benzofuran compounds as well as in
devising strategies for improving the efficacy of pesticides and for their safe
environmental use.