* 9020708
* Workshop on Open Lexical and Textual Resources
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1990,02/29/1992
* Donald Walker, Association for Computational Liguistics
* Standard Grant
* Su-Shing Chen
* 02/29/1992
* USD 15,750.00

This workshop will evaluate the need for computational dictionaries, the value
of large text databases in creating them, and the role of cooperative efforts in
this area. Both commercial and scientific interests will be considered. By
"computational dictionaries" We encompass databases containing information about
the form, pronunciation, meaning and usage of words and their collocations. Such
databases are not merely processed versions of conventional dictionaries.
Examples range from a relation among company names, and product types; to a
relation among verbs, derived nominals, and their co-occurence probabilities
with various argument structures. We believe that the quality of computer
programs for manipulating natural language depends crucially on the quality of
such word-indexed databases, and that theories of the representation and
manipulation of lexical information are central to scientific theories of
language structure and language use. We also believe that some crucial kinds of
lexical information can best be discovered by computer processing of very large
bodies of text. Progress in research and in its commercial exploitation is now
hindered by the unavailability of suitable computational dictionaries, and of
generally-available text databases that are large enough to help construct them.
This workshop will try to arrive at a consensus about what lexical and textual
resources are most needed, what mix of co-operative and individual efforts is
appropriate to generate them, and what organizational structure is appropriate
to coordinate efforts and distribute results. It will produce a report
reflecting the consensus of the participants.