* 9020887
* Support of the International Institute for Applied Systems  Analysis Research Program, 1991
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1991,12/31/1991
* Bo Doos, Internationales Institut fur angewandte Systemanalyse
* Continuing Grant
* William Blanpied
* 12/31/1991
* USD 1,850,000.00

The International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) in Laxenburg,
Austria, is an international institution that, according to its charter,
conducts pure and applied research in systems analysis, "in relation to problems
of modern societies arising from scientific and technological development." The
institute is governed by a council comprised of representatives from 15 National
Member Organizations, including the United States, the Soviet Union, Canada,
Japan, and several Western and Eastern European countries. In December 1989, the
President determined that IIASA conducts useful research and merits U.S.
support. Currently, its major research is focused in four policy relevant areas:
(1) the Envirnomental and Climate and Ecology-Related Program; (2) Population
Program; (3) Technology, Economy and Society Program; and (4) System and
Decision Science Program. This grant will support research in all four areas.
Many of the specific issues addressed by IIASA's research, particularly in the
first of these broad program areas, is closely related to Global Climate Change
problems. In view of its long-standing ties with scientists in the Soviet Union
and Eastern Europe, IIASA is in a particularly good position to explore
environmentally-related problems in that region of Europe, including their
likely long- term conseqences for Western Europe.