* 9020170
* U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research:  Mechanisms of       Respiratory Sensation in Humans
* O/D,OISE
* 10/15/1991,09/30/1992
* Paul Davenport, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 09/30/1992
* USD 7,036.00

This award supports a visit by Dr. Paul W. Davenport of the University of
Florida to the University of Auckland, New Zealand, to work with Dr. Paul Hill
to investigate mechanisms of respiratory sensation in humans. Respiratory
sensations allow humans and animals to sense and adjust their ventilation to
meet changing environmental demands. The sensation of increased inspiratory
mechanical loads has been previously studied using psychophysical techniques,
but very little is known about the sensory mechanisms mediating the sensation of
mechanical loads. Recently an evoked potential technique was used to demonstrate
the activation of somatosensory cortical regions by inspiratory loads. This new
respiratory related evoked potential (RREP) technique has the potential to
increase our understanding of the physiological mechanisms mediating respiratory
load sensation. The researchers will use inspiratory occlusions to determine the
cortical generator of the RREP early P1 peak. They will standardize the
stimulus/ response paradigm and correlate the RREP with subjective measures of
respiratory load sensation to begin the systematic investigation of the
underlying physiological mechanisms. The results of these experiments will
provide new information of the application of RREP's to the study of respiratory
sensations.