* 9020614
* Diet and Feeding Ecology of Chiropotes and Pithecia
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1991,09/30/1994
* Warren Kinzey, CUNY City College
* Continuing grant
* Jonathan S. Friedlaender
* 09/30/1994
* USD 176,014.00

The primary objective of this proposal is to clarify the ecology of two species
of frugivorous New World monkeys: Pithecia pithecia and Chiropotes satanas.
These two species overlap significantly in their distributions and in broad
terms utilize similar foods. The pithecines also possess a rather unique
anterior dental complex with large canines and general hypertrophy of the
anterior dentition. How does this dental structure relate to physical
characteristics of their food stuffs? How do the species differ in food choices
in their areas of sympatry? This research will test a series of linked
hypotheses regarding the choice and processing of foods by the two species.
Specifically, the PI will, through both field observation and laboratory
analysis (1) test the ability of the dentition of these species to reduce hard
dietary items (2) determine the importance of each item to the nutrition of each
species (3) study the use of the large anterior teeth (especially the canines)
in food processing as well as the grinding role of the molars (4) determine the
relative importance of each item to the diet of the two species. Through this
analysis the researchers should clarify the relationship of teeth to dietary
choices and the role of the later in preventing competition between closely
related species.