* 9020195
* LTREB:  Ecological Recovery Following Six Years of          Experimental Acidification of Little Rock Lake, Wisconsin
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1991,01/31/1996
* Timothy Kratz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 01/31/1996
* USD 299,654.00

The approaching completion of the acidification phase of the Little Rock Lake
Project in Spring 1991 provides a rare and valuable opportunity to examine
recovery from long term stress at the whole-ecosystem scale. Since 1983, Little
Rock Lake, Wisconsin has been the site of a large-scale experiment designed to
detail the effects of acid deposition on aquatic ecosystems. Two basins of the
lake were separated with a curtain and the pH of one basin was lowered with
sulfuric acid from an original value of 6.1 in three, two year stages to target
values of 5.6, 5.1 and 4.6. Both basins have been sampled in parallel for a
broad range of limnological parameters to provide baseline support for an
evaluation of the Lake's recovery following acidification. System recovery will
be examined on two nested levels. Drs. Frost and Kratz will monitor the lake's
chemical recovery as it's pH and ANC return towards pre-acidification
conditions. Within this chemical framework, the PIs will examine biological
recovery by focusing primarily on the zooplankton community. Patterns of species
return will be documented within the two lake basins and processes underlying
those patterns will be examined through smaller-scale experiments. Drs. Frost
and Kratz are respected and productive scientists. The institutional support and
facilities available for this project are outstanding.