* 9020462
* High Precision Oxygen Isotope Ratio Measurements in         Atmospherically Important Reactions and in Air Species
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/1991,02/28/1995
* Mark Thiemens, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 02/28/1995
* USD 474,742.00

The proposed research represents a continuation of isotopic measurements of
atmospheric species and reactions of direct importance to tropospheric and
stratospheric chemistry. The PI proposes to conduct five individual tasks: (1)
Recent kinetic measurements by Troe et al. for O + O2 + M recombination have
shown that, at pressures to 1,000 bar pressure, the rate constant varies in an
unpredicted fashion which may be related to the anomalous 18O, 17O fractionation
in O3 formation and in the stratosphere, which is presently not understood. High
pressure, variable temperature, bath gas experiments are proposed to resolve the
role of electronic excitation and radical complex mechanisms upon isotopic
fractionation in O3 formation and to define the mechanism of the mass
independent oxygen isotopic fractionation process in O3 formation. (2) Using
presently developed experimental and theoretical techniques, the PI proposes to
measure the rate of isotopic exchange between the species O3-O2-O and CO2,H2O,
N2O and CO. Anomalously large 18O enrichments exist in stratospheric O3,H2O and
CO2, but which are not understood. There are no measurements of most of the
isotopic exchange rates needed to model these reactions. (3) The PI has found a
new isotope effect in the thermal decomposition of O3. He proposes to resolve
this mechanism as it is of importance to general isotopic fractionation
processes and chemical reactions. (4) A variable 17O/18O ratio in atmospheric
CO2 has been measured, which the PI has demonstrated is removed by CO2- H2O
exchange. Determination of the source of the variable 17O/18O and exploration of
applications as a quantitative measure of the lifetime of CO2-H2O exchange and
general mixing, e.g. stratospheric-tropospheric exchange are planned (5) High
precision 18O tropospheric O2 measurements will be maintained specifically to
verify 18O variations in Santa Ana conditions and measure stratospheric O2
samples.