* 9020749
* Distillation Dynamics:  Propagation and Fate of Disturbancesin Multicomponent Fractionation Columns
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1993
* Ying-Long Hwang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* MILTON J LINEVSKY
* 08/31/1993
* USD 150,056.00

The project aims at developing a phenomenological model for describing
distillation-column dynamics for multicomponent systems. For improving practical
design and control of fractionation columns the model appropriately describes
the critical nonlinear and distributed nature of column dynamics with a
mathematical framework which is concise enough for on- line control (e.g. feed
forward controllers), control system analysis, and column design. The ultimate
goal is to make distillation columns operable at lower reflux ratios, and thus
to lower energy consumption. Better fundamental understanding of column dynamics
will make it possible to upgrade existing columns and design new ones which are
less sensitive to disturbances. The research approach is based on the
multicomponent coherence theory of simpler countercurrent separation processes
such as fixed-bed chromatography theory. The theory is expanded by including the
dynamics of reflux and reboil, interaction between two or more sections, and
heat effects. The theory and the dynamic model are tested by comparison with
experimental results. Experiments are carried out in an industrial laboratory
with a pilot-plant-scale, computer controlled distillation column properly
equipped with a fast gas chromatography system for on-line composition
anonitoring.