* 9020578
* Molecular Mechanisms of Thigmotropic Differentiation:       Promoters and Transacting Factors
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1993
* Srirama Bhairi, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 09/30/1993
* USD 138,000.00

The development of specialized infection structures including appressoria is a
prerequisite for infection of plants by several pathogenic fungi. An
appressorium is formed by the differentiation of a single-cell germ tube.
Differentiation is induced by a thigomotropic (touch) stimulus. In the bean rust
fungus, Uromyces appendiculatus, induction of differentiation requires contact
with a specific topography of a physical surface such as a collodion membrane
impregnated with oil or a 0.5 micrometer ridge on a plastic surface which
resembles the surface of a host plant leaf. The over-all goal of this research
is to understand how the touch stimulus initiates developmental events.
Preliminary results have shown that the touch stimulus induces mitosis and
expression of six differentiation-specific genes. Since it is difficult to
characterize directly the "receptor" for the touch stimulus, the strategy has
been to trace the steps of the signal transduction pathway backward, beginning
from the documented effects of the stimulus, e.g. mitosis and specific gene-
expression. As a first step, using polyclonal antibodies against the yeast cdc2
kinase, induction of a cdc2-like protein has been observed in differentiated
germlings. On western blots, this protein is not detectable in undifferentiated
germlings. The rust homologue of the cdc2 gene will be cloned and the temporal
expression of mRNA for the protein will be studied. Since many cell cycle
specific genes are regulated at the transcriptional level, the further goals of
this project will be to identify trans-acting factors that bind to the promoter
region of the gene. Further goals are to characterize the touch-specific gene,
INF88, and localize the encoded protein in vivo. The sequence, CCGCGTTAA, has
been identified about 300 bp from the transcription site(s) of INF24. This
sequence is very similar to the sequence, ACGCGTTAA, present in several cell
cycle specific genes including the thymidylate synthase (cdc21) gene in yeast.
Starting from a restriction fragment containing this sequence, trans-acting
factors binding to this region will be sought. Identification and
characterization of these factors should reveal other components of the signal
transduction pathway. Finally, to gain further insight into the function of the
protein encoded by another differentiation-specific gene, INF24, the protein
will be isolated from the differentiated germlings and its biochemcial and
biophysical properties studied. The results of this research will further our
understanding of how a touch stimulus initiates the developmental changes that
allow this fungus to invade its plant host.