* 9020171
* Phylogenetic and Molecular Evolutionary Studies of          Chloroplast DNA Variation in the Asteraceae
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1991,08/31/1992
* Robert Jansen, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 08/31/1992
* USD 81,229.00

Previous studies of chloroplast DNA variation in the Asteraceae have resolved
many systematic issues at higher taxonomic levels. However, major problems
persist in resolving tribal relationships and the monophyly of the subfamily
Lactucoideae. An expanded examination of chloroplast DNA variation in the
Asteraceae is proposed using comparative restriction site mapping of 10 enzymes
and DNA sequencing of two genes (rpoC2 and ndhF) from representative species in
all currently recognized tribes in the family. These new data will be combined
with those from previous chloroplast DNA studies to address both phylogenetic
and molecular evolutionary questions. Integration of molecular and morphological
data will produce a comprehensive phylogeny and classification of the
Asteraceae. Fine scale restriction site and gene mapping will enable the first
direct comparisons of the phylogenetic utility of restriction site mutations in
coding and noncoding regions of the chloroplast genome. Similarly, the
availability of DNA sequences of three genes (rbcL, rpoC2, ndhF) will provide
much needed comparisons of the usefulness of different chloroplast genes for
phylogenetic studies in angiosperms. Statistical analyses of restriction site
and sequence data will be used to examine the patterns and rates of sequence
evolution in the chloroplast genome. Identification of heterogeneity in the
location of restriction site mutations will provide valuable information for
character analysis in future molecular systematic studies in the Asteraceae and
other angiosperm families. Furthermore, new insights will be gained into the
rates and patterns of nucleotide substitutions within and between coding and
noncoding sequences from three chloroplast genes with different functions and
locations in the chloroplast genome.