* 9020759
* Structural Requirements for Protein Membrane Assembly
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1994
* Ross Dalbey, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 09/30/1994
* USD 270,000.00

This project addresses the problem of how the information contained in the
amino acid sequence of a secreted or a membrane protein determines the precise
topology of insertion into or through the membrane. This is a fundamental
problem in cell biology. Positively charged residues, often found located near
the boundaries of transmembrane segments of proteins, appear to be involved in
specifying the orientation of membrane proteins. This proposal examines in
detail to what extent positively charged residues play a part in this process
and the mechanism by which proteins obtain their unique membrane topology in
Escherischia coli. The aims of the proposal are: 1, to determine whether inner
membrane proteins, like other exported proteins in E. coli, require molecular
chaperones for their membrane assembly; 2, to define genetically the parts of
the proteins that participate in their membrane assembly; 3, to evaluate the
mechanisms of membrane insertion for simple and complex membrane proteins; 4, to
establish the general role of positively charged domains in protein orientation;
and 5, to determine how positively charged residues exert their effect on
topology. This work will be done with the E. coli leader peptidase, subunit H of
the photosynthetic reaction center, procoat, lac permease, and outer membrane
protein A. A variety of approaches will be used, including in vivo and in vitro
techniques. Protease mapping and biochemical methods will determine how positive
charges exert their effect on protein topology. These studies in protein
membrane assembly will eventually help answer some of the fundamental questions
in cellular biology concerning protein compartmentalization.