* 9020138
* The Biological Significance of Cellular Alloantigen Systems in Captive Avian Populations
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1996
* Worthie Briles, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 12/31/1996
* USD 508,979.00

The overall objective of this research is to apply immunogenetic knowledge
already acquired in the domestic fowl toward preserving the genetic health of
captive avian species, especially those in danger of extinction. In the chicken
there are 12 genetic loci or gene complexes producing antigens on erythrocytes
and, more recently some five additional loci determining lymphocyte specificity
have been discovered in this laboratory. These genetic systems of polymorphic
genes are potentially beneficial in several respects. Some of the gene systems
have distinct physiological effects. The B system is the major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) of the chicken and is of prime significance in
both humoral and cellular immune response. The B system serves as an example of
a multi-gene complex in which individuals inheriting two different B gene
complexes are at a survival advantage because of more effective immune defense.
The other more highly polymorphic systems are to be examined for specific
effects on survival under exposure to naturally occurring diseases. Other
systems encoding lymphocyte antigens are known to interact with the MHC in the
overall immune response to environmental stimuli. The unique genetic stocks and
reagents developed for specific immunogenetic objectives make possible
interdisciplinary research with colleagues in related areas--restriction
fragment length polymorphisms, natural resistance to environmental disease
organisms, genome mapping, and the use of alloantigen gene systems as markers in
monitoring individual fitness. Finally, studying these multigene systems in
avian populations over time will enhance our understanding of their function in
the evolution of birds. This research will apply immunogenetic knowledge
obtained from study of chickens to develop new knowledge of the immunological
recognition systems of several wild bird species which currently exist in very
limited numbers. This will be done by identifying, on the surfaces of red and
white blood cells, specific families of molecules involved in immune
recognition. An immediate practical benefit of being able to identify the
immunological recognition systems in captive bird species is their use in a
simple blood test to check pedigree information to avoid accidental mating of
closely related individuals, and thus to maximize the genetic diversity of small
populations. This information will contribute to our ability to preserve the
genetic health of captive bird species, especially those in danger of
extinction.