* 9020718
* Genetic and Molecular Studies of the Tad Transposon
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1994
* John Kinsey, University of Kansas Medical Center
* Continuing grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 09/30/1994
* USD 330,000.00

The long term goals of this project are to determine the structure, the
mechanism of transposition, and the possible regulatory function of Tad, a LINE-
like transposable element from Neurospora crassa. Tad is a 7 kilobase
transposable found in multiple copies in the Ivory Coast strain, Adiopodoume,
and its derivatives, but not in other strains (over 400 tested). The Tad element
has no terminal repeats, but it has internal regions of homology with both the
gag and pol genes of retroviruses and retrotransposons. The sequence of one Tad
elements, which proved to be defective, was determined. A functional Tad element
has been cloned. We will determine the sequence of this functional element and
compare the sequence to other elements as well as the nonfunctional element
already sequenced. The location of the major promoters will be determined using
gene fusion techniques. Cis-acting sequences important for transposition will be
determine using engineering constructs. An intron will also be introduced to
determine whether Tad transposes via and RNA intermediate as expected from its
structure. The effects of an adjacent Tad element on the expression of the am
gene will be addressed. Tad will also be tested for mutator function, reverse
transcriptase activity, and what effects RIP has on this elements.