* 9020072
* Collaborative Research:  Rates of Long-Term Vegetation and  Climate Change in North America and Europe
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1991,10/31/1993
* George Jacobson, University of Maine
* Continuing grant
* Richard F. Dame
* 10/31/1993
* USD 90,720.00

Analyses of rates of change in fossil-pollen data from eastern North America
reveal that many sites experienced major changes 10,000-13,000 years ago during
the last deglaciation and again during the last 1000 years. The PIs propose to
expand previous research to several new regions of the northern hemisphere, and
to determine the timing, magnitude, and geographic patterns of changes in
climate and vegetation during the past 18,000 years in northwestern as well as
eastern North America. They will also use a parallel database in Europe to study
the patterns and rates of change in Europe over the last 18,000 years, for
comparison with North America. Through use of pollen databases for North America
and Europe, this research will establish the degree to which rapid vegetation
changes in a broad band around the northern hemisphere are synchronous, and will
thus identify probable times of major rapid changes in atmospheric circulation.
In addition, special attention will be given to a critical site, Lake Tulane,
Florida which has a continuous high-resolution pollen stratigraphy extending to
at least 45,000 years ago. The pollen stratigraphy from Lake Tulane exhibits
major, abrupt changes, which may correlate with as yet poorly understood isotope
fluctuations in the Dye 3 Greenland ice core during the period 25,000-55,000
years ago. The results of the research will provide very important data on the
nature and extent of global change in the last 20,000 years.