* 9020111
* ALVIN Diving on the East Pacific Rise, 9-10 Degrees North: Hydrothermal, Volcanological, and Geochemical Studies in Support of ODP Bare Rock Drilling
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1991,12/31/1993
* Rachel Haymon, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 12/31/1993
* USD 194,157.00

A new view of sea-floor spreading center processes is emerging from integration
of detailed bathymetric, geophysical, and petrological data sets. Variations in
the supply of magma along the ridge axis appears to play a fundamental role in
controlling morphologic, tectonic, seismic and geochemical "segmentation" of
spreading centers. Such magmatic segmentation has profound implications for
hydrothermal processes which are controlled by the thermal and permeability
characteristics of the newly formed crust. The present project will support a
detailed examination of hydrothermal processes along the East Pacific Rise south
of the Clipperton Transform Fault. This section of ridge has been extensively
studied using standard geologic and geophysical techniques. Only data on the
chemistry and nature of vent fluids to be gathered by this project is lacking
for this ridge segment. Additionally, future drilling is planned which will
provide a depth perspective on volcanic and hydrothermal processes. These
additional data will provide the first complete three dimensional
characterization of a ridge crest spreading segment. Additional work to be
accomplished during Alvin dives in this study includes: structural mapping,
basalt sampling, and evaluation of specific sites for future drilling.