* 9020276
* REU:  Paleocene and Eocene Faunas of the Wind River Basin,  Wyoming:  Excavation, Preparation and Research
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1993
* Mary Dawson, Carnegie Institute
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Krishtalka
* 11/30/1993
* USD 156,866.00

This project -- the final two years of a five-year endeavor -- involves the
collecting, preparation and study of outstanding remains of extinct vertebrates
from the eastern Wind T+River Basin, Wyoming. Specifically, the project
involves: (1) the excavation of extremely reich fossil quarries that produce
unparalleled skulls, skeletons, and dentitions (50 million years old) of the
earliest forerunners of many groups os rhinoceroses, even-toed ungulates, bats,
marsupials and rodents: (2) survey of adjacent badland rocks (60 million to 35
million years old) to recover additional fossil vertebrates from a longer
temporal sequence and broader paleoecological settings in order to reconstruct
ancient ecosystems and biodiversity; and (3) the and relationships of these
ancient animals. Analysis of the paleobiological problems. Accomplishments of
this project to date include: (1) discovery and 60% excavation of extremely rich
quarries preserving skulls and skeletons of many Eocene mammals and lizards
hitherto known only from teeth and jaws; (2) scientific descriptions and
analyses of the material representing ancient marsupials, primates, armadillo-
like beasts, rodents, archaic ungulates, and even-toed ungulates: (3) analyses
of new, remarkable specimens, e.g.: first known skulls of tarsier-like
Shoshonius has overturned traditional views on the primate evolutionary tree;
skulls of the lemur-like Notharctus venticolus demonstrate the oldest record of
primate sexual dimorphism and imply early primate social behaviors; skull of new
rodent, Armintomys, reveals earliest appearance of a specialized jaw structure
called hystricomorphy, a major evolutionary innovation in rodents; (4) more
precise geology and stratigraphic correlation of Eocene faunas and horizons n
the Western Interior of the Rocky Mountains using conventional geologic
techniques, and satellite/aircraft remote sensing imagery; (5) analysis of
biodiversity and faunal change through time; and (6) detailed studies of
evolutionary patterns processes through time. Since 1988, these accomplishments
have been documented in 23 papers in professional journals, student
dissertations and theses, and presentations at professional meetings.