* 9020015
* Structure, Regulation and Mechanism of the Action of        Oxidizing Enzyme
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/1991,01/31/1994
* Rona Ramsay, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 01/31/1994
* USD 252,000.00

The proposed project is a direct continuation and expansion of studies conducted
under NSF project exploiting findings in that investigation. One aspect of the
project centers on the oxidation of the neurotoxic amine MPTP (N-
methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6- tetrahydropyridine) and of its structural analogs by
the two forms of monoamine oxidase )MAO), which are known to exist in mammalian
mitochondria, and the reversible inhibition of MAO A and B by the pyridinium
oxidation products of MPTP analogs. These tertiary amines are of profound
interest to biochemists, pharmacologists, and neurobiologists because in humans,
subhuman primates, and certain other species they induce neurological conditions
essentially identical with those seen in Parkinson patients. Expression of their
neurotoxic action is initiated by the 4-electron oxidation of these
tetrahydropyridines by either or both forms of brain MAO. A study of the
structural requirements of MAO A and MAO B for rapid oxidation of these tertiary
amines has revealed completely unexpected facets of the specificities of these
enzymes and has already yielded major new information concerning their catalytic
properties. Many more classes of structural analogs remain to be tested with
these different enzyme forms. Another aspect of the program explores further the
mechanism of neuronal death caused by the pyridinium compounds formed by MAO. It
is known that they inhibit the respiration of mitochondria by blocking the
reoxidation of the flavoprotein NADH dehydrogenase by Coenzyme Q. m Structure-
function studies under this proposed program should greatly increase our
understanding of the requirements for the interaction of MPP+ analogs with NADH
dehydrogenase. We plan to expand our recent experiments which have demonstrated
that the classical inhibitors of NADH dehydrogenase (rotenone, piericidin, and
barbiturates) bind at the same site and compete with MPP+ and its analogs.
Extension of these studies to photoaffinity analogs of MPP+ and congeners is
expected to establish which of the subunits of the complex NADH dehydrogenase
molecular are close to the Q reduction site.