* 9020155
* The Structure and Function of Sex Chromosomes in Plants
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/1991,06/30/1992
* Thomas Meagher, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 06/30/1992
* USD 57,000.00

A stable genetic mechanism for sex determination is a prerequisite for the
maintenance of separate sexes in a species. This in turn requires that those
genes promoting or suppressing female and male expression be located on the same
chromosome. Chromosomal sex determination, uncommon in plants, is widespread in
animals and is almost invariably accompanied by morphological differentiation of
the X and Y chromosomes. The relatively recent origin of sex chromosomes in
plants means that, in many cases, closely related species which lack sex
chromosomes, also exist. The existence of variation in sex chromosome
differentiation within a closely related group of plants provides a model system
for the study of the origin of sex chromosomes. We are studying Y chromosomes in
Silene to test theoretical predictions concerning their structure and function.
A DNA library will be generated from Y chromosomes of Silene alba isolated using
flow cytometry, a technique applied with great success to the human genome. The
resulting Y-specific DNA probes will be cross hybridized with chromosomes of
male and female S. alba, as well as the other close relatives. Our expectation
is that the Y chromosome will have some regions which are structurally similar
to the X. The existence of structurally different regions serves to prevent
recombination that would disrupt the "active Y" sex determination found in
Silene.