* 9020744
* Search for Gravitational Radiation Using Ultralow           Temperature Techniques
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/1991,07/31/1993
* Peter Michelson, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Isaacson
* 07/31/1993
* USD 1,207,203.00

Resonant-mass detectors of gravitational radiation have been developed that can
be reliably operated at liquid helium temperature (4.2K) with sensitivities h ~
10-18. At this sensitivity level we do not expect to detect gravitational wave
signals from anything but the rarest astrophysical events. However, the
technology to build an ultralow temperature (40mK) detector with sensitivity of
at least h ~ 10-19 and likely 10-20, sufficient to detect gravitational
radiation from plausible astrophysical events that could occur in our galaxy or
its immediate vicinity, is in hand. The Stanford research program has the
following key elements: a) completion of an ultralow temperature (40 mK)
detector now under construction, b) operation of this detector in coincidence
with other gravitational wave and neutrino burst detectors, c) operation of the
existing 4 K detector until reliable operation of ultralow temperature detector
is achieved, d) continuing research to advance the state-of-the-art in
superconductive modulated-inductance transducers, e) upgrade of the existing 4K
detector, f) research on advanced detector development including low-frequency
vibration isolation and investigation of alternative antenna material. This
group has pioneered the construction of cryogenic gravity wave receivers, and
operates one of the three most sensitive detectors in the world. Further
improvement of their receiver will not only provide leadership in the search for
gravitational waves, it will provide important technological spin-off in
precision measurements and vibration isolation which will be of use to a wider
community.