* 9020173
* Clonal Molecular Evolution in E. coli
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1991,03/31/1995
* Roger Milkman, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 03/31/1995
* USD 320,000.00

Most animals and plants get their genetic material DNA from two immediate
parents, and proceeding to more distant ancestors, from a very large number of
contributors. How long a stretch of DNA typically survives this recombination
process without itself being broken up, over a given time? Bacteria, too owe
their genetic material to many sources, although the exchange of DNA fragments
begins with small pieces (as opposed to the crossing over known in higher
organisms) and takes place less frequently. In any event, the same question
arises. A model has been developed to serve as a framework for the analysis of
the transmission over many generation of pieces of DNA in both bacteria and
higher organisms. The model has worked well so far in the analysis of genetic
variation in bacteria using both direct and indirect assessment of nucleotide
sequences. It will, hopefully, lead to clearer insight in to the dynamics of
evolution in bacteria. This has practical applications for the release of
genetically engineered microorganisms: how likely is a form, designed to work
within safe bounds, to pick up genes that permit it to "escape" and become
virulent? It should, in addition help solve ancient questions as to whether
certain organisms persist without genetic recombination indefinitely. It should
also help us interpret and make long-term predictions about the likely
associations of alleles at two or more nearby loci in humans. The present
project is designed to get values for the following variables in the well known
bacterium E. coli: the initial size of DNA replacements, the frequency of
replacements in relation to the frequency of individual time, and the rate of
selection of new favorable mutations that can cause a strain of bacteria to
spread all over the world.