* 9020302
* Interactions Between Planktonic Community Structure and     Nutrient Cycling Processes in Freshwater Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1991,07/31/1993
* Nelson Hairston, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 07/31/1993
* USD 140,016.00

This project will continue an investigation on the major interactions between
planktonic community structure and nutrient cycling in aquatic ecosystems.
Because community composition is tightly coupled with nutrient dynamics in a
number of complex cause-effect relationships, the relative importance of
different interactions in any particular habitat can be difficult to assess. For
example, phosphorus fertilization, water column N:P and planktivorous fish
abundance may each independently influence (directly or indirectly)
phytoplankton and zooplankton abundance and species composition. The latter
variables may, in turn, influence nutrient cycling rates and routes (either
directly through water-column effects, or indirectly through sedimentation and
benthic regeneration). Three major variables can be experimentally manipulated
to identify circumstances under which particular processes are important: the
abundance of zooplanktivorous fish, the ratio of nitrogen to phosphorus
available for uptake by phytoplankton, and the absolute amount of phosphorus
added to the environment. Using a set of 16 large experimental ponds,
researchers will manipulate two variables at a time with 4 replicate ponds per
treatment. At present, N:P (high vs low) and fish (presence vs. absence) are
being manipulated. This increment will be a further 1-year experiment to
manipulate the third variable, P- loading (high vs. low) again + fish. Research
will contribute to basic ecological concepts and will provide data useful in
lake management.