* 9020656
* Integration of the UNIDATA Scientific Data Management       System Into the Undergraduate Meteorology Curriculm
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1993
* Charles Murphy, Kean University
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Jacobs
* 02/28/1993
* USD 9,790.00

Computer hardware and software will be acquired to run the Scientific Data
Management (SDM) system for meteorological data access and analysis developed by
the UNIDATA Project Center. The SDM system is an essential element in achieving
the major objective of this project - the incorporation of the methodologies of
computerized data analysis into the meteorology curriculum at Kean College.
Today's meteorology students need experience with these methodologies, and they
require the means for efficient access to current data as well as new types of
information to be available in the near future (i.e. NEXTRAD, profilers, and
improved satellite capabilities). These curriculum revisions are necessary to
adapt our undergraduate program to the evolving technological developments in
the field of meteorology. The curriculum revisions will include new approaches
to teaching using computerized data analysis and the development of a range of
case studies and student exercises to reinforce the new methodologies.
Coexisting with the revision of the meteorology curriculum will be evaluation
and assessment of its impact on student learning. Evaluation of the curriculum
objectives will be accomplished through a variety of standard means, as well as
through specially designed assessment instruments as part of the existing
program assessment effort at Kean College. In addition to the curriculum
objectives, the SDM system will provide improved access to data for faculty
research in neural network approaches to local forecasting and mesoscale
modeling, as well as for student research projects. It will also enhance our
ability to share data with local high schools and other colleges in the area.