* 9020899
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Regional Development     Theory and Practice: A Korean/American Comparison
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1993
* Ann Markusen, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 12/31/1993
* USD 29,536.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Ann R. Markusen, Center for Urban
Policy Research Planning and Policy Development, Rutgers University, to pursue
with Dr. Sam Ock Park, Department of Geography, Seoul National University,
Korea, for a period of 24 months, a program of cooperative research on regional
development theory and practice in the United States and Korea. These
collaborators will examine the following five approaches to regional development
theory as practiced in the U.S. and Korea: product/profit cycle theories;
seedbeds of innovation; new districts; trade- induced development; and state-
induced development. Most empirical tests of regional development theories have
been confined to analysis within a particular country. In the present project,
however, theoretical framework will be compared and tested against the postwar
experience of Korean and American regions. The validity of previous research
results on a single national experience will be reviewed in an attempt to
improve the various theories via comparative results. The two collaborators are
highly regarded scientists who have made significant contributions to the
literature i/n the field of this project. This project is relevant to the
objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase
the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers
through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques
and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefits.