* 9020025
* Conference: "Scanned Probe Microscopies: STM and Beyond" to be held in Santa Barbara, CA, on January 6-11, 1991.
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/1991,12/31/1991
* Hemantha Wickramasinghe, United Engineering Trustees, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 12/31/1991
* USD 5,000.00

This conference on "Scanned Probe Microscopies: STM and Beyond" under the
sponsorship of the Engineering Foundation, will be held in Santa Barbara, CA,
from 6-11 January 1991. The invention of the Scanning Tunneling Microscope has
revolutionized surface science, by providing atomic resolution images of
surfaces. It has also stimulated the development of a family of new microscopies
based on the same approach: piezoelectrically-driven scanning of a probe tip
over a surface with nanometer/angstrom precision. By utilizing different
physical interactions between probe tip and sample, these new scanned probe
microscopes have demonstrated a range of physical measurements, from topography
and magnetic imaging to atomic-scale friction and optical imaging, all with
unprecedented resolution. The objectives of this conference are: (1) To bring
together a select group of people from diverse disciplines, not only those in
the forefront of development of these microscopies, and those who have pioneered
in their application of various fields, but also others whose research interests
lie in areas of potential application; (2) To provide a conference format (a
series of plenary sessions interspersed with time for informal discussion) which
has proved successful, both in previous Engineering Foundation conferences and
in the Gordon Conferences, in promoting synergistic interactions; and thereby
(3) To simulate new directions in scanned probe microscopies and techniques,
both in applications and in the underlying technologies.