* 9020102
* Insular and Continental, Amber and Living Diptera:          Implications for Historical Biogeography and the Caribbean  Region
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1996
* David Grimaldi, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* John R. Gold
* 03/31/1996
* USD 137,936.00

The abundant deposits of Oligo-miocene amber from southern Mexico and
Hispaniola have yielded a great diversity of exquisitely preserved biological
inclusions, the large majority being arthropods and especially Diptera. The
amber specimens afford an unparalleled opportunity to address questions on the
relationships and origins of the Caribbean fauna, but critical information is
lacking on the distributions of most extant Diptera in the caribbean, and the
phylogenetic relationships of the amber fossil taxa to living species. This
research proposes to examine selected groups represented in the amber
collections the AMNH and the NMNH: Asteia (Asteiidae), Aulacigaster
(Aulacigastridae), Beckeriella (Ephydridae), Beebeomyia (Richardiidae),
Carnus/Meoneura (Carnidae), Lygistorrhina and Proceroplatus (Mycetophilidae),
Diathoneura and selected Drosophila groups (Drosophilidae), Odinia (Odiniidae),
and a species group within Pholeomyia (Milichiidae). Taxonomic revisions of each
will be based on species-level treatments using adult morphology and cladistic
methodology to examine phylogenetic relationships. Study will resort to pinned
museum specimens but requires extensive sampling using several general and
specific collecting techniques in lowland tropical forests, which is proposed
for Hispa ola, Cuba, and Costa Rica. Gas chromatography/mass spectroscopy will
be done by a collaborator on selected amber specimens to more accurately
determine their geological provenance. Aims of the research are the following:
define species and their distributions for the above groups in the Netropics;
test for repeated, congruent patterns of distributions; and place the fossils
among the phylogenetic system of extant species. Implications of these results
are that distributions can be examined for correspondence to island origins
(vicariance), and the minimum, fossil age of a clade may provide permissive
evidence for or refute a particular geological explanation. Also, the role of
geographical extinctions in modifying distributions can be assessed, which is
directly applicable to vicariance methodology.