* 9020110
* U.S.-U.S.S.R. Workshop on Solar Activity, Solar Wind,       Terrestrial Effects and Solar Acceleration (Dagomys, USSR:  October 15-20, 990)
* O/D,OISE
* 10/15/1990,05/31/1991
* Glenn Schweitzer, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Gerson Sher
* 05/31/1991
* USD 9,464.00

Recent and planned research by the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. on solar-terrestrial
phenomena, as well as the greater openness in the Soviet scientific research
climate, make it particularly timely for the two countries to hold a scientific
workshop in this area. The workshop, which will take place in the U.S.S.R., will
focus on four topics: Solar Activity, including solar cycle manifestations;
Solar Wind, including the sources of solar winds and the theory for and
evolution of large- and small-scale structures; Terrestrial Effects, such as
magnetospheric responses as well as ground-based studies of ionosphere and
magnetosphere disturbances; and Solar Acceleration, including the origin and
propagation of solar cosmic rays as related to solar activity and terrestrial
effects. The study of all these events, and particularly the quantitative
reconstruction of the chain of events, requires the integration of knowledge
from several disciplines. Crucial understanding is acquired from both space- and
ground-based data, research on which in the U.S. is sponsored respectively by
the NASA and NSF. This workshop will be one of very few, either within the US or
internationally, that review the entire solar-terrestrial chain and thus will
have the added benefit of helping to set objectives for the coordination of the
U.S program of space- and ground-based research. The workshop is being organized
jointly by the U.S. NAS and the Academy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R. (ASUSSR).
The U.S. delegation will be led by Dr. Norman F. Ness, President of the Bartol
Research Foundation, University of Delaware. The Soviet delegation will be
chaired by Dr. Viktor N. Orayevskiy, Director of the ASUSSR Institute of
Terrestrial Magnetism, Ionosphere, and Radio Wave Propagation. On the U.S. side
the project is being jointly supported by NASA and NSF. This project fulfills
the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading
researchers in the U.S. and U.S.S.R. to combine complementary efforts and
capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and competence in the field of
basic scientific research on the basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality
of benefit.