* 9020270
* Collaborative Research on Decentralized Dynamic Processes   and Distributed Algorithms
* CSE,IIS
* 12/15/1990,11/30/1997
* Stanley Reiter, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Les Gasser
* 11/30/1997
* USD 490,265.00

This research is to develop a class of decentralized dynamic processes designed
to converge to equilibria. These processes may also be regarded as distributed
algorithms for computing solutions of systems of equations--the equations that
characterize equilibrium. Unlike most dynamic processes that have been used to
study stability of mechanisms, these processes are not given by differential or
difference equations. Furthermore, these processes need not be temporally
homogeneous. Some characteristics of this class of dynamic processes are: i)
There is an agent, personifying an institution such as an organized market, or a
central computer, who plays the role of coordinator; ii) no agent, including the
coordinator, knows anything about the equilibrium equations of other agents;
iii) the coordinator selects and announces points of the message space to the
other agents, referred to as private agents. iv) no private agent is required to
evaluate his equilibrium function, but only to determine its sign at a given
point m. For example, in the setting of a market, it is easier for an agent to
estimate whether a given allocation gives him more than he wants (positive
excess demand) or less (negative) than to quantify the precise amount by which
the allocation differs from his demands. No other computations are performed by
the private agents. The researchers will explore new processes of this type for
both linear equations, and nonlinear equations.