* 9020546
* Injection of Solutes into Sieve Tubes via Severed Aphid Stylets
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1990,06/30/1992
* Donald Fisher, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce L. Umminger
* 06/30/1992
* USD 15,114.00

Phloem is the conducting system for distribution of photosynthetic assimilates
in vascular plants and also a pathway by which systemic viral infection can be
spread. The movement of solutes out of phloem conducting cells is a crucial
regulation point for the distribution of phloem-mobile substances in the plant.
Little is known, however, about the mechanisms or controls involved. An
experimental approach to understanding these mechanisms would be to introduce
labelled compounds that have a range of solute sizes and chemical structures
into the phloem and follow the movement of these compounds. However, this has
been precluded because the phloem cells are pressurized and present means of
introducing material into the phloem also produces significant artifacts. An
aphid naturally removes sugars from phloem by selectively inserting a stylet
into the conducting cell. The exploratory work proposed here would attempt to
overcome the problem of introduced artifacts by developing a method for solute
injection directly into the phloem conducting cells via severed aphid stylets,
an approach suggested by earlier measurements of turgor pressure in phloem
conducting cells. An injection system will be constructed that will utilize
thermal expansion to generate pressure. Precise pressure control in this
injection system should be possible with a precisely-regulated thermoelectric
device that has a pressure transducer incorporated into the injector.
Development of this system should allow injection of tracer material into phloem
cells by a slight and precisely controlled over pressurization.