* 9020998
* Regulation of Skeletal Myofiber-Type Gene Expression
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1994
* Robert Wade, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 11/30/1994
* USD 240,000.00

The study of vertebrate muscle development presents exceptional opportunities
for the investigation of gene regulation during complex ontogenetic processes.
During myogenesis both tissue- specific and developmental stage-specific gene
switching occur, culminating in the formation of the two major types of skeletal
muscle: fast-twitch and slow-twitch myofibers. Each of the muscle fiber types is
characterized by the expression of unique combinations is contractile protein
isoforms. The establishment of muscle fiber type arises from the interplay of
factors such as cell lineage, type of innervation the myofiber receives, and the
level of circulating hormones. Whereas much progress has been made in
understanding the molecular mechanisms responsible for muscle-specific gene
expression, almost nothing is known about differential myofiber-type-specific
gene expression. Dr Wade proposes to investigate the mechanisms regulating
myofiber-type specific gene expression through the study of the human troponin I
gene family. The adult slow-fiber TnI gene is differentially expressed during
embryonic muscle fiber formation, and can serve as a model for the developmental
regulation of fiber-type- specific gene expression. He has cloned the human
skeletal muscle TnI slow gene, and has identified multiple cis-acting sequences
required for its muscle-specific expression by the use of in vitro transient
expression assays. These studies have identified a muscle specific enhancer
which is not trans- activated by the myogenic regulatory factor MyoD1. He will
further characterize the muscle-specific regulatory elements and extend these
studies to examine muscle fiber-type-specific gene activity. The mechanisms
underlying fiber-type-specific gene expression will be investigated in vivo by
the novel approach of directly introducing TnI gene constructs into specific
fast and slow twitch muscles in mice and rats, and by the development of
transgenic mice carrying hybrid TnI gene constructs. The in vivo expression of
these TnI gene constructs will be monitored by CAT activity assays, RNase
protection assay,and by in situ hybridization of gene specific probes to cross
sections of muscle tissue. These in vitro and in vivo expression studies will
assess whether specific cis-acting sequences can confer muscle fiber-type-
specific gene expression and evaluate the role of trans-acting factors in the
process. The putative trans-acting factors regulating fiber-type-specific gene
expression will be characterized by gel mobility shift assays, and DNA
footprinting techniques. If such factors are found, he will clone representative
cDNAs from expression libraries. These studies will be among the first to
examine the molecular mechanisms regulating muscle fiber type development and
maintenance.