* 9020357
* SGER:  Systems Dynamics Applications in Psychology
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1992
* Mary Metzger, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 07/31/1992
* USD 20,000.00

This research will apply the theory of nonlinear dynamical systems and chaos to
generate models of psychological processes. The new mathematical and graphical
methods of chaos will address features of dynamic aspects of new and existing
data streams that have not previously been treated using formal techniques. The
results will make the temporal structure of cognitive and behavioral patterns
accessible to psychologists in a language common to physical, biological, and
social sciences. Two examples of this approach are as follows: (1) The
attractors of coordinated hand and mouth movements by newborn babies change in
an interesting way after babies are given a taste of sucrose. This result is
plain from inspection of the dynamic graph (phase- space trajectory), and could
not be obtained by standard methods, except by piecewise spectrum analyses of
coordinated time series, requiring substantial interpretation. The research will
further apply nonlinear theory to the full data stream for movement in babies.
(2) Dynamic maps show that, when people attempt to make a series of consecutive
short-term forecasts for an unfamiliar, chaotic, but not completely random
process, the anchoring strategy produces an accurate behavioral analogue of the
process but inaccurate forecasts (one-step out of phase). People who have had
more exposure to the process make very accurate short- term forecasts. The
research will gather new forecasting data and use dynamical maps to show
graphically and mathematically how the behavioral analogue of the chaotic
process moves from out-of- phase to in-phase. The dynamic maps of strategies may
well become a standard method for tracing the formation of concepts and
expectations. In the future, this research may be useful in an educational
context, contributing to understanding of cognitive processes that are sometimes
problematic and are defined in terms of dynamic properties, such as
distractibility and attentiveness; it may also contribute new techniques for
assessment and instruction of individuals, based on the principles of
optimization of dynamic processes.