* 9020441
* Structural Analysis of E.coli Transcription Complexes
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1991,07/01/1991
* Michelle Hanna, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/01/1991
* USD 0.00

The synthesis of RNA (transcription) is a process common to all organisms, and
is catalyzed by the enzyme RNA polymerase. It is a central step in the flow of
information from the DNA to cellular structure and function and is subject to
considerable regulation. The transcription process can be divided into two types
of activities. The first includes those steps which are common to all RNA
polymerases: the synthesis of RNA by polymerization of nucleotides in the
template - directed reaction. The second includes the regulatory processes which
modulate transcription and differ in complexity and mechanism among organisms.
The proposed experiments are designed to analyze these activities at the
molecular level by employing photochemical crosslinking. The bacterium
Escherichia coli will be used as a model for these studies. The in vitro
transcription system employing purified E. coli RNA polymerase has been well
characterized, and many transcriptional regulatory factors have been identified.
By incorporating nucleotide analogs which are tagged with photoreactive
crosslinking groups into the RNA during transcription, it is possible to probe
the molecular environment of the RNA during its synthesis. RNA containing such
analogs becomes covalently attached to adjacent molecules upon irradiation with
ultraviolet light . RNA will be synthesized in vito which contains
photocrosslinking groups at different positions within the RNA, and the contacts
made between these groups and the RNA polymerase subunits and/or DNA template
will be analyzed. The immediate goal of this work is to use photocrosslinking
nucleotide analogs to identify the RNA polymerase domains involved in substrate
and product binding, as well as the regions containing the catalytic activities
for phosphodiester bond formation and RNA displacement from the DNA-RNA hybrid.
These experiments should provide information about the fundamental mechanisms of
RNA synthesis common to all RNA polymerases. The question conformational
differences among transcription complexed from differentially regulated
promoters (antiterminated, stringently controlled, etc.). The long range goal is
to structurally characterize the E.coli transcription complex, understand the
mechanism of RNA synthesis at the molecular level, and analyze the effects of
regulatory factors such as NusA of ppGpp on RNA polymerase conformation and
activity.