* 9020672
* Regulation of Sister-Chromatid Segregation by the mei-S332  Gene.
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1994
* Terry Orr-Weaver, Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 09/30/1994
* USD 326,584.00

The regulation of sister-chromatid segregation in Drosophila will be analyzed.
While disjunction of sister-chromatids is common to both meiosis and mitosis, in
meiosis sister-chromatid separation occurs in meiosis II and is inhibited in
meiosis I. Thus there are functions that promote sister-chromatid cohesion as
well as those that lead to disjunction. Two Drosophila mutants, mei-S332 and
ord, result in precocious sister-chromatid separation in meiosis I of both males
and females, providing a key to unraveling this process. We have recently
isolated additional alleles of each of these loci; these alleles reveal that the
mei-S332 is not required to maintain sister-chromatid cohesion until anaphase I,
after the kinetochore has duplicated. The new alleles of mei-S332 will be
analyzed for their effects on sister-chromatid segregation in meiosis and
mitosis using genetic and cytological approaches. The mei-S332 gene will be
cloned and its products identified and characterized. Since an interesting
possibility is that the gene encodes a component of the kinetochore which
functions to maintain cohesion or the two duplicated halves, the cytological
location of the mei-S332 gene product will be analyzed. Sister-chromatid
disjunction is central to the ordered segregation of chromosomes is eukaryotic
organisms. The information resulting from this work will allow us to understand
better fundamental aspect of inheritance.