* 9020631
* Characterization and Optimization of Atomic Spectrometric   Processes and Techniques
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1996
* Gary Hieftje, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* David J. Curran
* 08/31/1996
* USD 970,775.00

With support from the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program Dr. Gary M.
Hieftje will continue studies intended to enhance the sensitivity, precision,
accuracy and degree of utility of atomic spectrometric analysis. In one group of
investigations, specially developed techniques will be employed to eluciate the
mechanism of solute particle vaporization and atom formation in flames and
plasmas of the kind used for multielement analysis. Clarification of these
events is expected to reduce interelement interferences caused by incomplete
vaporization. In a second area of investigation, rare-gas plasmas will be
studied in an effort to determine how they are responsible for excitation of
atoms and ions. Particular emphasis will be placed on understanding the
characteristics of electrons in such discharges and the role electrons play in
transferring plasma energy to analyte atoms and ions. In the third area, the
sources of interferences in plasma source-mass spectrometry will be
investigated. A typical plasma source, the mass spectrometer itself, and the
interface that separates these will be examined in an effort to understand how
the mass spectrometric sampling process influences a plasma, how the
atmospheric-pressure gases are extracted through a medium-pressure interface
into the mass spectrometer, and how space-charge effects in the mass
spectrometer can influence accuracy, precision, and dynamic range in the
resulting measurement. Finally, the factors that limit the utility of the glow-
discharge lamp as a source will be explored, with special attention to the
nature and rate of rare-gas sputtering in such sources. Atomic spectroscopy is a
highly sensitive and convenient method for the identification and quantitative
measurement of metals in biological and environmental samples. The results of
this project are expected to contribute to substantial improvements in the
utility and accuracy of this method.