* 9020265
* Chemical Ecology of Resin Secretion in Dalechampia          (Euphorbiacea):  Radical Evolutionary Shifts in the         Functions of Triterpenses?
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1991,09/30/1996
* Thomas Clausen, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Taber D. Allison
* 09/30/1996
* USD 224,416.00

Plant secondary chemicals mediate many relationships between plants and their
mutualists and antagonists. The number and specificity of these plant-animal
relationships generates much of the biodiversity of the tropics. Plants commonly
use secondary compounds as defense against herbivores or as attractants for
mutualists. Chemically similar compounds may serve different functions in
related plants. The proposed research will elucidate a model system of plant-
animal interactions by testing the hypothesis that terpenoid resins, which
function as floral rewards for bees in most species of Dalechampia, function in
the leaves, stipules, and floral bractlets of primitive species as a defense
against herbivores and/or pathogens, and play no role in pollination. Primitive
species of Rhopalostylis, according to the hypothesis, should defend flowers and
leaves against herbivores with resin, while offering pollinators some other
reward, such as pollen or fragrances. To test these ideas the proposed project
will i) establish whether or not the terpenoid resins of glandless and gland-
bearing species deter herbivores, by using resin extracts in feeding trials with
natural herbivores; ii) establish whether or not the terpenoid resins inhibit
microorganisms, by testing extracts in bioassays with microorganisms; iii)
investigate the chemical relationships between the floral and vegetative resins
by surveying and analyzing the compounds produced; and iv) make observations on
the pollination of, and herbivory on, primitively glandless species of
Dalechampia. Information from this study will give us greater insight into the
chemical basis of plant-animal interactions, how such interactions evolve, and
how novel mutualisms arise.