* 9020605
* Stability and Mechanism of Action of the Catalytic Subunit  of Aspartate Transcarbamoylase
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/1991,12/31/1994
* Howard Schachman, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Valerie W. Hu
* 12/31/1994
* USD 270,000.00

When highly active catalytic (C) subunits isolated from Escherichia coli
aspartate transcarbamoylase (ATCase) interact with regulatory subunits to form
intact ATCase molecules, composed of 6 catalytic and 6 regulatory polypeptide
chains, there are striking changes in the C subunits leading to a dramatic
decrease in enzyme activity. Moreover, C subunits in the assembled complex
undergo further extensive changes upon the addition of substrates, leading a
more active enzyme. What are the structural and catalytic features which endow C
trimers with these special properties thereby causing the C trimer to differ
markedly from most oligomeric enzymes? Knowledge of the stability and possible
fluctuations in structure would be invaluable. What is the role of the long
helix connecting the N- terminal and C-terminal domains, each composed about 140
amino acids? What is the significance of shared active sites in the C trimer
requiring joint participation of amino acid residues from adjacent chains? What
role do interchain salt-links play in stabilizing C trimers and what is the role
of distinct domains? What is the catalytic mechanism? Answering these questions
requires many different mutant forms constructed by site-directed mutagenesis,
determining the role of specific amino acids crucial for catalytic activity and
correct folding of the chains, using NMR spectroscopy to measure pK's of
residues implicated in catalysis, analyzing the pattern of activity over a broad
pH range to evaluate acid-base catalysis, studying isotope effects to elucidate
the catalytic mechanism, and studying binding of transition state analog
inhibitors.