* 9020183
* DNA Hybridization Comparison of Mitochondrial Versus NuclearDNA Evolution in Birds
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1993
* Frederick Sheldon, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 09/30/1993
* USD 152,251.00

By virtue of its simplicity and fast rate of evolution, mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) is playing an increasingly important role in avian systematics. Yet
despite its great potential, the application of mtDNA to avian problems depends
heavily upon evolutionary assumptions extrapolated from mammal mtDNAs. While
initial rates of bird mtDNA evolution appear to be fast, it is unknown whether
they are the same as in mammals. Further, evidence is accruing that the mtDNA
saturation plateau in birds may be lower than in mammals, which implies a
difference between bird and mammal rates at some levels of divergence. The
upshot is that we are producing data on avian genetic divergences without
knowing how rate patterns are influencing those estimates. In this project,
mtDNA and single-copy nuclear (scn) DNA hybridization will be employed to
estimate phylogenies of the Hirundinidae (swallows) and Paridae (chickadees and
titmice) and divergences among selected non-passerine taxa. DNA hybridization is
especially appropriate for such analyses because it can measure overall
divergence among taxa for both the small mt and huge scn genomes, and present
them in a single data form. These data can then be plotted, without conversion
or reference to fossil datings, to depict relative rates and saturation levels.
DNA-hybridization phylogenies will also be compared to one another and to
results of extensive restriction fragment analyses to assess the various types
of phylogenetic data.