* 9020571
* A Portable Interactive Environment for Computer Speech      Research
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1992
* None   DATA NOT AVAILABLE, Oregon Graduate Institute of Science & Technology
* Standard Grant
* MARY E EBBOTT
* 12/31/1992
* USD 83,000.00

There is a need for powerful, extensible speech research tools with an
interactive interfaces. This effort is to produce an integrated set of software
tools to enable speech research and is a contribution to research
infrastructure. The tools to be included support speech analysis, speech
production and speech recognition, particularly from the acoustic point of view.
The neural network simulation tools provide the ability to simulate recognition
tools with biological plausibility. The tools may also be used for teaching
students about speech and computer speech recognition. The specific goals are to
(a) enhance existing software research current tools, (b) develop an portable
and extensible environment, (c) develop documentation for users, and (d) provide
distribution of the software. The tools will be available free of charge and
will be distributed with documented source code so they can be enhanced locally.
Since the toolkit will be portable to several platforms, it can short-circuit
the need to reinvent the same tools, with different errors and bugs, in each
speech research laboratory. Students would be able to graduate with a toolkit
useful in subsequent research and teaching and the cost of subsequent research
may be reduced. The communities of potential users of these tools include
computer speech recognition researchers, speech pathologists, speech
psychologists, linguists, and others.