* 9020013
* RUI:  Flagellar Apparatus Structure and Phylogeny in the    Colonial Volvocales
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1995
* Harold Hoops, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 03/31/1995
* USD 73,685.00

The flagellar apparatus structure of the colonial Volvocales has turned out to
be unexpectedly diverse. This diversity is especially noteworthy in view of the
evidence that members of this group have evolved from a Chlamydomonas-like
ancestor with a "typical" chlorophycean flagellar apparatus. The differences in
flagellar structure can be hypothesized to result from either: a) independent
transitions from the unicellular to the colonial habit, or b) unusual plasticity
in flagellar apparatus structure. We cannot yet discriminate between these
hypotheses because of the paucity of species examined. This project will study
additional taxa of less uncertain affinities by detailed flagellar apparatus
reconstruction at the ultrastructural level, and by surveys of rootlet and
flagellar positioning with immunofluorescence using a monoclonal antibody that
recognized stable microtubules. In addition, correlation of structure of the
flagellar apparatus with flagellar functioning will be continued to understand
better the effects of possible selection pressures on flagellar apparatus
structure. These studies will contribute to understanding of the phylogenetic
relationships among algae in the "volvocene line." In addition, they will give
information on the evolutionary stability of the flagellar apparatus characters;
this is especially important because the structure of the flagellar apparatus is
being used increasingly in systematic studies of algae and protozoa at all
levels.