* 9020911
* Collaborative Research:  Avian Digestive Physiology:        A Comparative and Integrative Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1991,09/30/1994
* Douglas Levey, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 09/30/1994
* USD 59,100.00

The ability to digest different kinds of foods has an enormous influence on the
kinds of foods chosen by animals, on how and when they feed, and on the rates at
which they grow and reproduce. The influence of digestive studies on ecology and
behavior, however, has been practically ignored. The application of digestive
physiology has been hampered by a wide gap between detailed studies of digestion
and absorption at the cellular and biochemical levels, and the measurement of
food assimilation at the whole organism level. The analogy between the digestive
systems of animals and chemical reactors provides a bridge that links
measurements of digestive processes at the cellular and whole organism level
into a integrative and predictive framework. Mathematical models based on
chemical engineering principles will be used to generate and test productions
about the digestive processes of birds feeding on nectar and fruit pulp. Our
models also provide predictions about the feeding preferences of birds with
different physiological traits, and thus provide a direct liaison between
digestive processes and the ecologically relevant process of food selection. The
digestive traits of animals are not fixed; within a span, they depend on
acclimation to different diets. The influence of different diets on the
digestive processes of birds with contrasting dietary habits, how changing a
diet influences the ability to digest and absorb carbohydrates, lipids, and
proteins, and how dietary changes influence these digestive processes at the
cellular, organ, and whole organism levels, will be investigated. Chemical
reactor theory will be used to integrate our results. In addition to providing a
bridge between digestive physiology and ecology and behavior, our research will
provide information on the digestive capabilities and limitations of birds in
captivity, and in improving husbandry practices for both endangered species in
zoological parks and animals with economic value.