* 9020678
* U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research on Molecular          Characterization and Modification of Lactobacillus Spp
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1995
* John Luchansky, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 07/31/1995
* USD 21,050.00

This award will support a three-year collaborative project between Professor
John B. Luchansky, Department of Food Microbiology and Toxicology, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, and Dr. Gerald W. Tannock, Department of Microbiology,
University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand. The activity takes place under the
U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Science Program. The scientists will study the
genetics, biology, and microbial ecology of lactobacilli, microorganisms that
play an important role in the food fermentation industry and in animal
husbandry. Lactobacilli have been used for centuries for the production of some
foods (e.g. certain cheeses) and preservation of others (e.g. some meats). The
cooperating scientists in this study plan to utilize modern molecular biological
techniques to characterize selected lactobacilli at the molecular genetic level.
This is expected ultimately to lead to a greater understanding of the role of
these bacilli in food systems and in the gastrointestinal tract of mammals.
These efforts should also facilitate the development of novel strains of the
organism that could have significant practical applications, including their use
as vectors for delivery of biologically active molecules, and as effective
agents for protection against targeted pathogenic bacteria. This project brings
together complementary research experience and facilities in the two countries.
Professor Luchansky has expertise in molecular genetic techniques, and his
laboratory maintains equipment and personnel for conducting experiments
involving recombinant DNA methodologies of the type required for this research.
Dr. Tannock has considerable experience in studying the microbial ecology of
lactobacilli that inhabit the gastrointestinal tract of animals, and maintains a
novel colony of lactobacillus-free mice that will be very useful for evaluating
the efficacy of genetically modified strains of lactobacilli derived in this
study. The scientists plan reciprocal visits to each other's laboratory over the
course of the project to transfer the technologies each has developed.