* 9020271
* Research Careers in Biology for Minority Scholars
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1994
* Genaro Lopez, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Continuing Grant
*   name not available
* 02/28/1994
* USD 217,442.00

The Biology Department at California State University, Los Angeles will
institute a program to recruit high school graduates, community college
graduates, Cal State L.A. matriculated students, graduates from other colleges
and universities, and current high school biology teachers into a research and
mentoring oriented program designed to increase the number of minority students
who matriculate into Ph.D. degree programs. The research areas that are involved
in this program are ecology/environmental biology, genetics, molecular biology,
and physiology. Students who take part in this program will be active
researchers in the laboratories of biology faculty members with proven research
track records. The students will also be involved in an ongoing faculty/student
mentoring program funded by California State University, Los Angeles. Several
federal reports have indicated that the United States faces a severe shortage of
science faculty members by the year 2010 if more students do not become
interested in teaching and research careers. The demographic makeup of the
United State is changing, particularly in the younger age groups. Black and
Hispanic school children are projected to comprise 47% of the total school age
population by the 2000 and this change has already occurred in the Los Angeles
area. The only way that the United States can meet future potential Shortfalls
of scientists is by recruiting, retaining, and graduating more minority students
and this California State University, Los Angeles program will help in this
regard.