* 9020514
* Dissertation Research: Political Evolution and Social Stratification In The Moche Valley, Peru
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1990,10/31/1991
* NONE NONE, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* name not available
* 10/31/1991
* USD 9,200.00

Under the direction of Dr. Catharina Schreiber, Mr. Brian Billman will collect
archaeological data as part of his doctoral dissertation research. He will
conduct survey and excavation in the Upper Moche Valley which is located in the
northern coastal region of Peru. The Moche Valley is well known to
archaeologists because in its later prehistoric period it contained "cities"
with large scale temple architecture and other attributes characteristic of
civilization. Mr. Billman wishes to understand how this complexity developed,
and will focus on the preceeding periods where the roots of this process must
lie. His plan of research includes three stages. Using aerial photographs as a
guide he will locate Initial Period (1800-900 B.C.) and Early Period (900-200
B.C.) sites. These can be dated on the basis of associated ceramics. These will
then be mapped and surface collected. The second stage consists of excavation of
middens associated with individual dwellings. Finally, he will conduct
laboratory analysis of artifactual, floral, and faunal remains. Archaeologists
have proposed several theories about how complex stratified societies arise.
Some believe that the causes are external and such factors as the need to join
large numbers of people together for common goals demands the emergence of a
hierarchy. One example is the need to dig and maintain large scale irrigation
canals. Others believe that the driving force is internal, that individuals
compete for status and develop mechanisms to reinforce emergent status
differences. The Moche Valley provides an excellent opportunity to examine this
issue because crops were irrigated in this desert region and the scale of
irrigation was different in the upper and lower portions of the valley. Because
the lower valley region has been well studied, it provides an excellent
comparative sample for Mr. Billman's upper valley data. This research is
important for several reasons. It will help archaeologists understand how
complex societies such as our own originally developed and were maintained.
Since in many parts of the world people still live at a Moche level of
organization information of more direct relevance may also emerge. Finally, this
project will assist in the training of an extremely promising young scientist.