* 9020394
* Seismic Torsional Effects In Multistory Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1992
* Enrique Bazan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 12/31/1992
* USD 74,425.00

This research study is a joint collaborative research effort between an
academic research unit and a professional design office to investigate seismic
torsional effects in multistory buildings. Two projects (BCS 9020394 and BCS
9116089) are combined into a joint cooperative study of the referenced topic
area as a single research effort. By means of analytical models and a
probabilistic approach, this research study evaluates the inelastic seismic
response of torsionally unbalanced structures, with a view towards developing
more rational methods of design. Knowledge of the seismic response, calculated
for seismic motions defined by ensembles of normalized real and synthetic
accelerograms, are used to gain physical insight in the examination of a wide
range of elastically-based procedures widely used in current codes for torsional
effects in seismic design. The validity of these procedures are assessed by
first designing the structural models according to the elastically-based
"static" and modal superposition rules, followed by an explicit evaluation of
the inelastic response of these models. A torsionally unbalanced structure will
be judged to have been properly designed if the probability of exceedance of a
seismic response parameter (story drift or component ductility demand) does not
exceed that for the corresponding balanced (symmetric) system. Criterion
established will help identify deficiencies in current practice and will provide
a method for testing and modifying systematically different design rules until
satisfactory probabilities are obtained. Results from this project provide
critically important data on the torsional effects in multistory buildings
induced by seismic forces.