* 9020049
* Process-level Investigations of Weathering Inputs to        Base-poor Forest Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1991,12/31/1995
* Charles Driscoll, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Richard F. Dame
* 12/31/1995
* USD 430,003.00

In many forest ecosystems, the rate of release of Ca and other mineral nutrients
through chemical weathering far exceeds the rate of input from the atmosphere.
Thus, weathering is the primary mechanism by which mineral nutrient losses in
streamwater leaching or from forest harvesting are replaced. Recent research has
focused attention on the role of Ca and other basic cations (CB) in the
acidification of freshwaters, ecosystem recovery from acidification, long-term
forest productivity, fish mortality and the decline of red spruce in montane
forests. Our poor understanding of the mechanisms and rates of weathering
release of CB limits our ability to critically evaluate observed and predicted
changes in element cycles. This study is aimed at determining the mechanisms and
rates of weathering in two base- poor forest watersheds in New Hampshire. The
project is designed to study weathering on the scale of individual minerals, the
soil profile and the watershed. Several methods of estimating weathering rates
will be used and compared, including geochemical mass balances, mineral
depletion estimates, watershed element balances and Sr isotope analysis. By
evaluating the contributions of individual minerals to watershed weathering
rates and studying the patterns of weathering within the soil profile, our
ability to predict changes in CB cycling and forest productivity under future
atmospheric conditions will be improved.