* 9020844
* trafast Photodissociation and Dephasing Dynamics of         all Molecules in Solution
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1991,07/31/1994
* Anne Kelley, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Alfons Weber
* 07/31/1994
* USD 162,500.00

In this project in the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division, spectroscopic studies will be performed to investigate the effects of
a solvent on the electronic states of several small molecules. Both time-
dependent and steady-state techniques will be used, including picosecond pump-
probe absorption kinetics and resonance Raman spectroscopy. Past work has
explored the molecules in the gas phase, but the proposed experiments will
concentrate on the condensed phase. The time- resolved experiments will help
illuminate some of the dynamic aspects of the solvent-solute interactions. Data
will be used to critically test and extend existing theoretical models. The
range of spectroscopic techniques to be used will provide information on many
aspects of the systems under study. %%% This study of the differences in
properties of species in the gas phase versus in solution is novel in that it
concentrates on small molecules, which are more tractable to theoretical
analysis and prediction than the large molecules commonly studied
spectroscopically in solution. Furthermore, the liquid-phase results can be
compared with existing gas-phase data to determine what changes in properties
occur in the condensed medium. These studies are important since a large
fraction of all biologically, environmentally, and technologically important
chemistry occurs in liquids.