* 9020317
* ROA:  Comparative Plant-Herbivore-Enemy Interactions in     a Monophyletic Group of Six Sawfly Species
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1991,07/31/1994
* Peter Price, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 07/31/1994
* USD 250,419.00

The objective of this research is to advance ecological theory by starting from
an empirical pattern of feeding types among six sawfly herbivore species, and
developing a mechanistic understanding of how the pattern relates to differences
among species in their relationships with host plants, and natural enemies, and
their resultant population dynamics. The pattern involves a gradient of
specificity in response to plant resources from a highly specific shoot-galling
sawfly to a more generalized leaf-feeding sawfly. Fourteen hypotheses address
aspects of specificity in terms of within-plant variation, plant genotype, plan
stree, plant age, and among plant species, in addition to the relative
importance of induced plant defenses, herbivore competition, population
stability, the role of natural enemies and three trophic-level interactions, and
the distribution and colonization ability of the sawflies. Methods will employ
field observations and experimental studies using potted willow plants to
investigate questions on life history characteristics of the species, the
distribution and abundance of species, the relationships between female
preference in oviposition and consequent larval performance, the colonizing
ability of sawflies and their parasitoids, and the role of induced plant
defenses. This research is aimed at advancing knowledge by using a strongly
comparative approach on a monophyletic group of six sawfly species which range
from species with stable population dynamics to those that are more eruptive.
The mechanistic understanding of linkage among many traits of these plant-
herbivore-enemy interactions is likely to yield an advance in ecological theory
relating to such systems, with probable application to agricultural and forest
systems.