* 9020691
* U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research:  Biochemistry of Red Algal Polysaccharides
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1991,09/23/1992
* Michael Gretz, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Milsap
* 09/23/1992
* USD 285.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Michael Gretz of
George Mason University and Dr. Richard Furneauz of the New Zealand Department
of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR). Extracellular matrix polysac-
charides of red algae include the commercially important carrageenans and
agarocolloids as well as cellulose, xylans, mannans, and complex
heteropolysaccharides. Due in part to the commercial significance of these
compounds and their derivatives as gelling, emulsifying and sizing agents, much
is known of the chemistry of these polymers from selected organisms. Relatively
little is known, however, about the distribution of these and related natural
compounds among major groups of the red algae. A more detailed survey of this
plant division is therefore needed. The objective of this research is
comparative biochemical analysis of cell wall polymers of New Zealand and North
American red algae using techniques recently developed in New Zealand for
methylation analysis (gas chromatography/mass spectrometry), as well as nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) and x-ray diffraction analysis. A second objective is
to better understand the biosynthetic pathways to these polysacchardides using a
unique approach currently being developed in the United States incorporating
13C-labelling of precursor molecules coupled with methylation analysis and NMR.
The project represents excellent collaboration between the U.S. and New Zealand
group in utilizing their complementary skills in algal polysaccharide research.
This is important fundmental work on the biochemistry of red algal
polysaccrides, and has the potential for discovery of sources of additional
natural products.