* 9020206
* Keys to the Genera of Nearctic Chalcidoidea:  A             Collaborative Project
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1994
* James Woolley, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 07/31/1994
* USD 144,377.00

A collaborative project is proposed to produce illustrated keys to enable
identification of all genera of Chalcidoidea (a large group of parasitic wasps)
known from North America including temperate areas of Mexico. The Chalcidoidea
are one of the largest groups of wasps, containing about 16,000 described
species. Because all species are parasites of other insects, they are of great
importance to agriculture as natural enemies of insect pests and of fundamental
importance in ecological systems as regulators of plant-feeding insects.
However, adequate keys to identify genera presently do not exist for most of the
twenty families present in the region. Seventeen scientists have made formal
commitments to participate in this project and each family is covered by one or
more contributors. Agreements on scope, content and format of the project was
reached at a workshop held in 1989. The approach will be a pragmatic synthesis
of available information using current concepts of genera and higher taxa
(families and subfamilies). The output will be a single manual. Introductory
chapters will include a key to chalcidoid families and a section on anatomical
terms explaining the uniform terminology to be used throughout the manual. The
keys will use an annotated format to provide information on distributions,
numbers of species, and hosts when practical for each genus. A second planning
workshop is proposed for integration of the chapters and hands-on testing of
draft keys by all participants. The resulting manual will enable many biologists
to identify Neartic chalcidoids to genus and will vastly facilitate this task
for systematics.