* 9020088
* Comparative Morphological and Molecular Phylogeny of the    Branchiopod Crustacea
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1995
* Joel Martin, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 12/31/1995
* USD 93,843.00

Although branchipods are often depicted as primitive crustaceans, little is
known about the morphology and relationships of the constituent groups. The
branchipod taxon Conchostraca, recently split into two orders, is a diverse
assemblage of small, bivalved, freshwater crustaceans. The first of the two
conchostracan orders (Laevicaudata) was addressed earlier; the Spinicaudata are
the focus of this proposal. The goals of the research have been expanded to
encompass the entire Branchiopoda, with emphasis on the spinicaudatan families.
The proposed research is a three phase project consisting of 1) a thorough
morphological treatment of each genus of the four spinicaudatan clam shrimp
families (Cyclestheriidae, Cyzicidae, Leptestheriidae, and Limnadiidae); 2) a
phylogenetic analysis of the morphological data and employing outgroups in the
Cladocera, Anostraca, and Notostraca; and 3) a phylogenetic analysis employing
18S ribosomal RNA sequences from fresh material of all 8 currently recognized
branchipod orders. Of the five families previously combined in the taxon
Conchostraca, morphological examinations and systematic reviews have been
completed of two: Lynceidae and Limnadiidae. A third family (the monotypic
Cyclestheriidae) has been carefully examined and found to be invariant and to
agree with morphological descriptions made in the last century. Thus, three of
the five conchostracan families are completed. This project is to complete the
morphological examination and data collection for the two remaining
spinicaudatan families ( Cyzicidae and Leptestheriidae) and for the outgroups in
the Cladocera, Anostraca, and Notostraca, and to collect fresh material for the
rRNA work.