* 9020853
* US-Korea Seminar on Binary Star Astronomy, Seoul and        Taejon, Korea, November 5-13, 1990
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1990,02/29/1992
* Kam Ching Leung, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 02/29/1992
* USD 33,974.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Kam Ching Leung, Department of
Physics and Astronomy, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, to conduct with Dr. Il-
Seong Nha, Department of Astronomy, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea, a
U.S.-Korea seminar on Binary Star Astronomy. The joint seminar, involving twelve
U.S. participants, will be held from November 5-13, 1990, in Seoul and Taejon,
Korea. The purpose of this seminar is to bring together for mutual benefit U.S.
and Korean astronomers to (1) exchange information on contemporary techniques
for investigating both close and wide binary star systems and (2) assess,
identify, and advise NSF and KOSEF (Korea Science and Engineering Foundation) on
priority areas for future cooperation in this field. Papers presented at the
seminar will focus on new approaches for acquiring data, deriving fundamental
quantities, and interpreting and modeling binary systems. The U.S. and Korean
coordinators are highly respected scientists who have a record of successful
collaboration in binary star astronomy. This project is relevant to the
objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase
the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers
through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques
and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. Korean participation
will be supported by KOSEF.