* 9020780
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Cis-Acting Sites in the  Yeast Viral Double-Stranded RNAs
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1991,08/31/1994
* Jeremy Bruenn, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 08/31/1994
* USD 15,570.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Jeremy Bruenn, Department of
Biological Sciences, State University of New York (SUNY) at Buffalo, to pursue
with Dr. Hyun Sam Kang, Director, Institute for Molecular Biology and Genetics,
Seoul National University, for a period of 24 months, a program of cooperative
research on cis-acting sites in the yeast viral double-stranded RNA's. This
research will address current problems involving the interaction of proteins and
nucleic acids. The collaborators will undertake a fine-structure mapping of the
recognition sites on the viral plus strand for viral proteins. This will be
accomplished by RNase protection experiments and by in vitro mutagenesis of cDNA
clones of relevant regions and their expression both in vivo and in vitro.
Viruses provide a convenient means of addressing some of the problems involving
the interactions of proteins and nucleic acids. In particular, viruses with
their own packaged polymerases provide self-contained systems in which the
interaction of both enzymatic and structural proteins with nucleic acids can be
studied in an easily purified and isolated form. The ScV, or Saccharomyces
cerevisiae virus provides an opportunity to study these interactions and protein
interaction with double stranded RNA's (dsRNA's) as well. The U.S. and Korean
collaborators are highly respected scientists who not only have extensive
individual research records but also a record of successful collaboration in the
field of the proposal. This project is relevant to the objectives of the
U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of
cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the
exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through
collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. Korean participation in the project
is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).