* 9021845
* ARFMP:  Renovation and Modernization of Marine Science Hall,Dauphin Island Sea Lab, Alabama Marine Environmental        Sciences Consortium
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1991,06/30/1994
* George Crozier, Marine Environmental Sciences Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 06/30/1994
* USD 585,000.00

This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP) award from the
Research Facilities Office provides funds to the Marine Environmental Sciences
Consortium of the state of Alabama, which serves 21 state academic institutions
including three predominantly black colleges and universities and which operates
and maintains the Dauphin Island Sea Lab, for the renovation and repair of
Marine Science Hall and for the replacement of attendant buildings. Marine
Science Hall houses multi-disciplinary biological and behavioral science
research and research training activities in coastal marine science. This
building was constructed in 1950 and last renovated in 1990. The ARFMP grant of
$585,000 and $585,000 provided by the grantee as cost sharing will be used to
modernize these research and research training facilities. In order to relieve
overcrowding and to provide suitable facilities for collaborative investigation,
this project will address the need to improve the current research
infrastructure by repair or replacement of the physical structure and its
supporting systems. Resulting from these changes will be more space for
laboratory use and the creation of a video analysis facility and an isotope
facility. This award contributes to the infrastructure of science and
engineering by providing an improved environment for the conduct of research and
for the training of undergraduates, graduates and postdoctoral students in
interdisciplinary research. This modernization project makes a further
contribution to the human resources pipeline because of the Dauphin Island Sea
Lab's unique ability to introduce pre-college students to the knowledge
generated by the Marine Environmental Sciences Consortium's scientists and
collaborators.