* 9021969
* Dissertation Research:  Examination of Relationships Within the Casas Grandes Interaction Sphere
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/1990,05/31/1993
* Charles Redman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/1993
* USD 9,800.00

Under the direction of Dr. Charles Redman, Ms Ronna Bardley will analyze a body
of archaeological material to collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She
will study marine shells and shell artifacts excavated from the site of Casas
Grandes in Northern Mexico and from a number of sites in the U.S. Southwest to
determine the interactions between these regions. She wishes to trace this
process from collection (in the Gulf of California) through manufacture,
distribution and consumption. To accomplish this, she will examine the natural
ranges of species represented. Because within a single species shell chemical
composition varies by region, she will analyze and match archaeological
specimens with samples from different geographical areas. Finally, she will
conduct a stylistic analysis to help determine where manufacturing took place.
Between approximately 1100 - 1300 AD, a large population grew in Chihuahua,
Mexico and was centered at the site of Casas Grandes. Given the size and
monumental nature of the site, it is clear that a stratified complex society was
present. The discovery of many exotic materials at Casas Grandes indicates that
widespread trade occurred, and the city in fact may have served primarily as a
trading center. At approximately the same time large sites also appeared in the
Southwestern United States and archaeologists have questioned whether these
represent an independent local process or rather result from direct Mesoamerican
influence via Casas Grandes. Through chemical and stylistic analysis of shell
artifacts, Ms Bradley will examine the issue directly. This research is
important for several reasons. It will shed new light on the role of trade and
inter-regional exchange in the emergence of complex societies. It will also help
to develop a new approach to shell sourcing which may be applicable in a wide
variety of situations. Finally, it will assist in the training of an extremely
promising young scientist.