* 9021182
* Roles of Perception and Spatial Memory in Competitive Mate  Searching
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1991,01/31/1994
* Patricia Schwagmeyer, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 01/31/1994
* USD 47,998.00

In many species of mammals, males compete physically for access to mating
partners, and traits that confer an advantage in fighting are favored. In other
species, however, males seldom interact aggressively, yet some individuals still
acquire more mates than others. Dr. Schwagmeyer will conduct research on a
species belonging to this second type. She will investigate features of
potential importance to male reproductive success in a mating system in which
aggression and combat play trivial roles. In previous research on thirteen-lined
ground squirrels, Dr. Schwagmeyer found that breeding males spend most of their
time simply searching for sexually receptive females. Usually the number of
mates that a male acquires is exactly equal to the number of sexually receptive
females that he finds; thus, a male's skill in finding females is critical in
determining his reproductive success. Dr. Schwagmeyer will carry out a three-
phase field study to examine how males actually locate a female during the 4 to
5 hours that she is sexually receptive. The study will involve (1) monitoring
male visits with females to determine if males can "predict" when a particular
female will become sexually available, (2) temporarily removing females to
assess whether or not males remember the geographic locations of females they
have encountered on previous days, and (3) observing how males' abilities to
remember the locations of females, and to learn other spatial tasks, influence
their mating success. This research project represents a unique combination of
the behavioral ecology of mating systems with the experimental psychology of
spatial learning and memory. Thus, in addition to important and novel specific
findings, the work offers new perspectives for both fields of science.