* 9021021
* Study of Transient Phenomena in a Small-Scale Hazardous     Waste Incinerator
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1995
* Stanley Osher, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/1995
* USD 480,000.00

The objectives of this project are the following: (1) To investigate transient
phenomena which lead to incomplete combustion of hazardous wastes. (2) To assess
the relationship between incinerator size (cost) and reliability, and to
identify the chemical and fluid mechanical phenomena which may limit the
ultimate degree of waste destruction in small systems. (3) To evaluate the use
of high volumetric heat release rate aerospace technology in the development of
small incinerators, including how combustion acoustics might be used to improve
and/or monitor incinerator performance. The objectives above are to be addressed
by means of an integrated program of experiments and numerical simulations. The
experiments are designed to follow the instantaneous velocity, temperature and
hydroxyl radical concentration fields in the combusting fluid, from which the
three T's of incineration (residence time, temperature, and turbulence intensity
or mixing) can be calculated. Experimental results are to be used in the
development of a 2-D transient combustion model based on the numerical solution
of the conservative form of the conservation equations. Realistic chemistry and
transport, capable of accurately representing the interaction of the flame with
large scale vortical structures found in the combustor, are to be used. The
results are expected to contribute to the development of small, reliable
incinerators which can be used effectively on the site of small waste
generators.