* 9021907
* Dissertation Research:  Intonation And Gesture
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1991,07/31/1992
* NONE NONE, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 07/31/1992
* USD 2,040.00

ABSTRACT This dissertation will explore the interrelationship between
intonation and gesture, thus widening the scope of recent studies of cognitive
functioning. Although scholars have long suspected a strong link, and believe
gestures and speech to be part of the same psychological structure, scientific
convention has fostered an artificial separation of these concurrent aspects of
communication. Current gestural-linguistic models neglect phonology in favor of
the semantic, syntactic and pragmatic parallels of body movement. This project
proposes a new gestural-intonational paradigm which will be applied to a data
base of two dyadic conversations, each of an hour's length, filmed on videotape.
Using specially modified audiovisual equipment, gestures will be microanalyzed
frame-by-frame, recorded using David McNeill's gesture coding system, and then
integrated with intonational patterns transcribed using an interlinear tonetic
system. Data have been found which defy description using current models, but
which can easily be handled by considering intonation patterns. Current
gestural-linguistic models must, therefore, consider the findings of this study
if they aim to completely represent the gestural-verbal complex. Intonation may
prove to be more closely related to gesture than it is to syntax.