* 9021572
* Microencapsulated Phase-Change Materials as Heat-Transfer   Media in Gas-Fluidized Beds
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1991,05/31/1996
* Robert Brown, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Tong
* 05/31/1996
* USD 224,996.00

The objective of this research is to investigate microencapsulated phase-change
materials as heat-transfer media in gas-fluidized beds. Microcapsules are small
capsules, usually between 50 and 100 >m diameter, consisting of an impervious
shell of only a few microns' thickness enclosing a gaseous, liquid, or solid
core material. Phase- change materials such as toluene, cyclohexane, or
fluorocarbons are potential core material for these experiments. Convection
coefficients for these materials are expected to be much larger than those for
gas-fluidized beds of solid particles. Furthermore, pressure drops in such beds
are expected to be small compared to conventional beds because of smaller
densities for capsules compared to solid particles. Our approach includes both
experimental and theoretical evaluations. An electrically heated probe is used
to measure convection coefficients in temperature-controlled fluidized beds of
microencapsulated phase-change material. Several theories of heat transfer in
fluidized beds will be tested against our experimental data. Suitable
theoretical refinements will be developed as appropriate for the
microencapsulated phase-change materials. The improvements in heat transfer will
expand the opportunities for using fluidized beds in such diverse applications
as air-cooled microelectronics equipment, where pressure drop is critical; gas-
liquid heat exchangers, where gas-side heat transfer is rate limiting but
difficult to enhance; and liquid fluidized beds, where heat capacities of
conventional bed materials are not enough larger than the liquid heat capacity
to yield the order-of-magnitude enhancements typical of gas-fluidized beds.