* 9021616
* Regulation of Protein Synthesis in Neuronal Ischemia
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1995
* Margaret Brostrom, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-Robert Wood
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 06/30/1995
* USD 126,490.00

The performance of the mammalian brain is dependent on a continuous supply of
oxygen and glucose. When brain cells are deprived of these nutritive substances
present in blood, neuronal function and viability are endangered. Little is
known regarding the mechanisms that operate during such ischemic insult or the
factors that favor recovery. It is recognized however, that ischemic brain cells
rapidly synthesize and release unsaturated fatty acids and platelet activating
factor (PAF), both of which act to release calcium from its intracellular site
of storage known as the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Dr. Brostom has provided
evidence that calcium mobilization from the ER provokes rapid shutdown of the
synthesis of all cellular proteins. Upon continued incubation, recovery of
protein synthesis is observed immediately when preceded by an increase in a
glucose-related protein, GRP78, a resident of the ER. GRP78 is hypothesized to
function in protein processing, the last stage of protein synthesis. This
research will investigate the importance of this protein in the functioning of
neurons with depleted calcium stores. Neuronal cells in culture will constitute
the primary model system. Gene expression for GRP78 will be modulated to prove
that an increase in this ER protein is required for the recovery phase. Efforts
will be made to determine the importance of GRP78 content in the processing of
proteins by neurons with inadequate ER calcium. Experiments using free fatty
acids and PAF will be performed to test for the capacity of influencing protein
synthesis, protein processing and GRP78 content under conditions that prevail
during brain ischemia. Results from this study will provide insight on the role
of GRP78 during the regulation of protein synthesis in neuronal ischemia.