* 9021337
* Documenting the Chiwere (Siouan) Language:  Explanation and Guidance from a Model of Language Change (REU Supplement)
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1991,12/31/1995
* N. Louanna Furbee, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 12/31/1995
* USD 64,841.00

ABSTRACT This project continues the documentation of Chiwere, a Siouan language
in the late stages of obsolescence, a language that has fewer than 15 fluent
speakers. Probably as a result of the disuse of Chiwere as an every-day form of
communication for more than a generation, all present-day speakers of Chiwere,
even fluent ones, exhibit some gaps in their knowledge of the language. These
inadequacies appear to be patterned. This project addresses the problem of
integration of divergent and partial knowledge toward recovering a complete
grammatical system. Accommodation theory, a theory most usually applied to gain
understanding of dialect variation and shift in synchronic settings, appears to
offer a guide to integrating these various less-than-perfect competencies into
something resembling a relatively complete picture of Chiwere as it was in its
full vibrancy of life. The specific goals for this project are (1) to develop
this method for recovery of the complete linguistic system from several
incomplete models, thus enhancing the description of Chiwere; (2) to devise an
explanatory model of language change in Chiwere that may be more generally
applicable for the whole of the Great Plains languages; (3) to reconstruct the
paths of language death, i.e., to make a case histroy of language death in
Chiwere; (4) to test hypothese suggested by accommodation theory about the
pattern of decline in Chiwere and its relevance for indicating important
features of the language.