* 9021982
* Isentropic Potential Vorticity Analysis of the Outflow Layerof a Typhoon
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/1991,12/31/1994
* Robert Merrill, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Pamela L. Stephens
* 12/31/1994
* USD 83,932.00

A tropical cyclone may be considered to be a heat engine. Its fuel is the
latent heat gathered by surface air as it is swept toward the central region of
a low-level inflow circ- ulation. The heat is released by condensation during
ascent of the moist surface air in the eye-wall. In any heat engine, a heat sink
is required for energy to be converted to the kinetic energy of motion. In a
tropical storm, such a sink is found in an ele- vated (upper troposphere-lower
statosphere) layer of outflow from the storm's central region. The temperature,
pressure, humidity, and three-dimensional velocity of the air change drastically
before reaching this sink region. However, two other properties are better
conserved, that can serve as tracers. These are its equivalent potential
temperature (a measure of its entropy) and its potential vorticity (a combined
measure of its thermal stability and rotational motion). Calculation of natural
three-dimensional fields of these properties requires, however, measurements of
unprecedented detail and extent through the life- cycle of a (preferably
intense) tropical cyclone. Four observational experiments in the summer of 1990
should provide the data needed to analyze, in particular, the vertical structure
of the elevated outflow layer. These analyses should further our understanding
of tropical cyclone outflow and its interaction with its tropospheric and
stratospheric environment. An ideal case is now available for analysis, since
the instru- mental networks were deployed in a region (the western Pacific) and
during a period (10-20 September 1990) that allowed them to capture Super-
typhoon Flo. The analyses could serve to discriminate between a few cur- rent
theories of tropical cyclone development and provide a basis for advancing
beyond current statistical-empirical methods for forecasting intensity changes.
Also, it is estimated that 5- 10% of the global mass exchange between
troposphere and strato- sphere occurs in these storms. Thus, the analyses could
help refine our present estimates of atmospheric chemical budgets. Merrill has
established a creditable past record in tropical cyclone analyses. He is being
supported by ONR and AFGL to par- ticipate in the data editing, reduction and
statistical cyclone- track analyses of the summer 1990 measurements. The
additional research supported under this award provides an opportunity for
complementary use of these unprecedented data sets.