* 9021062
* Real-Time Dynamics of Energy Redistribution and Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1991,01/31/1996
* Ahmed Zewail, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 01/31/1996
* USD 1,232,000.00

This research in the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division involves experimental investigations into two major areas of chemical
dynamics: 1) extending studies of intramolecular vibrational energy
redistribution (IVR) in real time to reactive systems in the electronically
excited state; and 2) developing a new approach for looking at dynamics on
ground- state potential energy surfaces in real time. The time scale of these
studies is in the picosecond to femtosecond regime. The mode specificity, time
scale and nature, role of rotations and collisions, and influence of symmetry on
IVR will be targeted. The focus of the reactive dynamics will be on state-to-
state rates of elementary reactions, the effect of total energy, mode
specificity, and the role of angular momentum on reaction rates. %%% Until
recently it was not possible to follow molecules in the process of exchanging
energy or reacting to form products. Chemists deduced the forces and energies
involved in collisions by examining the state of the interacting species before
and after the collisional event. Professor Zewail has been a pioneer in
developing time-resolved techniques which allow an unequivocal picture of
collisions as they happen. Such studies are important because they help answer
some fundamental questions in chemistry: how do reactions occur, and how does
the released energy of reaction dissipate? The proposed work examines some of
these questions.