* 9021872
* ARFMP:  Replacement of Biochemical Systematics Laboratory,  Natural History Museum, Los Angeles County
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1991,02/28/1993
* Sarah George, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 02/28/1993
* USD 103,992.00

This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP) award from the
Research Facilities Office provides funds to the Los Angeles County Museum of
Natural History for the replacement of the Museum's Biochemical Systematics
Laboratory which houses research and research training activities in the
biological and earth sciences on the evolution of organisms. The Biochemical
Systematics Laboratory was constructed in 1975 and last renovated in 1985. The
need for its replacement by an expanded facility is well justified and cost-
effective. The replacement facility is designed for research and research
training in the area of biochemical and molecular systematics. The ARFMP grant
of $103,992 and $360,258 provided by the grantee as cost sharing will be used to
modernize these research and research training facilities. The replacement
facility will permit the utilization of the Museum's extensive molecular data
bank that is of importance to the conduct of cutting-edge research in the area
of biochemical and molecular systematics. This award contributes to the
infrastructure of science by providing an improved environment for research and
for the training of quality graduate students. Los Angeles County Museum of
Natural History curators are collaborating with several universities in southern
California to provide training in the area of systematics where shortages in
professionals are anticipated.