* 9021778
* ARFMP:  Renovation of Geo-Data Processing Research and      Research Training Laboratory
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1991,10/31/1994
* Trevor Harris, West Virginia University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 10/31/1994
* USD 180,000.00

This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP) award from the
Research Facilities Office provides funds to West Virginia University for the
renovation and repair of the West Virginia University Geo-data Processing
Laboratory which is a part of the Department of Geology and Geography. The West
Virginia University Geo-data Processing Laboratory focuses on the integrated
storage, processing, and analysis of spatial and geophysical data, and it
supports research and research training in the fields of geographic information
systems (GIS), remote sensing, digital mapping, spatial statistics, and
geophysics. The building which houses the Geo-data Processing Laboratory was
constructed in 1942 and last renovated in 1981. The ARFMP grant of $180,000 and
$212,752 provided by the grantee as cost sharing will be used to modernize these
research and research training facilities. This project will address significant
deficiencies of the current research infrastructure by providing (a) electrical
circuitry sufficient to support all the equipment, (b) temperature control and
ventilation adequate to prevent computer shutdown, (c) suitable lighting, (d)
necessary conduit and computer cabling to enable the full potential of the
computer system to be used, and (e) a reconfiguration of the individual
laboratories into more suitable sizes. Benefits accruing from this renovation
will be the improvement and expansion of system use. This award contributes to
the infrastructure of science by providing an improved environment for the
conduct of research and for the training of undergraduate and graduate students.
Students trained in these laboratories will have command of a technology which
has great potential to facilitate advances in many fields of science.