* 9021840
* ARFMP:  Barus and Holley Building Engineering and Physics   Modernization Project
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1991,01/31/1994
* Donald Wilder, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 01/31/1994
* USD 660,000.00

This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP) award from the
Research Facilities Office provides funds to Brown University for the renovation
and repair of the Barus and Holley Building which houses the major portion of
the materials science research and research training activities of the Division
of Engineering and the Department of Physics. This building was constructed in
1965 and has not previously been renovated. The ARFMP grant of $660,000 and
$770,000 provided by the grantee as cost sharing will be used to modernize these
research and research training facilities. This project will address the need to
improve the current research infrastructure by correcting system and design
problems that affect safety, reliability, capacity, energy, maintenance, and
ecology and which primarily involve the remodeling of the heating, ventilation
and air conditioning (HVAC) and chilled water service. Accruing from this
renovation will be the unrestricted use of fume hoods, the enhancement of the
computing capacity, and improvement in flexibility related to the use of
electrical equipment. This award contributes to the infrastructure of science
and engineering by providing an improved environment for the conduct of research
and for the training of quality undergraduate and graduate students. Students
trained in these laboratories are products of a large internationally-recognized
center of excellence which has had and continues to have a major impact on our
national research effort, especially in the areas of solid state electronics and
the mechanics of materials.