* 9021790
* ARFMP:  Renovation of Biology, Chemistry, and Physics       Research Facility
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1991,07/31/1996
* Frederick Humphries, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 07/31/1996
* USD 650,000.00

This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP) award from the
Research Facilities Office provides funds to Florida A &amp; M University for
the repair and renovation of Jones Hall which houses that institution's research
and research training activities in biology, chemistry, and physics. This
building was constructed in 1940 and last renovated in 1974. The ARFMP grant of
$600,000 and $771,320 provided by the grantee as cost sharing will be used to
modernize these research and research training facilities. This project will
address the need to improve the current research infrastructure by upgrading
existing laboratories so that they can accommodate research in molecular
genetics, ecology, biochemistry, superconductivity, and computational physics. A
major focus of the renovation will be on replacing the heating, ventilation, and
air conditioning (HVAC) system so as to eliminate the risk of damage to major
instruments such as the electron microscope, spectrometers, x-ray
diffractometers, and computers. This award contributes to the infrastructure of
science and engineering by providing an improved environment for the conduct of
research and for the training of quality undergraduate and graduate students.
The proposed renovations will be beneficial to the training of a significant
number of minority scientists at a rapidly growing institution with an high
enrollment of Black students. Florida A &amp; M's strong graduate feeder program
which places baccalaureates of the University in a select number of major
graduate institutions throughout the nation contributes both to the nation's
manpower needs and to its science capabilities.