* 9021603
* Strategic Self-Presentation of Emotion
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/1991,03/31/1995
* Margaret Clark, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jean B. Intermaggio
* 03/31/1995
* USD 119,000.00

This research will investigate: a) the attributions people draw about others
based on the emotions those others express, b) how people's behavior toward
others is influenced by the emotions those others express, and c) whether and,
if so, when, people will choose to intentionally strategically present emotions
to others. Three emotions will be investigated: happiness, sadness and anger. A
person's happiness is expected to increase attributions of likableness to that
person and to increase compliance with the person. Happiness is expected to be
strategically presented to others as an ingratiation strategy when the potential
presenter has reason for the other to like him or her and/or a desire for the
other to comply with him or her. A person's sadness is expected to increase
neediness attributions of dependency or neediness to that person and to increase
the amount of help that that person will receive (assuming the other feels some
moral obligation to help). Sadness is expected to be strategically presented to
others as a supplication strategy when the presented desires help. This may be a
more effective strategy in communal relationships (in which obligation to help
is high) than in exchange relationships (in which obligation to help is lower).
Finally, a person's anger is expected to increase attributions of dangerousness
to that person and to increase the amount of others' compliance with that
person's desires. This may be particularly true when the potential complier has
low power relative to the angry person and when their relationship is a non-
voluntary one. Anger is expected to be strategically presented to others as an
intimidation strategy when the presenter wants the other to comply, has power
over the other and when the relationship is non-voluntary. This research will
inform our understanding of strategic self- presentation, as well as increase
the body of knowledge related to communal and exchange relationships.