* 9021767
* ARFMP:  Renovation and Modernization of Facilities for      Materials Research at Oklahoma State University
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1991,04/30/1994
* George Dixon, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 04/30/1994
* USD 800,000.00

This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP) award from the
Research Facilities Office provides funds to Oklahoma State University for the
renovation and repair of its research and research training facilities for
physical and chemical materials research located in the Physical Sciences
Building. This building was constructed in 1960 and has not been renovated since
that time. The ARFMP grant of $800,000 and $800,000 provided by the grantee as
cost sharing will be used to modernize these research and research training
facilities. This project will address the need to improve the current research
infrastructure by providing upgraded utility systems; heating, ventilation and
air conditioning (HVAC); and additional fume hoods. The renovation will be of
particular benefit to Oklahoma State University's research on synthesis and
characterization of optical materials, which is one of the leading research
efforts in the nation in this area, and it will enable the clustering of faculty
with common interests. This award contributes to the infrastructure of science
and engineering by providing an improved environment for the conduct of research
and for the training of undergraduate and graduate students in the field of
materials research. This renovation will help Oklahoma State University fulfill
the major commitment it has made to increasing the number and quality of
students in the human resources pipeline through Research Experience for
Undergraduates, Research Careers for Minority Scholars, Young Scholars, and
similar programs directed especially toward populations that are
underrepresented in the field.