* 9021185
* Microevolution of Acoustic Communication in Acris
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1995
* Walter Wilczynski, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 01/31/1995
* USD 265,844.00

Auditory communication requires a sound call emitted by one animal to be
received as a sensory signal and detected reliably by another animal listening.
It is important to know how the receiver is matched to the signal in a given
species, and how congruence can be maintained over generations despite the
individual variability within a species. Nowhere is the match between signal and
receiver more crucial than when the communication system is used in mate
recognition. Females often use the signal from a calling male to discriminate
between members of the same species versus other species, and if the male's
signal does not match the female's detection properties he will be ignored as a
potential mate. Neurobiology, behavior, morphology and evolutionary biology are
combined here to study the "microevolution" of communication in particular
populations of cricket frogs. The advertisement calls of males ready to mate
will be quantified to see how pitch and timing of their acoustic components
differ among the populations. Neurophysiological recording in the brain will be
used to see how the auditory pathway processes call features that characterize
the population. Behavioral studies will test whether females respond
preferentially to calls from their local population. Variation within a
population will be analyzed to see how differences affect mate choice, to
identify sex differences in the communication system, and to see how the
structure of the calling organ, the larynx, may constrain or promote call
changes. Finally, genetic relatedness will be assessed biochemically to see if
populations that are separated but share similar call structure reflect similar
pressures from habitat constraints on acoustic signals, or instead reflect a
historical ancestral relation- ship. This work represents a uniquely complete
analysis of a particular communication system, likely to uncover fundamental
patterns and processes underlying the neural and morphological control and
evolution of vertebrate social behavior and communication. Its multidisciplinary
scope is likely to produce a wide impact on many areas of biology.