* 9021627
* Prediction of Probability Functions for Fluid Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/1990,04/30/1994
* Robert Kraichnan, Robert H Kraichnan Inc
* Continuing grant
* Pamela L. Stephens
* 04/30/1994
* USD 241,416.00

This proposal is centered about development and exploitation of "mapping
closure", a novel and powerful method for statistical modeling of the properties
of turbulent flow fields. Mapping closure is based on the continuous distortion
of fields with known statistics into approximations of flows developing
according to known physical-dynamic laws. It has several advan- tages over
traditional analytical approaches, particularly with regard to the prediction of
the statistical properties of such fields, including entire probability
distribution functions (pdf's). It can give meaningful estimates of improbable
events, and since it can track structures in physical space it may lead to more
realistic subgrid-scale representations. It is proposed that the method be
applied to pdf's of 2-dimensional turbulence and of fields governed by quasi-
geostrophic dynamics. The pro- posed work also encompasses the investigation of
practical procedures for the calculations required; the publication of a
pedagogically oriented paper to make the method's associated tools more widely
available to the geosciences community; and the evaluation of its applicablity
to subgrid representations. Although the first two applications of the method
are of particular relevance to large-scale meteorology and oceanography,
Kraichnan's work on the method has been closely followed by scientists in other
disciplines. They have recognized that it can be applied to the large percentage
of the fluid in the universe that is in turbulent motion in systems of all
scales. These include those undergoing non-linear chemical reactions (as in
combustion models), those used in mechanical engineering, and those considered
in planetary science and in astrophysics.