* 9021607
* Knowledge Compilation:  A Divide-and-Conquer Approach
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1994
* Christopher Tong, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Larry H. Reeker
* 08/31/1994
* USD 133,652.00

Knowledge compilation (KC) converts explicitly represented domain knowledge into
an efficient algorithm for performing a task. KC technology could have a major
impact in fields depending of efficient problem-solving algorithms. For,
example, productivity in circuit and mechanical design has grown increasingly
dependent on efficient computer-aided design (CAD) tools. KC techniques can
accelerate CAD tool development and improve CAD tool reliability. This work will
develop knowledge compilation techniques for a variety of CAD applications.
Initially the work will focus on spatial configuration problems. Such problems
arise in many domains, including VLSI design, mechanical design, and
architectural design. It will focus on synthesizing search algorithms composed
of such components as generators, testers, and hillclimbing patchers organized
into one or more levels of abstraction. The research will develop an investigate
a divide- and-conquer approach to KC: A problem specification is partitioned
into parts; each part is assigned to be implemented as a particular type of
algorithm component. This approach should avoid the control problems that arise
in unrestricted transformational models of knowledge compilation. Expected
benefits of the research include articulated principles for the synthesis of
design algorithms, knowledge compilers implementing such principles, and new CAD
algorithms resulting from their application.