* 9021495
* Mechanisms Underlying Spatiotemporal Response Properties in Neurons of Visual Cortex
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1995
* Alan Saul, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 06/30/1995
* USD 255,000.00

Many cells in the cortex of the brain respond best to highly specific stimuli,
and the neural mechanisms that "tune" the cell's response remain largely
unclear. For a given cell in the visual cortex, it is possible to define its
"receptive field" as the area in visual space in which an appropriate visual
stimulus (for example a light bar, or a moving edge, or even a complex shape)
causes a recordable response in the cell. There may be a particular combination
of both spatial and temporal features of that stimulus that elicit the "best"
response from the cell. This project will examine the relations between
receptive field structure and responses to slowly moving visual gratings (series
of light and dark bars). Repetitive presentations of such drifting gratings in
one direction cause adaptation in the cell, so its response decreases to the
movement in one direction, but not to movement in the other. Single cell
activity will be recorded to map out the receptive field to a single bar
stimulus before, during, and after the selective adaptation to the grating, to
see how the receptive field changes. A mathematical model will be used to
describe both response strength and timing across the receptive field. The
results will be interpreted in terms of neural inputs to the cortical cells,
with an emphasis on how the spatial and temporal components contribute to the
timing of cortical responses. These studies provide a novel approach to the
important question of how visual cortical response properties are generated from
convergence of different types of inputs, and will have an impact across sensory
neuroscience and computational neuroscience.