* 9021260
* Washington Metropolitan Alliance for Minority Participation in Science, Engineering and Technology
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/1990,07/31/1992
* Melvin Thompson, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Susan P. Williams
* 07/31/1992
* USD 39,120.00

This proposal seeks support from the National Science Foundation to develop a
strategic plan for implementing a successful Metropolitan Washington Alliance
for Increasing Minority Graduates in Science and Engineering. The specific goal
of the Alliance is to increase the annual number of African-American and
Hispanic S&amp;E baccalaureate graduates in the area to 2,000 by the year 2000.
It is estimated that in 1989, some 400 African-American and Hispanic students
earned baccalaureate degrees in science and engineering in the metropolitan
Washington area. We have established a goal that will increase that number by a
magnitude of five in the year 2000. This can only be accomplished by developing
a systematic approach to S&amp;E education focusing on precollege and
undergraduate enrichment, academic and support services. The jurisdictions
served by this proposal include the Washington Metropolitan area represented by
counties and cities in suburban Maryland, Northern Virginia and the District of
Columbia, a 2,300 square mile are with approximately 2.7 million people. The
Washington, D.C. metropolitan region is especially will-suited for the
establishment of a successful Alliance. It is one of the leading scientific
research and development centers in the nation; the center of the Federal
scientific effort; the site of many Government laboratories; a focal point for
industrial research and development (with business showing great interest in
S&amp;E activities in the region); a major center of African- American and
Asian-American life); the location of a number of comprehensive universities;
and an area with more than 50,000 African-American and Hispanic youth between
the ages of 16 and 18, who, with adequate support, have the potential to become
2,000 S&amp;E baccalaureate graduates. Howard University is especially well-
suited to assume the leadership role in this Alliance because the University is
a comprehensive university of national significance, with graduate programs in a
number of fields of natural science and mathematics, as well as in engineering,
medicine, and dentistry. With its national Advisory Committee, chaired by
Congressman Mervyn Dymally, the University's Institute for Science, Space and
Technology has already begun to lay the groundwork for the development of an
Alliance in the metropolitan Washington region. On June 27, 1990, a meeting was
held with Howard University officials and representatives of the Consortium of
Colleges and Universities, D.C. Public Schools, Montgomery County Public
Schools, Federal R&amp;D agencies, businesses and other private organizations to
review opportunities and expand the development of this proposal.