* 9021041
* Task Allocation and Checkpointing in Distributed            Computer Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/1991,04/30/1995
* Mark Franklin, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 04/30/1995
* USD 433,467.00

With the increasing availability of message based distributed parallel computing
systems, the difficulties associated with constructing parallel algorithms and
mapping them onto parallel architectures have grown in importance. Currently,
the algorithm development and programming process typically includes the
explicit mapping of algorithm subtasks to processors. This problem is typically
dealt with manually and often results in inefficient computation and
communication load balancing which in turn leads to an overall reduction in the
speedups potentially obtainable. The problem is exacerbated when distributed
architectures are considered where processors and/or communications links are
subject to failure, yet must continue processing at reasonable rates with the
remaining computing resources. This requires that process and data checkpointing
be done effectively and that, on detection and location of failures, the system
be reconfigured and tasks reallocated. This work focuses on the checkpointing
and task reallocation problems. This research program is aimed at investigating
approaches to allocating tasks to processors in distributed computer systems
whose reliability characteristics have been characterized. The goal is to ensure
effective use of the remaining distributed resources after failure (processor or
link) has occurred through the development of distributed checkpointing and fast
task reallocation schemes.