* 9021664
* "Topological Methods in Modern Mathematics," a conference   to be held at SUNY Stony Brook, New York, June 14-21, 1991
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1992
* Dusa McDuff, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 03/31/1992
* USD 12,400.00

The field of topology became an independent mathematical discipline around the
turn of the century. Since then, it has grown into a large and diversified area
of mathematical activity. Methods from the different subareas of topology have
widely influenced current research in many other areas, from mathematical
physics to algebra and number theory. The conference supported by this grant
will focus on the use of topology in three main areas of current research:
Global geometry, topology and mathematical physics (including gauge field
theory, topological and conformal quantum field theories, and the global
geometry of the Dirac operator); Algebraic geometry and algebraic K-theory; and
Dynamical systems. The conference, entitled Topological Methods in Modern
Mathematics, will be held at SUNY Stony Brook, June 14-21, 1991. In each of the
three areas there will be broad survey talks together with more detailed
lectures on the most important and exciting recent developments. The conference
will provide an opportunity for mathematicians from three distinct mathematical
disciplines whose common feature is the use of topological methods and results
to come together and interact in an extremely fruitful way. In addition, special
tutorial programs are planned for graduate and undergraduate students, so that
they may also participate in the conference and gain a sense of the reality and
excitement of research mathematicians.