* 9021586
* Neurotransmitter Mechanisms Regulating Molluscan Muscle
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1992
* Jeffrey Ram, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Stacy Springer
* 09/30/1992
* USD 20,000.00

This project investigates the underlying mechanisms by which drugs affect the
contraction of smooth muscles. Smooth muscles are the type of muscles that line
blood vessels, cause the movements of the walls of the stomach and intestine,
and control the opening and closing of the pupils of the eye. These muscles as
important as they are for normal blood pressure, digestion, and vision in
humans, are nevertheless considered to be more "primitive" than skeletal or
cardiac muscle. Smooth muscles are the main type of muscles in lower organisms,
such as snails or worms, where they can be studied with fewer technical
difficulties than in vertebrate animals. Understanding the mechanisms by which
endogenous substances or drugs control the contraction of these muscles may help
us better understand hypertension, blindness or problems in digestion. One
substance found in both humans and lower animals is serotonin, which is released
by blood clots and can contract blood vessel walls and amplify the effects or
other contractile substances, thereby, exacerbating the effect of the clot. This
research studies the mechanism by which serotonin amplifies the contraction of
smooth muscle in the sea snail, Aplysia. Methods have been developed to isolate
smooth muscle cells so that the contraction and electrical properties of
individual cells may be studied. The studies examine the effect of serotonin and
drugs on these properties.