* 9021853
* ARFMP:  Renovation of Stauffer Chemistry, Chemical          Engineering Complex
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1991,12/31/1995
* Robert Pecora, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 12/31/1995
* USD 1,500,000.00

This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP) award from the
Research Facilities Office provides funds to Stanford University for the
renovation and repair of the Stauffer building complex which houses a portion of
the research and research training activities in Chemistry and Chemical
Engineering. This building was constructed in 1961 and last renovated in 1989.
The ARFMP grant of $1,500,000 and $4,375,000 provided by the grantee as cost
sharing will be used to modernize these research and research training
facilities so as to meet the significant new demands placed on them by research
in these fields and the requirements for the safe practice of that research.
This project will address the need to improve the current research
infrastructure by systematically upgrading major building systems and by
selectively renovating individual laboratories to conform to recent building and
fire codes. Top priority will be given to the renovation of the intake/exhaust
systems including the replacement of all existing fume hoods for safety,
economic, and research quality considerations. This award contributes to the
infrastructure of science and engineering by providing an improved environment
for the conduct of research and for the training of quality undergraduate and
graduate students. This project will enable two leading research and research
training departments to continue to provide not only an outstanding environment
but one with an increased capacity for training the excellent students it
attracts. Students trained in these laboratories are in demand in both basic and
applied research fields.