* 9021535
* Comprehensive Alliance for Minority Participation
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/1990,04/30/1991
* Lewis Smith, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Susan P. Williams
* 04/30/1991
* USD 40,000.00

The Comprehensive Alliance for Minority Participation will be an intersegmental
program involving the University of California, Irvine and over two dozen other
public and private institutions. It will have a considerable concentration on
the undergraduate biological sciences and will also include an emphasis on
chemistry, mathematics, and physics. A prototype of linkages, between each of
the "pieces" of the science careers pipeline, it builds upon earlier successful
partnerships initiated in the region by UC Irvine. It will enable close to 1,000
underrepresented minorities to participate in collaborative research activities
in the sciences each year. It involves numerous senior faculty who are
themselves representatives of minority groups serving as role models in the
conduct of research and as mentors. It includes (1) A Minority Undergraduate
Research Fellows Program involving students at UC Irvine and several other
public and private 4-year colleges and universities--a program undertaken in
cooperation with distinguished scientists on the campus and in the region, (2) A
Community College Alliance motivating minority enrollment in scientific
disciplines and fostering articulation between science majors in 2-year and
4-year institutions, and (3) ASecondary School Outreach Program providing
stimulating science programs for minority students, parents and teachers. The
Alliance assures that programs focused at the undergraduate level are connected
with a broader series of longitudinal pipeline efforts. It draws upon sizable
private sector resources and includes linkages with business and industry,
foundations, state and Federal agencies, and professional associations. It will
be characterized by the long-term commitment of participants, its high level
Advisory Council creating sustained cooperation among participating entities,
shared governance of alliance activities, coequal participation within project
activities, a focused action plan with specific longitudinal objectives, and an
ongoing commitment to data collection and evaluation to assess Alliance progress
and effects. Black, Chicano/Latino and Native American students will benefit
substantially from the program. Scientific discipline(s) involved: Biological
and Physical Sciences program(s) to which submitting: Alliances for Minority
Participation Instructional grade levels (within K-12): Grades 12 - 16 on to
college.