* 9021801
* ARFMP:  Modernization of Research Facilities for Chemistry, Physics, and Computer Science
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1991,02/29/1996
* Ollie Williamson, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 02/29/1996
* USD 950,000.00

This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP) award from the
Research Facilities Office provides funds to Tuskegee University for the repair,
renovation, and reconfiguration of the recently vacated John A. Andrew Hospital
complex as a replacement for the facilities currently used to house the research
and research training activities of the Departments of Biology, Chemistry, and
Computer Science. The main portion of this complex to be modified was
constructed in 1970 and has not been renovated since that time. The replacement
and relocation are fully justified and cost-effective. The ARFMP grant of
$950,000 and $1,300,000 provided by the grantee as cost sharing will be used to
modernize these research and research training facilities. This project will
address the need to improve the current research infrastructure by reconfiguring
the space, installing adequate heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC)
and other building systems, and providing needed fixed equipment such as
laboratory casework, fume hoods, and cold rooms. Bringing biology, chemistry,
and computer sciences together and also in closer proximity to related
activities can be expected to enhance collaborations, the efficiency of the use
of the facilities, and the quality and quantity of ongoing research. This award
contributes to the infrastructure of science by providing an improved
environment for the conduct of research and for the training of undergraduate
and graduate students. This project will play a significant role in helping
Tuskegee University to remain a demonstrated leader in the direction,
inspiration, and training of qualified black students and women students and an
important resource for bringing them into the human resources pipeline in
scientific fields.