* 9021927
* FAW:  Micro-Automation of Mechanical Processes
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1991,10/31/1997
* Ilene Busch-Vishniac, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 10/31/1997
* USD 250,000.00

The research will deal with two basic issues. The first topic is friction on
microscopic scales. In conjunction with the work on electrostatic micro-motors,
there has been an attempt made to characterize static friction in solid state
devices using a structure etched into silicon. This device is quite clever, and
results are providing new insight into friction on microscopic scales, but its
application is limited to determination of static friction coefficients for
materials used on semiconductors. Using magnetically driven machines similar to
those already being worked with, the work can be extended to experimental
determination of static and dynamic friction coefficients of various materials.
The second basic topic is small scale bond yield strengths. Virtually all
microelectronic devices are connected to packages via leads bonded to the
periphery of the device, yet little is known about the mechanical behavior of
these bonds. A database of bond stress/strain information is to be developed and
the information will be used to develop a predictive model of bond behavior.
Preliminary work suggests that the size of any voids in the bond should be able
to be determined from force/displacement information. This fundamental research
will help determine levels of bond stress that are truly nondestructive, and
should ultimately permit the development of a nondestructive bond quality
monitoring machine for use in the manufacture of all miniature electronic and
electromechanical items.