* 9021058
* FT/ICR/MS: Technique Development and Non-Biological         Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/1991,03/31/1994
* Alan Marshall, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Henry N. Blount, III
* 03/31/1994
* USD 364,700.00

The research, in the general area of Analytical and Surface Chemistry, focuses
on continued development of Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass
spectrometry. The work promises to enhance the development of mass spectrometry,
a very important analytical technique. The project tackles the problem of
external ion injection and linearized excitation/detection. Both theoretical
modelling and equipment building and testing are planned. New theory to be
studied will include general spectroscopic aspects, and will focus on Fourier
transform ion cyclotron resonance (FT/ICR) mass spectrometry. New instrumental
developments will include studies of ion trap design and characterization, ion
guides for ion external injection, and dual-channel SWIFT and detection modules.
New experiments will be performed to directly determine the ICR orbital radius
from the detected ICR signal, together with experiments to study the use of a
fast neutral beam ion source for involatile samples and a bilateral frequency
sweep for ion injection. Some analytical and chemical applications regarding
actinide metal complexes, stereochemical effects, gas-phase basicities of
carbenes, osmium cluster ion chemistry and applications to the analysis of
polymers and electrode surfaces are also planned.