* 9021946
* Dispersal and Group Dynamics of Chimpanzees and Baboons at  Gombe
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1991,10/31/1994
* Craig Packer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan S. Friedlaender
* 10/31/1994
* USD 285,916.00

Different primate species are characterized by differing patterns of dispersal.
It is generally felt that the dispersal pattern is an adaptation which may
increase the selective fitness of individuals by increasingly their likelihood
of mating and hence passing their genes on to subsequent generations. Both
chimpanzees and baboons are present in the Gombe Forest of Tanzania and each
demonstrates a different dispersal pattern. Among chimpanzees, about half of the
females leave their natal group permanently and half leave temporarily. Among
the baboons, it is the males who emigrate but the age of first dispersal varies
from 3 to 9 years. Additionally, some female baboons leave their natal range at
the time when groups divide. In order to attempt to understand the costs and
benefits of the different patterns, the PIs will cooperate with Jane Goodall in
the use of her detailed field notes; notes which extend back for as much as 20
years. In addition, they will extend the studies of both species at Gombe for
the next three years by direct observation. In cooperation with Tanzanian
scientists, they will also test the relationship of the richness of the habitat
to the dispersal patterns by initiating new studies on the plant species
distributions within the ranges of each species.