* 9021761
* ARFMP:  Replacement and Modernization of the University of  Wyoming Botany Glasshouse
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1991,06/30/1994
* William Smith, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 06/30/1994
* USD 575,000.00

This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP) award from the
Research Facilities Office provides funds to the University of Wyoming for
replacement of the Botany Greenhouse Facility which houses botany research and
research training activities. This building was constructed in 1940 and last
renovated in 1972. The ARFMP grant of $575,000 and $745,000 provided by the
grantee as cost sharing will be used to modernize these research and research
training facilities. This project will address the need to improve the current
research infrastructure by replacing a facility for which renovation is not cost
effective. The replacement of the greenhouse and headhouse will make possible
optimal plant research and higher level controlled experiments than are
currently feasible, and it will contribute to the Botany Department's goal of
coordinating faculty to address fundamental questions about photosynthesis and
plant adaptation. This award contributes to the infrastructure of science by
providing an improved environment for the conduct of research and for the
training of undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students. The Departments
of Biology and Botany at the University of Wyoming are in the process of
formulating aggressive student recruitment protocols that are attracting student
majors from the region.