* 9021470
* Electrophysiology and Morphology of Co2/H+-Chemosensitive   Neurons in Brainstem
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1991,03/31/1992
* Jay Dean, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Comer
* 03/31/1992
* USD 33,540.00

The respiratory and circulatory systems of the body can be stimulated when
carbon dioxide and hydrogen ions activate certain brain cells (neurons). These
neruons are considered to be chemosensitive and, based on earlier studies, were
thought to be localized exclusively along one surface of the brainstem, i.e.,
the ventrolateral medulla oblongata. Recent evidence, however, now suggests that
chemosensitive neurons have a wider distribution than previously believed and
that they are also located in a region called the nucleus of the solitary tract.
Both of these regions will be studied. Chemosensitive neurons are thought to
provide tonic input to both the cells that generate breathing rhythm and the
cells that control vascular tone. Chemosensitive cells also maintain the acid-
base balance during periods of metabolic disturbance and changes in the external
environment. Despite the importance conferred on these neurons, the exact neural
pathways and cellular mechanisms by which they produce their effects are not
known. In the proposed studies, electrophysiological recordings will be made
from these neurons and their responses to changes in oxygen level, acid-base
balance and drug application will be studied. The cells will be localized and
the way in which they are connected to other parts of the brain will be
investigated. This work will contribute to fundamental knowledge of how the
brain controls the respiratory and circulatory systems of the body.