* 9021805
* ARFMP:  Facilities Replacement and Renovation - Natural     Resource Ecology Laboratory
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1991,09/30/1994
* James Gibson, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 09/30/1994
* USD 361,414.00

This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP) award from the
Research Facilities Office provides funds to Colorado State University for the
relocation of the Natural Resource Ecology Laboratory (NREL) which houses
interdisciplinary ecological sciences research and research training activities
to the Biochemistry and Radiation Biology Building. The Biochemistry and
Radiation Biology building was constructed in 1947 and last renovated in 1987.
The relocation is fully justified and cost- effective. The ARFMP grant of
$360,000 and $542,121 provided by the grantee as cost sharing will be used to
modernize these research and research training facilities. This project will
address the need to improve the current research infrastructure by relocating
NREL to another space, which is being completely repaired and renovated, in the
old Biochemistry and Radiation Biology Building and thus providing a research
and research training space adequate in size and design and complete with new
wiring, heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC), and fume hoods that
are adequate to accommodate the quantity, quality, and diversity of research
conducted in this burgeoning program. The Center for Analysis of the Dynamics of
Regional Ecosystems (CADRE), a multi-institutional and transdisciplinary center
of excellence in the ecological and atmospheric sciences, has just been approved
by the University. The strength and the experience of the research institute,
NREL, which will be enhanced by this project, is one of the cornerstones upon
which CADRE is being built. This award contributes to the infrastructure of
science by providing an improved environment for the conduct of research and for
the training of quality undergraduate and graduate students in an expanding
program in ecosystems research that is of regional, national, and international
importance. This project will assist in the fulfillment of the University of
Colorado's commitment to enhance research on the effects of climate on arid and
semi-arid ecosystems through training of future scientists with a holistic view
of atmosphere-biosphere interactions.