* 9021514
* Relatedness and Altruism in Neotropical Wasps
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1995
* Colin Hughes, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Sakai
* 03/31/1995
* USD 277,999.00

Social insects provide nature's most conspicuous example of altruistic
behavior, in which some individuals sacrifice their survival and reproduction
for the benefit of others. Theories of the evolution of altruism have therefore
emphasized social insects. The theory of kin selection predicts that social
insect colonies should be groups of close relatives, and this is usually true.
However, when there are many egg-laying queens per colony, average relatedness
is expected to be quite low. The maintenance of worker altruism then becomes
more problematic, unless workers are locked into their role by a specialized
morphology. From this perspective, the social insects that most challenge
current understanding of the maintenance of worker behavior are the swarm-
founding wasps of the neo-tropics, because they combine the multiple-queen habit
with little or no morphological differentiation between workers and queens.
Study of this group will answer two vital questions. First, how low is
relatedness among colony-mates in these wasps? Second, what factors other than
queen number influence relatedness, especially in cases where relatedness is
higher than expected? If relatedness is very low, then these studies will show
that current theories of the evolution of sociality may need revision. If
relatedness is not low, then the problem posed by the presence of multiple
queens will be solved. Further investigations into why relatedness is not low
will uncover the forces that help to maintain altruistic behavior in this group.