* 9021042
* Processing of Choline Acetyltransferase
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1991,08/31/1994
* John Olschowka, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 08/31/1994
* USD 169,625.00

Nervous system function is tied closely to the development and maintenance of
neurons in both the central and peripheral nervous systems. Molecular
technologies developed over the last two decades have greatly enhanced our
ability to understand the cellular mechanisms that mediate these processes,
thereby highlighting new areas of research. One such area has included questions
of how the neuron sorts its several thousand proteins following synthesis, which
is then followed by cellular transport of each one to specific locations. The
general mechanisms used to accomplish these tasks are used by all cells
throughout their existence and play important roles in cellular development, the
reaction of cells to stress and the maintenance of the cell's functions. By
studying the above process for molecules like choline acetyltransferase, the
biosynthetic enzyme for the important neurotransmitter acetylcholine, we can
begin to understand how neurons of this particular subtype continue to carry out
their contribution to neuron-neuron communication over time. The projects
undertaken in this study have been designed to exploit what is known of protein
transport and apply this to what has been learned about the structure of choline
acetyltransferase. This enzyme possesses an extra statement on its amino
terminal end that has the appearance of a structural domain capable of mediating
translocation. This will be tested by examining if the sequence is removed as a
result of the transport process. Similar types of proteolytic processing are
commonly observed for protein translocation in other systems. If such a segment
removal occurs, then it may identify one mechanism by which proteins critical to
neurotransmission are deployed. In addition, this may lead to a better
understanding of the process by which proteins are recognized and how the
structure of neurons are maintained.