* 9021177
* Conference on Oxytocin in Maternal, Sexual and Social       Behaviors; May 20 - 22, 1991; Arlington, VA
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1991,07/31/1992
* Cort Pedersen, New York Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 07/31/1992
* USD 6,500.00

Funds are provided to defray the travel costs for participants and young
scientists to attend an international conference entitled "Oxytocin in Maternal,
Sexual and Social Behavior" to be held in Arlington, VA on May 20-22, 1991.
Oxytocin is a peptide hormone that is synthesized in cell bodies localized in
the hypothalamus and transported to the posterior pituitary, from which it is
released directly into the general circulation. This neuropeptide is critical
for parturition, lactation and changes in plasma osmotic pressure. Recently, new
functions, beside its classic role as a posterior pituitary hormone, has been
proposed for oxytocin. The hypothalamic oxytocinergic system has been shown to
undergo dramatic structural plasticity in response to normal physiological
stimuli and to be directly involved in the regulation of maternal, sexual and
social behaviors. This conference brings together internationally recognized
scientists from diverse disciplines to exchange ideas and provide a
comprehensive summary of the present state of knowledge in this exciting and
important field. The format of this meeting provides the atmosphere to foster
meaningful interchanges between an interdisciplinary group of scientists that
include neuropharmacologist, neuroanatomists and psychobiologist. The outcome of
these discussions have the potential to lead to a better understanding of the
integration between structure and function of which oxytocinergic neurons are
particularly suitable for analysis.