* 9021879
* ARFMP:  Repair and Modernization of Research and Research   Training Space in Cal State L.A. Biological Sciences        Building
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1991,02/28/1994
* Joseph Bragin, California State University-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 02/28/1994
* USD 750,000.00

This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP) award from the
Research Facilities Office provides funds to California State University Los
Angeles for the renovation and repair of the Biological Sciences Building which
houses that institution's biological and microbiological research and research
training activities. This building was constructed in 1958 and has not been
renovated since that time. The ARFMP grant of $750,000 and $1,032,000 provided
by the grantee as cost sharing will be used to modernize these research and
research training facilities. This project will address the need to improve the
current research infrastructure both in terms of health and safety and of the
quality, quantity, and diversity of research that can be undertaken by
redesigning the work space in a number of individual laboratories and by
bringing the power and heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems
up to standard. This award contributes to the infrastructure of science by
providing an improved environment for the conduct of research and for the
training of primarily undergraduate students in an institution with a particular
commitment to and a successful record of recruiting and educating
underrepresented minorities. The modernization supported will significantly
increase the numbers of such ethnic minorities who may receive research training
and be exposed to modern scientific methods and techniques in the biological
sciences.