* 9021527
* A Comprehensive, Collaborative Program to Increase          Minorities in Science and Engineering
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/1990,07/31/1991
* Jose Maldonado-Moll, University of Puerto Rico
* Standard Grant
* Susan P. Williams
* 07/31/1991
* USD 40,000.00

The purpose of this proposal is to plan a systematic and comprehensive program
to increase the number and quality of minority students entering and progressing
through the educational pipeline in the natural sciences, mathematics and
engineering. The goals of this comprehensive program will be achieved by
establishing an alliance between institutions with a strong track record of
producing hispanic scientists, engineers and science and engineering educators,
and which have successful experience in implementing large scale science
education and research programs in Puerto Rico. The University of Puerto Rico,
through the Resource Center for Science and Engineering (RCSE), the Ana G.
Mendez Educational Foundation (The Universidad Metorplitana), other two-and four
year postsecondary institutions in Puerto Rico and on the mainland, and major
Department of Energy National Laboratories, will join to form a broad-based
Alliance to: pool and build on the resources of these institutions; and provide
students and faculty with a wide range of activities designed to increase the
number of students that complete an undergraduate degree and continue graduate
studies in the natural sciences and engineering. The activities proposed within
this Alliance will focus on motivating and preparing students, particularly at
the undergraduate level. In addition, the activities will broaden their
awareness of career and study opportunities in the sciences and engineering in
order to facilitate their progress through critical transition points in their
academic development: the high school to college and undergraduate to graduate
studies transitions in the education continuum. Through the development of a
broad base Alliance, the participating institutions will share their strengths
and optimize resources in order to bring about a broad and significant
improvement in the infrastructure of science education for Hispanics in general.