* 9021755
* ARFMP:  Biochemistry Research Laboratory Renovation
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1991,04/30/1992
* Michael Minch, University of the Pacific
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 04/30/1992
* USD 212,000.00

This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP) award from the
Research Facilities Office provides funds to the University of the Pacific-
Stockton for the renovation and repair of the Pacific Science Center which
houses that institution's research and research activities in biochemistry,
bioinorganic chemistry and bioanalytical chemistry. This building was
constructed prior to 1940 and last renovated when the University of the Pacific
purchased the building in 1974. The ARFMP grant of $212,000 and $212,000
provided by the grantee as cost sharing will be used to modernize these research
and research training facilities. This project will address the need to improve
the current research infrastructure by reconfiguring the laboratory space to
include four more efficient laboratories, a computer- instrumentation room, a
cold room, and a darkroom and storage areas, and by upgrading the electrical and
heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems. This award
contributes to the infrastructure of science by providing an improved
environment for the conduct of research and for the training of quality
undergraduate and graduate students for careers in chemistry and biochemistry.
Pre-college students, so essential to the issue of the human resources pipeline
in these fields, have also enjoyed strong involvement in scientific research
projects at the University of the Pacific. University students trained in these
laboratories have consistently found positions in top tier universities and have
pursued research careers. This project will make it possible for the University
of the Pacific's research program to further expand so that it will be able to
make even larger contributions to the human resources pipeline.