* 9021223
* Workshop on Grammatical Foundations of Prosody and          Discourse; Santa Cruz, CA; June 23-July 7, 1991
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1992
* William Ladusaw, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 03/31/1992
* USD 34,225.00

Recent advances in theoretical, computational, and applied linguistics
demonstrate a need to integrate information across all the individual linguistic
modules that are involved in the comprehension of spoken discourse. To
facilitate this integration, a workshop on the Grammatical Foundations of
Prosody and Discourse will be held between June 23rd and July 7th, 1991, at the
University of California at Santa Cruz, during the first two weeks of the Summer
Institute sponsored by the Linguistic Society of America and co-sponsored by the
Association for Computational Linguistics and the American Association for
Artificial Intelligence. The workshop, which will culminate in a short
conference, will bring together internationally known researchers, both from
academia and industry, who work at the interfaces between linguistic
specializations. It will provide the opportunity for researchers in speech
processing, phonetics, phonology, syntax, semantics, and discourse to work
together to develop a common understanding of crucial theoretical, descriptive,
and computational issues in spoken language understanding across their subject
areas. An important task for the two week long meeting will be to explore how
information expressed in one module of the grammar, syntactic structure for
example, can best be organized to convey all the information needed by other
related modules, such as discourse and prosody. Such an exploration is needed
for the development of more robust computational systems for natural language
understanding, translation, and generation, as well as being directly applicable
to speech understanding and synthesis technology. Holding the meeting at the
Linguistic Institute and encouraging participation by Institute attendees at
many of the workshop functions as well as at the public conference will assure
that the concerns to be addressed will be disseminated among the linguistic
community at large.