* 9021765
* ARFMP: Modernization of the Biology Research Laboratories   at Winona State University
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1991,04/30/1993
* Steven Berg, Winona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 04/30/1993
* USD 74,484.00

This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP) award from the
Research Facilities Office provides funds to Winona State University for the
repair and renovation of the second floor of Pasteur Hall which houses the
Biology Department. This building was constructed in 1961 and has not been
renovated since that time. The ARFMP grant of $74,484 and $74,484 provided by
the grantee as cost sharing will be used to modernize these research and
research training facilities and thus foster the establishment of a research
presence in the Biology Department. This project will address the need to
improve the current research infrastructure primarily by means of structural
modifications and of upgrading the plumbing and heating, ventilation, and air
conditioning (HVAC) systems. The increased quantitiy and visibility of
scientific experiments that accrue from this renovation can be expected to
expose more students to scientific research and to have an impact on their
perception of what research is and how it relates to them. This award
contributes to the infrastructure of science by providing an improved
environment for the conduct of research in cell and molecular biology and in
environmental biology and for the training of quality undergraduate students in
a department with a particular commitment to stimulating nontraditional students
to choose a scientific career.