* 9021966
* Gonadal Hormone Involvement in Brain Activity
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1991,03/31/1995
* Jill Becker, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 03/31/1995
* USD 294,455.00

Females of many species, including humans, tend to have lower thresholds for
sensory stimuli and can perform motor tasks more rapidly than males. Moreover,
differences in sensorimotor function normally occur during the estrous cycle or
menstrual cycle and administration of exogenous gonadal steroid hormones can
mimic these natural changes. Dr. Becker has evidence to suggest that estrogen
enhances sensorimotor responsiveness by having direct effects on the neurons of
the basal ganglia that use dopamine as the neurotransmitter. She will examine
this steroid-neurotransmitter relationship by analyzing both presynaptic and
postsynaptic effects of estrogen on the dopamine system. By comparing the
effects of estrogen on dopamine release and receptor activity in both males and
females, Dr. Becker will determine whether the known sex differences in
sensorimotor performance is related to biochemical differences. Her experiments
not only enhance our understanding of the relationship between hormones and
neurotransmitters but also how these processes modulate basal ganglia function.
Since the basal ganglia of the brain is involved in a number of clinical
disorders, including Parkinson's Disease and Huntington's Disease, these results
have important implications for our understanding and treatment of these
debilitating disorders and other related movement disorders.