* 9021623
* AIT (U.S.) - CCNAA (Taiwan) Cooperative Research            (Engineering):  Modeling of Strong-Ground Motion Observed BySMART1 Array
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1994
* Marijan Dravinski, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 11/30/1994
* USD 56,293.00

This is a three-year collaborative research project between Drs. Marijan
Dravinski and Keiiti Aki, University of Southern California, and Drs. Wen Kuo-
Liang and Yeh Yeong-Tein, Academia Sinica, supported by the AIT (U.S.) - CCNAA
(Taiwan) Cooperative Science Program. This proposal plans to develop a model to
predict strong ground motion during earthquakes and to calibrate this model
using the 3000 earthquake records collected from the Lanyang sedimentary basin
in Taiwan. Local amplification of strong ground motion in a basin of sedimentary
deposits is one of the most important issues in understanding earthquake
hazards. The most notable case is the amplification of ground motion in the 1985
earthquake in Mexico City, which was more than 300 km from the source of the
earthquake and suffered extensive damage. This research is very significant and
can provide new insights into the nature of ground motion amplification and
variation during earthquakes. The model calibrated using the SMART1 (Strong
Motion Array in Taiwan, Phase 1) data can be applied to the Los Angeles Basin to
reduce uncertainties in ground motion estimation. The damage potential for the
Los Angeles Basin from a major earthquake is enormous. This project can bring a
potential reduction in the loss of life and property.