* 9021884
* ARFMP:  Modernization of Environmental Science and          Engineering Facility at MIT
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1991,02/29/1992
* Rafael Bras, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 02/29/1992
* USD 700,000.00

This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP) award from the
Research Facilities Office provides funds to the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology for the renovation and repair of the Ralph M. Parsons Laboratory for
Water Resources and Environmental Engineering which houses the environmental
science and engineering research and research training activities of the Civil
Engineering Department. This building was constructed in 1950 and last renovated
in 1969. The ARFMP grant of $700,000 and $859,000 provided by the grantee as
cost sharing will be used to modernize these research and research training
facilities. This project will address the need to improve the current research
infrastructure by (a) refurbishing the environmental chemistry and biology
laboratories so that state-of-the-art research can be performed and modern
research equipment can be most effectively used in them; (b) consolidating the
hydrodynamics facilities to enhance their utility; and (c) making more efficient
use of the space so that a new environmental microbiology laboratory can be
added, the capacity of computer work stations can be expanded, and growth in the
population of student research assistants can be achieved. The benefits that
accrue from this renovation can be expected not only to improve the cleanliness
and safety of the research environment but also to enhance the efficiency of
research, the capacity to address environmental engineering and science problems
involving very hazardous substances and samples containing only trace quantities
of chemicals of interest, the ability to blend modern microbiology with the
currently predominant physical and chemical environmental research activities,
and the ability to train more students. This award contributes to the
infrastructure of science and engineering by providing an improved environment
for the conduct of research and for the training of quality undergraduate and
graduate students in a department with a strong commitment to the recruitment of
minority and women students.