* 9021725
* ARFMP:  Renovation of Chemical Engineering Laboratories/    University of Wisconsin
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1991,07/31/1994
* Charles Hill, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 07/31/1994
* USD 600,000.00

This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP) award from the
Research Facilities Office provides funds to the University of Wisconsin Madison
for the renovation and repair of facilities in two wings of the Engineering
Building which house the research and research training activities of the
Department of Chemical Engineering. These wings were constructed in 1953 and
1962 and no major renovations have since been carried out. The ARFMP grant of
$600,000 and $950,620 provided by the grantee as cost sharing will be used to
modernize these research and research training facilities. This project will
address the need to improve the current research infrastructure in terms of
health and safety as well as of quality, quantity, and diversity of research
that can be performed by upgrading the fume hood/ventilation system. This
renovation is essential to licensing that will permit the continued use of
radioactive materials which are involved in a great deal of the chemical
research conducted in the Chemical Engineering laboratories. This award
contributes to the infrastructure of science and engineering by providing an
improved environment for the conduct of research and for the training of quality
undergraduate and graduate students. The Department of Chemical Engineering at
the University of Wisconsin Madison is one of the world's foremost programs in
this discipline, and it is one of the important producers of the nation's
chemical engineers.