* 9021866
* ARFMP:  Renovation of Jacobs Science Center Chemistry       and Physics Facilities
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1991,03/31/1994
* B. Tanenbaum, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 03/31/1994
* USD 1,025,000.00

This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP) award from the
Research Facilities Office provides funds to Harvey Mudd College for the
renovation and repair of Jacobs Science Center which houses the research and
research training activities of the Departments of Chemistry and Physics. This
building was constructed in 1959 and last renovated in 1960. The ARFMP grant of
$1,025,000 and $1,025,090 provided by the grantee as cost sharing will be used
to modernize these research and research training facilities. This project will
address the need to improve the current research infrastructure in terms of
health and safety as well as of the quality, quantity, and diversity of research
that can be carried out. The modernization will involve gutting the building,
restructuring laboratories, and completely rebuilding the electrical, plumbing,
safety, and heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems. The
renovation will result not only in the ability to maintain, but also in a
significant enhancement of, the already excellent level of research training.
This award contributes to the infrastructure of science and engineering by
providing an improved environment for the conduct of research and for the
training of quality undergraduate students in the Chemistry and Physics
Departments which are projected to have a large increase in the number of
majors. Harvey Mudd, a science college with a highly regarded curriculum,
traditionally sends two-thirds of its baccalaureates to graduate school.