* 9021179
* Alliance for Minority Participation (AMP)
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1990,07/31/1991
* Raymond Landis, California State University-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Susan P. Williams
* 07/31/1991
* USD 39,597.00

California State University, Los Angeles is seeking a planning grant in the
amount of $39,597 under the NSF Alliances for Minority Participation (AMP)
Program. Cal State L.A. will match the NSF grant with $39,861 in "in kind" and
direct financial contributions. The objective of the AMP Program will be to
substantially increase both the quantity and quality of underrepresented
minorities receiving baccalaureate degrees in engineering and science from the
participating universities and to increase the percentage of those students that
continue on to full-time graduate study. Twelve universities have agreed to
enter the AMP planning phase. These universities were selected based on their
minority enrollment, commitment to minority education, geographical location in
the Western United States, and the expertise they each bring to the AMP planning
process. Six to eight of these universities will form the eventual AMP alliance.
The participating universities will work together to implement a "model" AMP
program on their campuses. The model AMP program will have the following six
elements: 1) a community college transition program; 2) a retention program in
the engineering academic unit; 3) a retention program in the math/science
academic unity; 4) a faculty training program; 5) an undergraduate research
initiative; and 6) an initiative to increase the percentage of minority
engineering and science graduates that continue on to full-time graduate study.
As indicated, in addition to undergraduate education the proposed AMP program
will focus on two other transition: 2-year to 4-year college; and undergraduate-
to-graduate study. Each university selected has at least one and some as many as
three or four of the above program elements already in place. And every program
element is being operated by at least two participating universities. The
proposed AMP Program will be a true alliance because participating universities
will both share their expertise and work together to develop resources in
support of AMP. A strength of the proposed AMP program is that it is based on
sound programmatic approaches which will take advantage of proven technologies,
improve those technologies, develop new approaches where needed, and disseminate
those approaches both within the alliance and across the nation. Dr. Raymond B.
Landis, Dean of Engineering and Technology, at California State University, Los
Angeles and a nationally recognized expert in minority student education will be
the Principal Investigator of the proposed AMP Program. He has assembled a
Steering Committee comprised of highly qualified individuals to guide the AMP
planning phase.