* 9021048
* Award For Creativity in Engineering for Kimberlee Wallace
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1994
* Gregory Payne, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 01/31/1994
* USD 90,000.00

Secondary metabolites are compounds which are produced by the cell but are not
required for the growth of the cell. Examples of commercially important
secondary metabolites include the antibiotics, pigments, and fragrances. Due to
the limited knowledge of the complex pathways from which these compounds are
produced, traditional methods for improving productivity have involved empirical
techniques. In early years, these empirical strategies resulted in exponential
productivity increases; however, currently these techniques are less successful,
resulting in annual productivity increases of only a few percent. To obtain
greater productivity improvements, rational techniques must be developed based
upon knowledge of intracellular rate limitations to biosynthesis. %%% The
purpose of this study is to examine the intracellular environment and determine
the rate limitation to secondary metabolite production. The investigator
proposes to examine regulation at three levels. First, levels of a key pathway
enzyme will be quantified to determine if enzyme availability is a limitation to
biosynthesis. Second, precursor supplies will be examined to determine if the
flux of metabolites through the pathway limits production. Third, the effect of
reaction endproducts on biosynthesis will be examined to determine if
intracellular levels inhibit production.