* 9021798
* ARFMP:  Modernization of Biology and Chemistry Research     Training Space at Luther College
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/1991,08/31/1994
* Carolyn Mottley, Luther College
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 08/31/1994
* USD 125,000.00

This Academic Research Facilities Modernization Program (ARFMP) award from the
Research Facilities Office provides funds to Luther College for the renovation,
repair, and partial replacement of Valders Hall which houses that institution's
biology and chemistry research and research training activities. This building
was constructed in 1961 and last renovated in 1987. The ARFMP grant of $125,000
and $148,078 provided by the grantee as cost sharing will be used to modernize
these research and research training facilities. This project will address the
need to improve the current research infrastructure in terms of health and
safety as well as of the quality and quantity of research that can be conducted
by replacing the ornamental greenhouse with a climate- controlled prefabricated
research greenhouse; converting existing greenhouse space into research cubicles
for student research projects; and modernizing rooms so as to accommodate
computer networking and to house the impressive collection of research- caliber
chemistry instruments that have been acquired in recent years and are presently
scattered in five locations. This award contributes to the infrastructure of
science by providing an improved environment for the conduct of research and for
the training of quality undergraduate students in an institution that has a
strong track record of training students for science careers.