* 9021626
* Dry Chemical Etching of Gallium Arsenide in OMVPE Reactors
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1991,02/28/1994
* Robert Brown, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/28/1994
* USD 216,650.00

The epitaxial growth of gallium arsenide (GaAs) by organometallic vapor phase
epitaxy (OMVPE) has been used to grow various III-V and II-VI compound
semiconductors and for electronic and optoelectronic devices. Optimizing the
reactor design for OMVPE growth has been done by, for example gas flow
visualization and numerical simulation. A major advantage of OMVPE over
molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) is that the growth rates of the former can be four
to ten times higher than MBE, making feasible the production of electronic
devices on a large volume scale. The OMVPE throughput and yield in large- scale
device fabrication could be enhanced if complete in-situ device processing, such
as etching, patterning and regrowth were demonstrated. The advantage of such
processing are: (1) potential for fabrication of low-loss buried waveguides and
low threshold buried diode lasers (2) simplified processing (3) low
contamination The PIs are therefore working at interfaces developing a simple
dry etching process with capabilities for in-situ, large area etching without
contaminant introduction or surface degradation. In this study, they plan to
investigate the in-situ dry chemical etching of GaAs and AlGaAs using methyl
radical sources. The PIs plan to study the "reverse growth" or "etching" of GaAs
using several methyl radical-sources at near atmospheric pressure typical in
OMVPE growth. These studies will identify the most promising source and
operating conditions for the in-situ etching of GaAs in OMPVE reactors without
impurity buildup and/or surface morphology changes. Azomethane, iodomethane,
hydrogen iodide, and trimethyl arsenic will be examined as source compounds at
temperatures in the range of 300-600oC. Another objective is to examine the
orientation dependence of etching. Patterned substrate with different crystal
orientations exposed will be studied. The anisotrophy of etching will also be
examined with masked substrate. Additionally, the work aims at identifying the
conditions and understanding the process leading to "poor" etching regimes as
evidenced by either substrate morphology changes or the incorporation of
impurities.