* 9022845
* Generating Graphic Sequences for the Visual Exploration of  Correlation
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/1991,11/30/1993
* Mark Monmonier, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 11/30/1993
* USD 74,999.00

Geographic information systems (GISs) have provided profound advances in
computational capacities to store, manipulate, and present spatial data over the
last few decades, and their continued development in future years will continue
to affect the ways that people view and analyze spatial patterns and processes.
Rapidly increasing use of GISs has been matched by development of increasingly
detailed spatial databases. These databases contain enormous amounts of
information, which greatly enhances possibilities for addressing fundamental
scientific questions, but their size and complexity makes identification of
which data are appropriate for specific analyses much more difficult.
Sophisticated procedures for accessing relevant data for focused inquiries are
being developed, but much less attention has been given to development of
procedures for summary visual analysis of related spatial data. Just as many
geographic patterns and processes have been identified and analyzed through
visual comparisons of hard- copy maps, comparable means are needed for exploring
"electronic atlases." This project will address the theoretical and software
requirements to permit orderly investigations of multi-temporal spatial
databases. Using knowledge about systematic variations in geographic and
temporal data, the investigator will develop several procedures for the
automatic generation of sequences of maps, statistical diagrams, and other
graphics for detecting and highlighting salient spatial relationships. Special
attention will be given to development of an interactive graphic interface,
which will allow database users to control the pace and direction of the
analysis and to focus on specific patterns, relationships, or places. New
procedures developed during this process will be assessed during focus-group
discussions with academics and practitioners. This project should contribute to
expansion of theoretical frameworks dealing with the presentation and analysis
of spatial data. It also will contribute directly to development of software and
other technological advances that ultimately will enhance the research and
educational capabilities of a large number of scientists and practitioners who
use geographic data.