* 9022425
* FAW:  Thermal Biology of Reptiles: Constraints on Viviparity
* EHR,HRD
* 11/01/1991,08/31/1998
* Robin Andrews, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 08/31/1998
* USD 250,000.00

Viviparity has an intriguing interface with reptilian thermal biology. Reptiles
behaviorally regulate their body temperature. Thus, developing embryos of
oviparous species are subject to the same body temperature as their mother only
until oviposition, while developing embryos of viviparous species are subject to
mother's body temperature throughout development. Because thermal requirements
of females and embryos are not identical, interests of mothers and offspring may
be in conflict. The resolution of this conflict is an important component in the
evolution of viviparity and of present day interactions between mothers of
viviparous species and their developing embryos. The proposed research is
directed towards two major questions. Has the evolution of viviparity been
constrained by conservative thermal tolerances of embryos? Viviparity has
evolved from oviparity in almost 100 lineages of snakes and lizards, and it is
favored in cool climates where increased egg retention requires more favorable
thermal environment for embryonic development than nests. However, an
evolutionary shift from oviparity to viviparity is possible only if embryonic
development is not compromised by the environment imposed by the pregnant
female. The investigator will evaluate temperature tolerances of embryos of
oviparous lizards from linages where it has not. The hypothesis to be tested is
that viviparity is more likely to evolve in lineages where thermal requirements
of females and thermal tolerances of their embryos are similar than in lineages
where they differ. Is the thermoregulation by pregnant females of viviparous
species constrained by thermal tolerances of embryos? Temperatures selected by
pregnant females of viviparous lizards differ from those selected by
non.pregnant females. Are shifts in body temperatures associated with pregnancy
related to adult body temperatures per se? This research will evaluate diel
temperature profiles of viviparous lizards when pregnant and not pregnant. The
hypothesis to be tested is that species that exhibit relatively high body
temperatures when active alter their thermal behavior more when pregnant than
closely related species that exhibit relatively low body temperatures. Rejection
of this hypothesis for all or some lineages would suggest thermal tolerances of
embryos are more labile than laboratory studies predict or that thermal
tolerances of embryos evolve rapidly.