* 9022131
* Assessment of Scientific and Technical Information          Dissemination in the United States
* O/D,OPA
* 10/01/1990,05/15/1992
* Jose-Marie Griffiths, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Contract
* Shirley A. Woods
* 05/15/1992
* USD 254,000.00

This project is to carry out an assessment of scientific and technical
information (STI) dissemination in the United States. There are two phases to
the project. Phase I is to focus on estimating and examining the size and
characteristics of the demand for different STI dissemination services by
various users and the magnitude, quality and costs of supplying STI
dissemination services by various sources. Phase II, to be performed at the
option of the NSF after a review of the results of phase I, is to concentrate on
examining private or public actions with a potential for improving STI
dissemination in the United States. This project will involve largely
quantitative analyses using available data, which are to be obtained from a
variety of sources. The project team is to design and implement a format for
integrating these diverse data for effective processing and analysis.
Information for project reports are to be derived from a series of papers
describing the results, procedures, and data for studies on a number of focussed
topics. Final substantive coverage, findings and analyses contained in these
papers are to come about from interim drafts, which will be revised in response
to intensive evaluations by outside experts on STI dissemination. %%% The NSF
always has been concerned with the nation's capabilities and performance in
disseminating timely information about science and engineering research results
and activities. Over twenty years have elapsed since the Federal Government last
undertook a comprehensive assessment of the dissemination of scientific and
technical information (STI). This project is to provide the NSF with empirical
studies and analyses, which, as a group, are to constitute a comprehensive
examination of current conditions, future potentials and policy issues for STI
dissemination in the United States.