* 9022148
* A Workshop on Strategies for Documentation of Research on   the Human Genome at Georgetown University, Washington, DC,  October 1990
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/1990,08/31/1991
* Anita Nolen, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 08/31/1991
* USD 11,000.00

The Human Genome Project burst upon the scene in the period 1985- 1986 and has
become a major topic of debate among life scientists, ethicists, and policy
makers. The Genome Project is often touted as the first foray into Big Biology
-- a biological equivalent to the Apollo and Manhattan Projects. The debate
about genome projects has had the feel of historical importance since its
inception. Those arguing for and against it have self-consciously placed this
project in a prominent position among the landmarks of biology. Whether it
belongs in this pantheon remains to be seen, but the quality and intensity of
debate and the extraordinary power and character of the advocates makes the
Human Genome Project a wonderful case study in how a scientific project is
placed on the national agenda, and what transpires once it is there. The Genome
Project is thus an ideal opportunity to document the life sciences in transition
from pure cottage industry to a mix of Big and little science. Because of the
evanescence of documentation and memory of the individuals involved, it is
essential to move quickly to establish a strategy for collection and
preservation of materials related to the Human Genome Projects. The Kennedy
Institute of Ethics, as the National Reference Center for Bioethics Literature,
is holding a workshop of interested historians, social scientists, ethicists,
archivists, biologists, and policy makers to begin to formulate such a national
strategy. The meeting is being held at Georgetown University in October, 1990