* 9022939
* Collaborative Research:  Optimal Consumption and Portfolio  Policies when Preferences Exhibit the Properties of Local   Substitution and Habit Formation
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1993
* Ayman Hindy, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1993
* USD 74,351.00

The relationship between aggregate consumption, productivity of capital, and
levels of stock and bond market prices is a fundamental issue in macroeconomics
and finance. From a macroeconomic policy perspective, an adequate understanding
of the interactions between real market activities and financial market changes
is necessary for formulating policies with direct impact on the financial
markets. In addition, a reasonable theory of the relationship between
savings/consumption and changes in levels of prices of financial assets can help
policy makers interpret the signals that the financial markets continuously send
about the future course of economic activities. The contribution of this project
comes in developing a new theory for the study of financial asset prices that
provides a more realistic representation of intertemporal consumption
preferences than the classical additive utility model. This project studies the
microeconomic implications of a model of choice under uncertainty in continuous
time. The agents in this model treat consumption at nearby dates as almost
perfect substitutes except possibly at information surprises. All the time-
additive as well as almost all the non-time additive utility functions used in
the literature fail to satisfy this local substitution property. The project
also investigates models of habit formation while retaining the local
substitutability of consumption.