* 9022424
* Sharing Research Data:  An Examination of Practices
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1991,05/31/1994
* Georgine Pion, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 05/31/1994
* USD 84,998.00

In the light of current concern about scientific integrity, scrutiny of
scientific practices that are thought to insure integrity takes on special
importance. This is the starting point for examining data sharing practices in
different scientific fields. But other values motivate inquiry as well: an
interest in maximum use of data and efficient use of federal funding. At the
same time, little is known about data sharing practices and their relative
merits. This research project addresses all of these concerns and will begin to
answer questions about (1) what are the current practices; (2) what are the
outcomes of data sharing practices; and (3) what factors facilitate or impede
sharing. Using a sample of completed NSF research grants in the biological and
social sciences, the investigators will develop fifty case studies based on
document review, content analysis, and semi-structured interviews. Alert to the
great variety of forms that data can assume, the researchers will select
projects completed since 1983 so as to gain information about the outcomes of
NSF's own policies and directives. The picture of current practices which is the
intended product of this research will be used to devise a research plan for
large-scale quantitative research on data sharing practices and outcomes. The
project will include development and pre-testing of instruments for collecting
data in a large-scale study. This proposal is a reasonable request for support
to enable highly qualified scholars to address issues about integrity in
research and efficient use of data by an examination of data sharing practices.
The research plan is well designed to produce empirical findings relevant to
research ethics and useful for assessing NSF policies and for devising a large-
scale, quantitative study. Institutional support is very good. The findings are
likely to reach well-targeted audiences. Support is highly recommended.