* 9022227
* Calcification and Photosynthesis Measurements for the JGOFS Equatorial Pacific Study
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/1991,09/30/1994
* William Balch, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/1994
* USD 196,142.00

This project will measure the rates of carbon uptake through the process of
calcification and photosynthesis during one of the JGOFS cruises in the
equatorial Pacific. The overwhelming contribution of calcite to the sediments of
the eastern equatorial Pacific has long been realized (70-90% of the total
sediment mass is calcite, and less than 1% is organic). Moreover, half of this
calcite is produced from the calcified plates of coccolithophorid phytoplankters
which are called coccoliths. Using published data on accumulation rates in the
equatorial pacific region and conservative assumptions about the ratio of
biologically fixed calcite which is ultimately buried, it can be argued that
calcification is at least of equal magnitude to new production in the eastern
tropical Pacific. In terms of the carbon which is ultimately buried on a yearly
time scale, calcite dominated the carbon flux while most of the organic material
is re-oxidized to carbon dioxide (CO2) within the water column. This project
will document the magnitude of the surface calcification signal along with the
standard photosynthesis measurements. Simulated-in-situ measurements will be
performed of both calcification and photosynthesis. The data will be compared
with the sediment trap data as a cross-check of the sediment- trap-derived
accumulation rates; in a region such as the equatorial Pacific, which is known
for its large current shears, this verification is essential. The data will also
represent some of the first direct measurements of surface calcification in the
equatorial Pacific and will be of significant interest and use to both
biologists and geologists.