* 9022868
* Occupational Mobility in Spatial Context
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1991,07/31/1993
* Susan Hanson, Clark University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Holly
* 07/31/1993
* USD 122,589.00

Despite rapid increases in the participation of women in the U.S. labor force
and efforts to eliminate gender-related discrimination in employment, a large
percentage of women remain mired in certain lower- paying occupations. Analyses
of gender-related occupational segregation have focused on various
institutional, social, and demographic factors. Geographers have undertaken
complementary analyses of geographic dimensions of employment patterns and
processes, focusing on the degree to which limited accessibility to
transportation and the location of job opportunities have restricted women's
employment. This award supports continuation of a project that examines the
geographic, sociological, and personal dimensions of employment for both men and
women in different occupational categories in Worcester, Massachusetts. Data at
the core of this analysis are the detailed job and residential histories of
workers in 620 households. The location and occupational status of jobs held by
these workers will be analyzed to determine the nature and rate of job
transitions and reasons given for those changes. A second part of the project
will use regression models to analyze the nature of individual employment in
terms of individual attributes like age and educational levels, household
attributes like marital status and numbers and ages of children, and spatial
attributes like the locations of housing and work sites and the locations of
alternative jobs within reasonable proximity to homesites. Data included in this
part of the analysis also will be used to test hypotheses about the impacts of
housing relocations on employment and about ways that the geography of
employment opportunities affects residential relocations. As a final part of
this project, the investigators will investigate occupational mobility as a
social process explicitly set in specific places. The degrees to which personal
contacts and information gathered at both home and work sites affect employment
searches will be explicitly addressed in order to explore the geography of
employment-information networks. This project will build on earlier studies by
analyzing the interplay of personal, social, and geographic factors in
individual employment and residential decision making. Special attention will
focus on the different ways that women and men make decisions about the nature
and location of their jobs, thereby contributing to the broader literature on
gender-related patterns of employment.