* 9022891
* The Panel Study of Income Dynamics -- Waves 25 - 29
* SBE,SES
* 12/15/1991,12/31/1997
* Greg Duncan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1997
* USD 14,797,014.00

The Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) collects information annually from a
representative national sample of some 7,000 families, about 20,000 individuals,
and processes it for dissemination to a broad segment of the social science
community. A national sample of 2,000 Latino households was added in the 1990
interviewing year, although the costs of planned ongoing annual interviews with
this sample are not part of this project. This grant will extend the PSID for
five additional years, covering interviewing waves 25 (1992) through 29 (1996).
The additional waves of data will add substantial value to the data set's
research potential. The added waves will vastly increase the amount and quality
of intergenerational data for the numerous parent-child and sibling pairs in
adult ages; facilitate refinements in business-cycle studies; improve analyses
of rare life events and long-term effects of life events by providing more than
a quarter century of life-cycle information on workers and families; expand the
issues that spells analysis can address; make possible international comparisons
with similar income- dynamics panel studies that have been launched in a number
of European countries; ensure that social scientists will continue to be able to
monitor the effects of changing economic and social conditions and policies; and
enhance the research potential of recent additions to the study by extending
their measurement period. Five more years of data will also permit the PSID to
become a data resource for research on economics and global change. Information
will be gathered that will permit better estimates of the likely behavioral
adjustments to the changing conditions occasioned by global environmental
change. The behaviors of interest include geographic mobility, energy
consumption and inter-sector labor mobility. The new data linked to data
collected in the past will also permit better analysis of the likely
distribution consequences of global changes -- who wins and loses -- in terms of
income, employment and health.