* 9022882
* Formal Models of Parties and Committees
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1991,09/30/1992
* Gary Cox, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 09/30/1992
* USD 74,993.00

This award supports research on the role that congressional committees play in
determining the outcome of legislation on the floor of Congress. Legislative
scholars have long been aware that the decisions made by congressional
committees are rarely overturned on the floor of the Congress. However, some
committees are accorded much greater deference than others. A number of
explanations have been advanced to explain this pattern, though most of these
are somewhat speculative and ad hoc. This innovative research attempts to build
upon existing explanations of committee floor success by developing a formal
theory based on the assumption that legislators are rational actors concerned
with maximizing individual interest but guided by a central agent, in this case
by party leaders. The theory will be tested using detailed legislative histories
of all bills reported by standing committees in the 84th, 86th, 88th, 90th,
92nd, 94th 96th 98th and 100th Congresses. When completed this project will help
us better understand the dynamics of the legislative process that influence
individuals to cooperate for collective benefits. Such an understanding of how
collective goods are produced in the highly decentralized environment which is
Congress is essential for developing better legislative strategies to cope with
other collective goods problems such as deficit reduction and campaign finance
reform.