* 9022002
* Observational Tests of the Hypothesis That Interstellar HI  "Cloud" Structure is Produced by Geometric Projection
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/1991,05/31/1994
* Gerrit Verschuur, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 05/31/1994
* USD 7,600.00

Hydrogen fills the interstellar medium of our Galaxy. While some of this
hydrogen is hot, and completely ionized, radio observations at a wavelength of
21~cm find a sky filled with signals from cold ,neutral hydrogen. This Small
Grant for Exploratory Research award will allow Dr. Verschuur to observe
interstellar neutral hydrogen at high spatial resolution. Using the Zeeman
effect, he will easure the magnetic fields in regions of enhanced 21~cm
emission. He expects to see the magnetic field reverse sign in a manner
consistent with the idea that the emission derives from a ``tube" of hydrogen
that has coupled to a strong magnetic field. Dr. Verschuur understands the
problems with interpreting a signal projected from a three-dimensional volume
onto a two-dimensional surface. He feels that the signals that have led to a
description of interstellar hydrogen as ``clouds," suggesting a roundish,
3-dimensional structure, have been incorrectly interpreted and that these
signals instead originate from a linear structure twisting in the magnetic field
of the Galaxy. These observations will, first, provide more values for the
magnetic field strength and its variation in the Galaxy. Most importantly, they
will lead to an improved understanding of the morphology of hydrogen in the
interstellar medium.