* 9022161
* Planning Grant for a Federated Computing Research Conference
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1993
* Paul Young, Computing Research Association
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gannon
* 02/28/1993
* USD 46,186.00

Computing Research is a very young research area. In the past few years it has
become clear that computation is joining experimentation and mathematical
analysis, providing a basic new scientific paradigm for how science gets done.
In such a new and rapidly changing field, communication among researchers is
particularly important. But the conference structure in computer science and
engineering is highly fragmented and works against such communication. Important
new research results are seldom presented at broad based national meetings.
Consequently, broad based meetings are seldom attended by active researchers. A
Federated Computing Research Conference is planned to address this problem. This
conference will retain the advantages of smaller specialized meetings while at
the same time facilitating communication among researchers in different
subfields. Additional benefits of this meeting include: (1) economies of scale,
(2) providing an educational function for the public, (3) stimulating new
research. Planning for this conference will consist of developing discussions
and consensus within the computing research community as well as careful
planning of site selection and other arrangements. Most of the administrative
effort in this planning will be carried out by a steering committee of prominent
members of the research community.