* 9022338
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Electron Correlation     Effects and Dielectric Functions of High-Tc Superconducting Oxides
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1991,08/31/1994
* Marvin Cohen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 08/31/1994
* USD 11,538.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Marvin L. Cohen, Professor of
Physics, University of California, Berkeley, to pursue with Dr. Jisoon Ihm,
Professor of Physics, Seoul National University, and Dr. Kee Joo Chang,
Professor of Physics, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
(KAIST), for a period of 24 months, a program of cooperative research on the
electronic properties of high temperature superconductors. New theoretical
approaches recently have been developed to examine how electrons interact in
solids. These approaches will be applied to study electron-electron interactions
and superconductivity, in general, with specific applications to the high
transition temperature superconducting oxides. The field of high temperature
superconductivity recently has attracted much attention with the discovery of
high temperature superconductivity in oxides. Although many mechanisms have been
suggested to explain this phenomenon, at present there is no consensus regarding
its basic cause. The three collaborators will use a new approach to study these
systems, with a dielectric function scheme for interactions between electrons
and phonons and between electrons and collective electronic excitations. Each of
the three scientists involved in this project has worked in this field of
research both independently and in collaboration with the PI. The U.S. and
Korean collaborators are highly respected scientists who not only have extensive
individual research records but also a record of successful collaboration in the
field of the proposal. This project is relevant to the objectives of the
U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of
cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the
exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through
collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. Korean participation in the project
is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF). The PI's
primary research costs are supported under NSF Grant No. DMR-8818404, to which
the present project adds an international cooperative dimension.