* 9022947
* On the Nature and Consequences of Output Volatility
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1994
* Valerie Ramey, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 06/30/1994
* USD 77,358.00

The purpose of this research is to analyze the link between the volatility in
national output and productive efficiency. The first part of the project will
focus on developing a theoretical general-equilibrium-model in which output
volatility leads to lower economic growth. It has already been established that
in a static setting that if firms must commit to technology, then higher
variability in the economy can lead to lower output. This important result will
be extended to a growth situation by formulating a model of endogenous growth
with learning-by-doing. Support for the theoretical results will be provided by
expanding on the preliminary empirical work which shows a strong negative
relationship between the average and variance of real GNP growth. The second
part of the project involves an empirical investigation of the theoretical
models developed in part one, which will focus on a detailed study of plant-
level data in the U.S. automobile industry. The data set, which has already been
collected, contains detailed weekly plant-level data for approximately fifty
assembly plants for the period 1972 to 1983. These data will be used to estimate
the form of the cost function in order to understand the effect of output
volatility on productive efficiency. This research is important because
understanding the relationship between the characteristics of technology and
output volatility remains central to the study of economic fluctuations. It is
not clear for example whether firms dampen underlying volatility or magnify it.
Also, it is very unclear as to what aspects of technology lead to such behavior
and how output volatility affects productivity of the firm.