* 9022477
* CISE Research Instrumentation for Studies in                Microwave Telecommunication Networks
* CSE,EIA
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1992
* Paul Kit Yu, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 03/31/1992
* USD 47,658.00

This award is for the acquisition of a high performance spectrum analyzer. The
analyzer will be used for interdisciplinary projects at UCSD involving lightwave
components and system research, including in particular (a) massively parallel
architectures for terabit packet switched photonic communication networks, (b)
high frequency RF optical links (c) study of high frequency optoelectronic
sample and hold circuits (c) planar, monolithic, and array integration of high
performance photonic devices. These research projects, based on a synergy
between optoelectronic device and network architectures, will lead to higher
performance fiber optic communication networks. As the demands on networks and
communications become ever greater with the advent of new applications such as
animated visualizations and the necessity for the transfer of large amounts of
data over networks arising from supercomputer outputs, it is becoming necessary
to vastly increase the capacity to transmit and receive information. A
particularly attractive transmission media is light which has an enormous
capacity for transmitting data. The research supported by the acquisition of the
high performance spectrum analyzer is in areas necessary for the realization of
networks transmitting and receiving information at rates more than 1,000 billion
bits/second. It includes both combined electrical/optical circuit research and
research on protocols for routing packets of information through the network.