* 9022737
* U.S.-Germany Collaborative Research on the Biochemistry of  Water Stress in Cyanobacteria
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1992
* Malcolm Potts, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/1992
* USD 8,450.00

This award supports Dr. Malcolm Potts of Virginia Polytechnic Institute and
State University for a research visit to work with Dr. Siegfried Scherer of the
Institute of Plant Biochemistry and Physiology of the University of Konstanz,
Germany. They are collaborating in an effort to elucidate the molecular
mechanisms for desiccation tolerance in cyanobacteria. The specific goals of
their current work are to characterize the recently isolated 'wsp' gene, to
understand how transcription of 'wsp' is regulated by water stress, and to
obtain milligram amounts of the water stress protein (Wsp) produced by the 'wsp'
gene for future structural analysis. Dr. Scherer has excellent facilities for
the growth of cyanobacteria in culture and for protein purification and
characterization. He has made substantial contributions to the understanding of
photosynthesis, respiration and electron transport in cyanobacteria. Dr. Potts
has focused more on the physiology, biochemistry and genetics of water stress
tolerance. Recently, Dr. Potts has developed the necessary techniques to
understand aspects of the molecular biology of Nostoc commune. Water
availability limits the distribution and the activities of all living cells. It
is of particular importance to the future of managed agriculture. Despite the
considerable biochemical restraints imposed by a cell-water deficit, certain
cells have the capacity to retain both structural and functional integrity after
exposure to repeated cycles of acute water stress. Cells of the desiccation-
tolerant photosynthetic procaryote Nostoc commune, a cyanobacterium, accumulate
massive amounts of a soluble protein when they are exposed to repeated cycles of
drying and rewetting. This water stress protein (Wsp) has been isolated,
purified, and partially characterized at the biochemical level. Recently, the
gene responsible for encoding this protein has been isolated. This is the
subject of the proposed collaborative research.