* 9022318
* The Role of Protozoan Zooplankton in Plankton Community     Structure, Composition and Fate in the Equatorial Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/1991,04/30/1995
* Michael Sieracki, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/1995
* USD 451,053.00

This project constitutes a portion of U.S. joint global ocean flux study (JGOFS)
of the central equatorial Pacific. Several observations have been made in this
region which contradict some of our conventional concepts of trophic status and
the relationship between plankton community structure and vertical flux. High
nitrogen concentrations and supply rates, usually associated with eutrophic
conditions, co-exist with relatively low chlorophyll, primary productivity, and
"new production" - which are characteristics of oligotrophic waters. Smaller
pico- and nanoplankton cells dominate the phytoplankton (Chavez, et.al. in
press), yet significant rates of biogenic sedimentation occur and is correlated
with primary production. High flux rates are usually thought to be associated
with large cells, such as diatoms, sinking out of surface waters or being
consumed by larger cells, fecal pellet-producing metazooplankton. These apparent
contradictions indicate that the consequences of phytoplankton size structure,
protozoan versus metazoan grazing, and their relationship to vertical flux of
material out of the surface layer are not fully understood. This project will
examine these contradictions by measuring the abundances and biomass of the
phototropic picoplankton, phototrophic and heterotrophic nanoplankton, and
phagotrophic protozoans in the surface water, and the grazing impact and growth
rates of protozooplankton. We study will employ proven, state-of-the-art color
image analysis combined with epifluorescence microscopy to describe the size,
trophic and taxonomic structure of the plankton. Results will be used to
determine the role of protozoan zooplankton in the coupling of production,
consumption and export of particulate of particulate organic matter in the
surface waters of the central equatorial Pacific.