* 9022817
* Mechanism(s) of Protein Retention in Mammalian Golgi        Apparatus
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1995
* Brian Storrie, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/1995
* USD 80,962.00

Proteins present within segments of the Golgi apparatus, a major subcellular
organelle system within eukaryotic cells, can be considered to be either
resident proteins, i.e., proteins most of whose lifetimes are spent in the
organelle, or transient proteins, i.e., proteins which are processed in the
organelle but whose ultimate "citizenship" is elsewhere within the cell or
extracellular milieu. Based on previous results, three hypotheses can be
advanced to explain residency: (1) limited entry into transport vesicles, due to
restricted mobility of resident versus transient proteins, which results in the
preferential inclusion of transient protein in non-selective, bulk transport
vesicles budding from the Golgi apparatus; (2) preferential trapping of
transient versus resident proteins in Golgi transport vesicles with the mobility
of both protein classes being similar; or (3) equal inclusion of both transient
and resident proteins in Golgi transport vesicles with the resident proteins
then being retrieved after each round of transport. Various combinations of
these hypotheses are, of course, possible. To test the validity of these
hypotheses, the mobility of two membrane proteins, a transient Golgi protein,
the vesicular stomatitis virus G protein, and a resident Golgi protein, a murine
galactosyl transferase, will be measured directly by confocal fluorescent
recovery after photobleaching (cFRAP). Recombinant DNA techniques will be used
to express the specific galactosyl transferase in cultured monkey cells. The
cFRAP experiments will be done in collaboration with Dr. Thomas Kreis, at the
European Molecular Biology Laboratory in Heidelberg, Germany, using EMBL
facilities. Preparative work for these experiments will be done at Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and State University in Blacksburg, VA. In a second set of
experiments, the relative enrichment of the transient and resident Golgi
proteins in isolated Golgi vesicles relative to isolated Golgi complexes will be
assessed. These experiments will be done entirely at VPI-SU. These experiments
focus on an important problem in cell biology, namely, how do specific proteins
get to their functionally appropriate destinations within the compartmentalized
cell? The results of these innovative experiments are expected to advance our
understanding of these critical cellular processes.