* 9022219
* JGOFS -  Seasonal Study of Carbon Chemistry in the Eastern  Equatorial Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1991,05/31/1995
* David Archer, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger W. Baier
* 05/31/1995
* USD 416,351.00

The equatorial Pacific represents a significant portion of the ocean/atmosphere
CO2 system and is the largest regional source for CO2 to the atmosphere. The
sensitivity of the processes controlling pCO2 to climatic forcing is attested to
by the impact of the ENSO cycles on the sea surface pCO2, and by the apparent
change in equatorial production during the last glacial period. A central goal
of JGOFS Equatorial Pacific Process Study is to elucidate the links between the
physical circulation and the biological and chemical processes that control the
surface ocean pCO2. A crucial part of this program must be to measure the pCO2
in conjunction with the other chemical and biological measurements. pCO2, total
CO2, and alkalinity of the upper ocean will be measured using proven and
standard methods, on the two "survey" upper ocean JGOFS cruises. Measurement of
pCO2 directly, as opposed to calculating pCO2 from other measurements, is
necessary to accurately calculate air-sea fluxes. The variation of total CO2 and
alkalinity will constrain the dynamics of organic carbon and calcite,
respectively. The carbonate chemistry data will be incorporated into a detailed
physical circulation model of the equatorial Pacific, to address questions of
thermocline ventilation and the effect of nutrient utilization efficiency on
atmospheric pCO2.