* 9022288
* Thermal Conductivity, Diffusivity Instrument
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1993
* Lawrence Langley, Vatell Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 12/31/1993
* USD 207,334.00

In this SBIR project, Vatell Corporation is designing, constructing and testing
a prototype instrument for simultaneously measuring thermal conductivity and
diffusivity. The instrument incorporates a Heat Flux Microsensor probe to
measure heat flow and thermocouples to measure surface temperatures. It is
microprocessor-based, performing all calculations needed to resolve transient
signals of the probe and thermocouples into values of thermal conductivity and
diffusivity. To measure these thermal properties for a material, a small sample
(approximately 2" square and 1/2" thick) of the material is placed in the test
chamber of the instrument. The operator selects an initial temperature for the
measuring probe. This selection establishes the range of temperatures over which
the sample's thermal properties will be determined. The probe is preheated to
this temperature and then automatically makes contact with the surface of the
sample. The signal of the microsensor, representing transient heat flow into the
sample, and the thermocouple signals representing the decreasing temperature at
the probe face and the sample's surface temperature rise, is digitized and
recorded by the instrument. The microprocessor then calculates and displays the
thermal conductivity and diffusivity of the sample.