* 9022766
* Robust Controller Design for Systems with Constraints
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/1991,02/28/1995
* Manfred Morari, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/28/1995
* USD 305,446.00

This research project is aimed at developing process control algorithms to
handle both constraints and uncertainty. Constraints affect controller design
because while the dynamic behavior of many processes can be accurately described
by a linear model, system operation is always subject to constraints which are
nonlinear elements. The controller has to be designed to handle these
nonlinearities. Such constraints may arise from actuator saturation or
processing limitations (certain temperatures and pressures may not be exceeded,
for example). Uncertainty is a factor because the control designer never has a
perfect dynamic description (model) of any real industrial process. The system
is approximated and model order and parameters always contain some error, and
may even change with operating conditions. The PI plans to implement two
techniques for dealing with such problems, Model Predictive Control (MPC) and
Anti-Windup Bumpless-Transfer (AWBT). MPC requires that the control objective is
expressed in terms of a single quadratic objective function and the constraints
are translated into linear inequality constraints. AWBT controller design
proceeds in two steps where first an acceptable linear robust controller is
designed neglecting all nonlinear loop elements and objectives. Then a
compensation scheme is added which deals with the nonlinear issues such as
constraints. This research will proceed in three steps: (1) A new robust linear
MPC controller will be designed. It will be implemented in a nonlinear manner
through an optimizer which aims at satisfying all process constraints while
minimizing the deviation from linear behavior. (2) Development of an AWBT
synthesis procedure that balances the trade-offs between smooth switching
performance, measurement noise sensitivity and robustness. (3) Development of
mechanisms to translate practical objectives and constraints into an MPC or AWBT
formalism in an effective manner.