* 9022382
* Structure and Function of S-Laminin, A Synaptic Form of Laminin
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1993
* Arlene Chiu, Beckman Research Institute City of Hope
* Standard Grant
* Stacy Springer
* 12/31/1993
* USD 120,000.00

The mature nervous system functions, in part, because precise connections are
made and maintained between appropriate groups of nerve cells. The formation of
these specialized sites of connectivity, known as synapses, occurs during
development, however only a small amount of information is known about the
mechanisms that influence this critical process. This investigation will focus
on the neuromuscular junction, a model synapse between motor nerve cells and
muscle cells. The formation of the neuromuscular synapse appears to be regulated
by specialized molecules within the extracellular matrix. Laminin, a well
characterized matrix molecule, is present in all extracellular matrices and is a
potent promoter of neurite outgrowth. In contrast, S-laminin, known as synaptic
laminin, is a homolog of laminin which is localized within the neuromuscular
synaptic cleft and appears to exhibit selective adhesiveness for motor neurons.
Instead of promoting growth, S-laminin acts to terminate axonal growth and
initiate synapse formation. The long term goal of this research project is to
understand the molecular mechanisms that contribute to the formation and
maintenance of neuromuscular synapses. The immediate goal is to determine the
function, structure, and association of S-laminin with other components in the
synaptic extracellular matrix. Experiments, utilizing a Schwannoma cell line,
will be performed to purify and biochemically characterize this molecule. This
specific cell line produces and releases large amounts of this rare antigen in
the form of a soluble complex with other matrix compounds. Results from this
study will facilitate future studies on the role of this synaptic molecule in
the formation of the neuromuscular junction.