* 9022182
* The Selection of Distractors and Eyewitness Identification  Accuracy
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1994
* Gary Wells, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Shelton White
* 01/31/1994
* USD 177,000.00

Sociolegal scholars have devoted considerable attention to research in the area
of eyewitness evidence and identification in recent years. Although significant
advances have been made in the scientific identification from lineups and
photospreads, all progress has been of one form, namely reducing the likelihood
of false identification without affecting adversely the likelihood of correct
identifications (hits). The selection of distracters so as to meet functional or
effective-size requirements has been a major tool for reducing false
identification rates. This project follows on the recent theoretical argument
that, depending on the strategy used to select distracters, two lineups of equal
functional or effective size can have different amounts of propitious
(beneficial) heterogeneity with the result of having strikingly different hit
rates. It is argued from theory and pilot data that implementing ways of
maximizing the variance between the suspect and the distractors can improve the
hit rates so that witnesses are more likely to correctly identify the suspect.
Three experiments are designed to fully test the propitious heterogeneity idea
for improving hit rates without inflating false identification rates. The
experiments follow a basic format in which crimes are staged for unsuspecting
witnesses who later are presented with a lineup and asked to identify the
culprit. Comparisons are made between lineups that include distracters who were
chosen to (a) resemble the suspect, (b) match the eyewitness's description of
the culprit, or (c) match the description plus maximize the propitious variance.
A confidence-accuracy relation will be assessed in each experiment with the
expectation that the relation will be stronger when propitious variance is high.
This research has theoretical value in advancing basic understanding of the
process of eyewitness identification. From a practical standpoint, such
knowledge about the dynamics of lineup procedures could lead to increased
quality and efficiency by which justice is administered in criminal cases.
Finally, in the area of cognitive psychology, the study will illuminate
theoretical issues associated with recognition memory.