* 9022608
* Understanding the Dynamics of 3D Shape Appearance
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/1991,04/30/1994
* Charles Dyer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Howard Moraff
* 04/30/1994
* USD 241,727.00

As a monocular observer moves in a 3D world, the parts which can be seen and
their geometry change with the observer's vantage point. This project undertakes
to quantitatively describe and model the relationships between motion and the
induced change in the appearance of 3D shape. Because motion is such an integral
part of this information gathering and processing process, the investigators are
developing a uniform spatiotemporal approach to 3D object representation and
intermediate-level motion description for dynamic model-based 3D object
recognition. To model explicitly the dynamic appearance of objects as the
viewpoint moves, the approach uses "aspect space" which is the cross product of
the image plane and viewpoint space. New 3D object representations are being
developed in this multidimensional space, including the asp and the rim
appearance representation. These representations describe how visible, geometric
features of projected shape can change over time due to egomotion or object
motion. Complementing this work on dynamic viewer-centered representations, the
research will also derive intermediate-level motion descriptions from the motion
of features in spatiotemporal image volumes prior to object recognition and
description. Methods will be developed for intermediate-level motion description
including spatiotemporal surface flow and flow line detection, segmentation of
spatiotemporal surfaces, and the detection of properties such as cyclic motion
and T-junction motion.