* 9022897
* Accomplishment Based Research:  Substantive and Measurement Issues in the Productivity Growth Slowdown
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/1991,09/30/1993
* Robert Gordon, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/1993
* USD 120,081.00

The United States is now reaching the end of its second decade of virtually zero
growth in productivity in the service sector. The purpose of this research is to
determine and analyze the reasons for this unsatisfactory performance, with its
threatening implications for the future growth of the American standard of
living. This project is divided into three major components. The first consists
of an international comparison of differences in productivity measurement-
methods. Some facts of measurement favor the U.S., particularly in the
manufacturing sector, where the U.S. is almost unique in its use of a hedonic
price index for computers. Other considerations help to account for a poor U.S.
performance and the more favorable foreign performance in non- manufacturing,
particularly the greater use in foreign accounts of physical measures of output
in such industries as construction, transportation, banking, and finance. This
research will develop a coherent account of differences in measurement methods
in the U. S. and four other leading nations. The second part of the project
analysis the causes for the differences productivity performance, particularly
the hypothesis that labor in U.S. service industries is poorly paid, leading to
a high use of labor relative to some European countries where the relative wage
in the services is higher and the use of labor relatively lower. The hypothesis
will be tested in a comparison of wage and productivity performance across
industries and countries. The final component will consist of detailed studies
of individual U.S. industries which raise a combination of measurement and
substantive issues. Building on previous work that yielded new insights on
productivity behavior in the U.S. transportation and utility industries, this
part of the project will focus on banking, finance, and retailing.