* 9022909
* Synthesis and Structure of Polynuclear Clusters Constructed about Polyphosphine Backbones
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1995
* Alan Balch, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Paul H. Smith
* 03/31/1995
* USD 298,400.00

In this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of
the Chemistry Division, Balch will continue the synthesis of ligands, generally
containing some phosphine binding sites, that form complexes containing clusters
of metal ions. These clusters show promise as sensors for a number of toxic
pollutants and as catalysts for some reactions of commercial importance. The
following goals will be pursued. (1) The design and synthesis of new
polyfunctional ligands for constructing transition metal complexes. (2) To
develop the coordination chemistry of these new ligands so that metal cluster
forming reactions can be carried out with some degree of predictability and
control. (3) The design and synthesis of new metallo- macrocycles which contain
metal ions as an intrinsic part of their cyclic structure, and the exploration
of the ability of these to bind inorganic and organic substances. (4) To examine
the metal-metal bonding in these clusters and their electronic spectra and
luminescence. (5) To explore their use as catalysts and in organic synthesis.
(6) To initiate photochemical experiments including studies of the reactivity of
excited states of these clusters. (7) To explore the ability of monophosphines
to function as bridging ligands.