* 9022880
* Heat and Mass Transfer Symposium-Workshop to be Held        December 9-12, 1990, in Miami, Florida
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/1990,06/30/1991
* T. Nejat Veziroglu, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 06/30/1991
* USD 6,994.00

The Miami International Symposia on Multi-Phase Transport and Particulate
Phenomena have now been expanded to include new areas, including Heat Transfer
in Fire and Combustion Systems, Heat Transfer and Flow through Porous Media,
Heat Transfer in Superconductor Processing, Heat and Mass Transfer in Food and
Polymer Processing, Heat and Mass Transfer in Bioengineering, Heat Transfer in
Composite Media, and Lasers and Thermal Imaging. The Symposia provides an
international forum for scientific exchange of the latest research results in
these areas between participants from universities, research establishments,
industrial and government organizations, It is the objective of the symposium-
workshop to provide a comprehensive state-of-the-art assessment of the progress
of research, development and applications in heat and mass transfer and to
provide an international forum for information exchange among active
researchers. It is also desired to establish a rational basis for the
identification of areas of research in heat and mass transfer and
recommendations for future research and development needs. There is a need for
improved communications between research workers in university laboratories and
in industry on these subject areas. The symposium-workshop and the subsequent
dissemination of the reports and the proceedings thereof will seek to accomplish
these objectives.