* 9022578
* 5 Axis CNC Machine Center in Support of Rapid Prototyping   and Unmanned Manufacturing
* CSE,EIA
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1992
* Samuel Drake, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 09/30/1992
* USD 207,980.00

This research involves automating toolpath generation using techniques from
expert systems and computer geometry. The goal is to generate CNC codes directly
from abstract geometric models. Expert systems will be used in conjunction with
spline-based geometric models. The geometric models will model "standard"
geometries while the expert systems will model "features" common to manufactured
goods,( e.g., counterbored holes). These models will then generate CNC codes
that can be run on a numerically controlled machine center. The goal of this
research is to develop a fully automated rapid prototyping capability for
manufacturing systems. An advantage that European and Japanese manufacturers
have over the United States is the ability to rapidly modify products to meet
new user demands. This research is an effort to improve the rapid prototyping of
manufacturing goods. The research also will lead to improved quality control
procedures and batch manufacturing capabilities. The research request is for the
acquisition of a device for manufacturing goods. The machine center will be
driven by numeric codes automatically generated from a combination of a
mathematical representation and an expert system representation of the object to
be manufactured. This capability will be unique in U. S. universities.