* 9022383
* Non-Intrusive Furnace Exhaust Gas Temperature Monitor
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/1991,02/28/1994
* Michael Frish, Physical Sciences Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 02/28/1994
* USD 221,647.00

Heat recovery in utility boilers is maximized when a particular temperature
distribution within the furnace and its downstream heat recovery apparatus is
maintained. This design temperature distribution provides the optimum balance
between steam production by radiant heat transfer in the furnace section and
steam reheating or superheating in the convective heat transfer section. When
the temperature distribution deviates from its design condition, turbine
efficiency declines either because: a) the steam production is too low due to
insufficient heat absorption in the furnace; or, b) not enough sensible heat
remains in the exhaust to superheat the steam (since too much heat is absorbed
in the furnace). Off- design operation can also lead to tube overheating
failures, ash deposition, and cold-end corrosion. This SBIR project continues
the development and testing of a non-intrusive rapid-response instrument able to
monitor ash particle temperatures in furnace exhaust gases. Because the
particles are thermally equilibrated with the gas, the measurement is, in fact,
an accurate representation of the local gas temperature. The instrument employs
an innovative variation of two-color pyrometry to eliminate errors, associated
with radiation from the primary combustion zone and boiler walls, which have
confounded previous attempts to accurately measure exhaust gas temperatures. The
prototype instrument will be coupled to a furnace control system and, after
verification of proper operation, used to control and optimize one aspect of the
combustion process. This will lead to increased plant efficiency. The instrument
can also be used to control incinerator furnace temperatures, specifically to
maintain them above 1700oF in order to minimize emission of toxic organics such
as aromatic hydrocarbon or chlorinated dioxin/furans. Indirect benefits of the
device include increased plant longevity, reduced pollutant emissions, and the
extended lifetime of our finite fossil fuel resources. As part of this program,
an instrument for calibrating furnace exhaust gas spectral signatures is also
being built. This instrument will be useful for acquiring data needed to
commercialize the temperature monitor.