* 9022623
* Ultrafast Processes &amp; Optoelectronic Properties of Semicon- ductor Microstructures
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1991,07/31/1996
* Jagdeep Shah, Lucent Technologies, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/1996
* USD 32,350.00

Technical Narrative: The research project "Ultrafast Processes and
Optoelectronic Properties of Semiconductor Microstructures" will be a
collaboration between Dr. Arora of the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research,
Bombay, India and Dr. Jagdeep Shah at the AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories, Holmdel,
N.J. The specific aims of this proposal are: (1) to facilitate cooperation
between TIFR scientists and Dr. Shah and his group at the AT&amp;T Bell
Laboratories in setting up material and device structure preparation systems and
time resolved measurement laboratory required for the study of the ultrafast
phenomena in novel semiconductor heterostructure and superlattice systems, and
(2) to collaborate in the research programs related to the optoelectronic
properties of the above materials. Scope: This proposal is for funds to cover
the travel and the per diem expenses of the Principal Investigator and other
U.S. scientists participating in this collaboration. The investigation is of
great importance form the basic science point of view as the studies will
provide fundamental understanding of nonequilibrium carrier dynamics and new
optoelectronic phenomena in the above structures. Furthermore, the study is of
great practical relevance in understanding the operation of novel devices which
have been made from very special thin film heterostructures. This proposal meets
the objectives of the U.S. -India Cooperative Science Program. ***