* 9022010
* Parsing and Descriptional Succinctness in Natural Language
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1991,07/01/1992
* Michael Palis, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 07/01/1992
* USD 14,400.00

ABSTRACTS Research in computational linguistics has introduced new grammatical
formalisms for natural language (NL) which achieve greater expressive power than
context-free grammars through the use and manipulation of complex structures
such as trees and graphs. It is argued that these formalisms allow for more
succinct descriptions of linguistic phenomena than less powerful grammars.
However, the enhanced power of these formalisms raises important questions
concerning their computational feasibility. Specifically: (1) How efficient can
NL parsing be carried out for these powerful grammars? (2) Can the purported
succinctness gain when moving from a weaker to a more powerful grammar be
quantified in precise mathematical terms? The planned research is aimed at
resolving these two questions. First, upper bounds on the complexity of parsing
will be derived, and the most efficient parsing algorithms, both serial and
parallel, for different natural language grammars will be developed. Secondly, a
mathematical framework for comparing the relative succinctness of different
formalisms will be developed. Using grammar size as a measure of descriptional
complexity, the gain in succinctness (if any) when moving from a weaker to a
more powerful will be quantified precisely. The results of this investigation
will be useful in assessing the practicability of building natural language
processing systems based on powerful grammatical formalisms.