* 9022192
* Support for Interdisciplinary Research at the Center for    Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/1992,04/30/1997
* Philip Converse, Center For Adv Study in the Behavioral Science
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 04/30/1997
* USD 4,800,000.00

This program provides for general support of an interdisciplinary center for
advanced study, including the support of selected behavioral scientists for
year-long residential fellowships and the funding of several specific activities
designed to enrich the intellectual environment in which these residents
operate. The Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences (CASBS) was
created 36 years ago to carry out this activity. Direct stipend support of
behavioral scientists constitutes the core of the Center's purpose and function.
The Fellows supported by National Science Foundation funds represent those areas
of the behavioral sciences that traditionally have been supported by NSF, as
contrasted with the Fellows typically supported by such sources as the National
Endowment for the Humanities and the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation. A number of
these scientists will be involved in prearranged collaborative activites
considered to be of high scientific and societal priority. A portion of the
program helps the Center identify and support promising scientists too young to
have established a national or international reputation. Special efforts are
made to include women and minority scientists, as well as some scholars from
beyond the nation's largest and most visible universities. The program also
helps to insure that a top-quality computing and communication environment is
available for its Fellows. The Center has proven to be a remarkably successful
institutional innovation. It can be expected to continue to strengthen the
behavioral sciences and interdisciplinary collaboration among them.