* 9022792
* Economic Theories of the Firm - 2
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1994
* Paul Milgrom, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1994
* USD 143,161.00

This is an accomplishment-based renewal of the research of one of the most
creative, influential and productive scholars in the modern economic theory of
industrial organizations. The primary emphasis in this project will be on
studying the interactions between the co-evolution of manufacturing firms, their
suppliers, technologies, and organization forms and on the problems of
coordination and strategy in the presence of returns to scale,
complementarities, and "design dependence." A second emphasis will be on the
incentives at work in firms and how compensation contracts, jobs, authority
relations and decision processes are designed in light of these problems. A
third emphasis will be on the evolution of modern institutions for supporting
exchanges and how these affected the evolution of the modern firm. The first
part of the project represents a major new direction of research that should
develop into a fruitful and exciting area of economic theory. Research completed
under the previous NSF grant on individual firms provides a new theory of
discrete organizational design with the extent of communications with customers
as the major design variable. Profit maximizing firms are shown to choose one of
two different and complementary organizational structures: a low inventory,
extensive communication organization or a high inventory, low communication
system. The low inventory firms differ from high inventory firms in the same
environment in that they have higher rates of new product introduction, more
flexible production technologies (e.g., robotics), greater reliance on
subcontractors, and more general training for workers. The next phase of the
research will be to expand this theory to study the evolution of manufacturing
systems and other activities across firms and eventually to develop a rigorous
economic theory of the role of management.