* 9022411
* Nitrogen Cycling in the Upwelling Waters of the Equatorial  Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/1991,03/31/1994
* James McCarthy, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/1994
* USD 245,000.00

The upwelling of nutrients in Equatorial Pacific waters enhances plankton
biomass and primary production over a large area and may account for a
significant fraction of the global new production. Nitrate persists in the
euphotic zone in an area a few hundred kilometers north and south of the
upwelling axis and several hypotheses have been advanced to account for the
apparent inability of the phytoplankton to fully utilize it. This project
hypothesizes that grazing controls phytoplankton biomass and that recycling of
nutrients provides much of the phytoplankton nitrogen requirement. This study
will utilize new techniques which have been applied over the last few years in
the Sargasso Sea and the JGOFS North Atlantic Bloom Experiment to test the
grazing/regeneration hypothesis as part of the U.S JGOFS Equatorial Pacific
program. This hypothesis implies specific patterns and distributions of
nitrogenous nutrients, their utilization and regeneration, and natural N isotope
abundance in nutrients and suspended and sinking particulate material. This
project is collaborative with Chris Garside (9022726) and consists of two major
components: 1) nutrient concentration measurements of high precision (nanomolar
sensitivity where necessary) and high spatial resolution; 2) low level and high
sensitivity tracer studies of their biological uptake and transformations. The
results of this study will constitute an assessment of the relative importance
of "new" and "regenerated" nitrogen in the Equatorial Pacific region. The
principal mechanisms regulating production will be identified, and the extent to
which "new" production contributes to particle flux and carbon sequestration
will be assessed.