* 9022499
* Learning by Abstraction and Analogy:  Acquiring Planning    Expertise in Complex Domains
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/1991,02/28/1995
* Jaime Carbonell, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Larry H. Reeker
* 02/28/1995
* USD 282,960.00

This is the first year of a three year continuing award. To plan in complex,
large-scale tasks requires elaborate and costly knowledge engineering and
programming to design and implement task-specific planners. General planning
methods, on the other hand, apply only to small constrained tasks because of the
inherent combinatiorial search. Although some worthy inroads have been made by
modern planners, such as SIPE, to combine general planning methods with hand-
crafted domain heuristic, This research considers a different alternative:
focused machine learning of control knowledge to guide search. In particular,
the fully-implemented PRODIGY planner presents the ideal substrate on which to
investigate multiple learning methods. Previously explanation-based learning was
successfully integrated in PRODIGY. This research addresses automated
acquisition of abstraction spaces for hierarchical planning, case-based learning
with derivational analogy, and their synergistic integration. Proper
abstractions in partially-decomposable domains provide major performance
improvements, and automated abstraction eliminates the bottleneck of laborious
hand-coded abstraction. Derivational analogy provides and extremely flexible
case-based replay mechanism, falling back to general planning when solution to
subgoals do not transfer. Together, both methods should prove even more
effective, with abstraction providing the key indices for case-based memory
search (those features that cannot abstracted away, such as bottleneck points or
roots of dependency networks), and derivational analogy speeding up search
within abstraction spaces. Through this automated acquisition of control
knowledge, planners will be able to solve increasingly complex planning domains.