* 9022408
* Sedimentary Microbiological Communities Across the          Equatorial Pacific Carbon-Flux Gradient: Biomass,           Composition, Carbon-Utilization Rates, and Production
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/1991,06/30/1994
* Fred Dobbs, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 06/30/1994
* USD 141,360.00

The central equatorial Pacific (EQPAC) is a very large region of overall high
primary productivity that exhibits distinct latitudinal gradients in the flux of
organic material from surface waters to the seafloor. A problem in modeling
global carbon budgets is that the rate of organic-carbon mineralization at the
seafloor in this region is not directly related to surface productivity.
Therefore, a better understanding is needed of the processes controlling the
destruction of organic matter falling from surface waters. In this regard, it is
critical to study the role of sedimentary microorganisms, especially bacteria.
This project will sample the microbiological communities on a USJGOFS EQPAC
cruise in 1992. The study will employ a multifaceted approach will be used in
order to address four hypotheses concerned with the effects of changes in carbon
flux to the benthic environment on: 1) sedimentary microbial biomass; 2) the
functional-group composition of the microbial community; 3) bacterial
utilization of carbon (glutamic acid); 4) the growth rate and productivity of
the microbial community. An ultimate goal of this project is to combine these
microbiological data with those generated by other EQPAC researchers and to
determine the role of bacteria in the mineralization and formation of organic
matter in these oceanic sediments.