* 9022125
* STOP(STUDENT TEACHING OTHERS PALEONTOLOGY)
* EDU,DRL
* 12/15/1990,05/31/1992
* Patsy Johnson, Booneville School District
* Standard Grant
* Alice Moses
* 05/31/1992
* USD 25,357.00

Students Teaching Others Paleontology (STOP) is an eighth and ninth grade
science project initiated for girls to explore, to interpret and to record the
geological history along the U.S. Highway 45 corridor in Northeast Mississippi.
The research fossil site is located approximately three miles from the
Boonsville High School. This exploratory activity is novel and timely and will
result in research experiences for students engaged in the fossil collections.
These particular scientific discoveries of sixty million year old fossils will
provide students with an enormous grasp of time space and access to specialized
data which will help them to verify and classify the fossils. The site has been
identified by geologists and geographers at Mississippi State University as
unique. The enlargement of U.S. Highway through this area has made available
exposures of Cretaceous and Tertiary rocks that contain an impressive amount of
fossil material. The fossil material is well preserved and contain species
rarely seen in Mississippi or elsewhere. It has been evaluated by the department
at Mississippi State University and deemed to be one of the more important in
this region. A team of geologists from the University of Mississippi and
Mississippi State University will assist in removing and identifying the
fossils. Scientists/Mentors from other agencies and universities will serve as
role models for the women and minorities which Project STOP targets. The
students' fossil collection will be preserved in their libraries and at the
geology museum at Mississippi State University.