* 9022961
* Faculty Awards for Women Scientists and Engineers
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1991,10/31/1997
* Barbara Cooper, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 10/31/1997
* USD 250,000.00

The NSF Faculty Awards for Women Scientists and Engineers recognizes the high
quality of the awardee's record in teaching and scholarship, as well as
potential research, the academic profession, and the education of future
scientists and engineers. Dr. Cooper's research under this award is directed at
understanding the interactions of energetic ion beams with clean and adsorbate-
covered single crystal metal surfaces. The dynamics of hyperthermal ion-surface
scattering (incident energies below 500 eV) are of fundamental interest because
it is in the hyperthermal energy regime that the transition occurs from thermal
scattering,in which the ion interacts simultaneously with the entire surface to
keV scattering, where the ion undergoes a series of sequential binary collisions
with individual surface atoms. Hyperthermal scattering dynamics are also of
practical importance since this energy regime is used in technological
applications such as reactive ion etching and ion beam assisted epitaxy. To
study these dynamics, well-characterized ion beams are scattered from clean and
adsorbate-covered metal surfaces. Particular emphasis is placed on understanding
aspects of the scattering dynamics, such as energy transfer to the surface and
particle trapping, and on understanding mechanisms of ion-surface charge
transfer. The initial studies will use alkali ion beams since the relative
simplicity of alkali ion-surface reactions permits detailed modeling of the
scattering and charge transfer dynamics. Scattering dynamics studies are
currently underway for Na+ scattering from Cu(001), and will be extended to
other alkalis and to other beam species, such as oxygen and nitrogen.
Investigations to determine the mechanisms of ion-surface charge transfer are
currently underway for incident Li+, Na+, and K+. They will be extended to other
incident species, in particular atomic and molecular oxygen. A probe that is
complementary to ion scattering for studying local atomic and electronic surface
properties is the scanning tunneling microscope (STM). STM will be used in ultra
high vacuum to study tunneling mechanisms on metal surfaces, the effect of
adsorbates on the electronic structure at metal surfaces, and diffusion on metal
surfaces.