* 9022271
* Protein Affinity Chromatograpy
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/1991,01/31/1993
* Lawrence Kauvar, Terrapin Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 01/31/1993
* USD 250,000.00

Paralogs are short polymer analogs of antibody binding sites (paratopes) used as
chromatography ligands. Like antibodies, they provide a mixture of binding modes
at the molecular dimensions of analytes. The Phase I work by Terrapin
Technologies established that these ligands provide a useful set of novel
sorbents for separating proteins. The proposed work encompasses two extensions
of the Phase I work. First, selected non-standard amino acids will be
incorporated to increase the specificity of the resulting paralog families for
particular classes of proteins, such as glycoproteins. Second, in order to
achieve higher resolution for separating small molecules, such as peptides,
suitable chemical modifications of the paralogs will be developed for attaching
the ligands to HPLC compatible sorbents. Both projects address fundamental
questions raised by the success of the initial work on paralog affinity
chromatography, and both lead to new products with widespread utility in
research, medical, and industrial applications. It is anticipated that
Terrapon's ligands will be used as chromatographic media by research biochemists
purifying novel proteins, by pharmaceutical manufacturers purifying proteins on
a preparative scale, and by Quality Assurance laboratories assessing the purity
of therapeutic proteins.