* 9022346
* The Grounding of the Bahia Paraiso:  A Continuing Study of  the Environmental Fate of an Antarctic Oil Spill
* O/D,OPP
* 02/01/1991,01/31/1995
* Mahlon Kennicutt, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 01/31/1995
* USD 468,051.00

The grounding of the Argentine ship Bahia Paraiso near the United States Palmer
Station highlighted the need, and potential, for resolving hydrocarbon
contamination due to acute releases, chronic exposure and global transport. This
study will investigate the distribution, sources, and fate of hydrocarbons along
the Antarctic Peninsula. Hydrocarbons are ubiquitous components of marine and
terrestrial systems and represent inputs from biological processes, local
contamination, atmospheric transport, recycled continental material and
digenesis. The biogeochemical cycle of hydrocarbons encompasses a variety of
interaction which impart characteristic compositions that are useful as tracers
of complex processes. Detailed analysis of hydrocarbons and their alteration
products will be used to document the relative importance of various inputs as
well as provide insight into the processes that determine pollutant
distributions. Cores taken close to scientific stations will be used to document
the onset, composition, and magnitude of hydrocarbon pollution caused by man's
presence on the Antarctic Peninsula. This historical perspective will be
provided by the analysis of core samples dated by tracer methods. Shallow
sediments collected near Palmer Station will be analyzed as well as surficial
sediments from remote areas. Data collected will be used to assess the
importance of present day atmospheric transport of combustion product
hydrocarbons. The relative importance of localized anthropogenic, global
anthropogenic and natural combustion hydrocarbons is expected to be resolved.