* 9022324
* Ada Quality Toolset
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/1991,11/01/1991
* Mark Dowson, Software Design & Analysis Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 11/01/1991
* USD 0.00

This research will address some key technical problems that will need to be
resolved before proceeding with full-scale commercial development of a
comprehensive and flexible set of Ada program quality-enhancing tools, the Ada
Quality Toolset (AQT). These tools will support Ada program developers by
checking, and where appropriate, enforcing, a set of Ada programming style
guidelines. A Phase I research project has demonstrated the feasibility of
supporting a wide range of guidelines, and has defined usage modes, user
interfaces and outline architecture for a toolset. The Phase II research will
focus on three main areas: o Design of toolset components and processing
functions, with exploratory prototyping to resolve difficult technical issues
where appropriate and necessary. o Prototype implementation of a toolset with
sufficient fuctionality to demonstrate that a full commercial toolset can be
implemented, and to allow evaluation of usability and utility. o Experimental
evaluation of the usability and utility of the prototype toolset. Design and
implemenation of a prototype toolset will require the solution to a number of
technical problems. If these problems can be solved, and the prototype toolset
proves to be both usable and useful, the feasibility and desirability of
proceeding with full scale commerical development of AQT will be fully
demonstrated.