* 9022642
* Learning in Dynamic Games
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1993
* In-Koo Cho, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/1993
* USD 55,531.00

This project develops an axiomatic intuitive learning model that can be used as
an alternative way of selecting an equilibrium from a class of dynamic games,
where the conventional approach like strategic stability is often ineffective.
The conventional rational expectations equilibrium is often ineffective because
it is founded on a strong "rationality" assumption. Each economic agent must
perfectly foresee all others' strategies and beliefs without prior communication
or coordination. One alternative to the conventional approach is called
"rationalizability". The rationalizability literature develops solution concepts
that are intuitively more plausible than the conventional approach, but admit
too many outcomes to be an effective solution concept. Another alternative is to
develop axiomatic learning models with very specific assumptions about the
behavior of individual economic agents. The contribution of this project comes
from developing axiomatic learning models that capture the intuition of
rationalizability and make precise predictions about the outcome of economic
problems. The project develops an axiomatic intuitive learning theory and uses
it to generalize the Coase theorem for durable good monopolists, an important
economic theorem about monopoly behavior. The theory is also used to determine
the conditions under which learning will lead to cooperation. Finally, the
results obtained in the first two parts of the project will be applied to
alternating offer bargaining models, bargaining where each party can stop the
learning process once and for all by accepting the offer.