* 9022200
* Internal Migration and Other Applications of Residual-Based Statistics
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1994
* Edward Frees, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/1994
* USD 45,842.00

An analytic method frequently used in geography and many other scientific
disciplines is to calculate the statistical expression of an "expected"
relationship and then to compare measurements of actual observations with values
that would be expected if the statistical expression was accurate. Differences
between the real and expected values are termed residuals; through analysis of
the pattern of residuals, investigators often can detect other systematic
regularities in the relationships among different variables. This project will
explore new methods of measuring and analyzing the regularities in residuals,
focusing on different types of systematic variation that commonly occur in data
gathered at different time periods for different geographic locations or for
other observational units. Techniques have been developed for dealing with
heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation, two situations in which normal
statistical assumptions related to the independence of observations and their
variances are violated. Relatively little attention has been given to a third
form of systematic variability, contemporaneous correlation, which measures how
observations for specific observational units vary together over time. The
investigator will focus his attention in this project on the refinement of
statistics for measuring cross-sectional heteroscedasticity, longitudinal
autocorrelation, and contemporaneous correlation. Development of these
statistics will focus on their application for two lines of inquiry: (1)
empirical modelling of interstate migration rates, and (2) estimation of future
expected warranty claims based on actuarial approaches. This project will
advance statistical methods for the analysis of data relating three or more
dimensions, especially longitudinal spatial data. It will result in new measures
for evaluating patterns of residuals, measures that will be useful for
retroactive modelling and for forecasting. Although primarily methodological in
emphasis, the project also will generate new insights into specific types of
inquiries. It will provide a means for relating gravity models and Markovian
models in migration studies, and it will enhance the utility of cross-sectional
data in the determination of warranty contracts.