* 9022484
* FAW:  Experimental and Computational Studies of Word        Phonology
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1991,10/31/1997
* Janet Pierrehumbert, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 10/31/1997
* USD 250,000.00

Dr. Janet Pierrehumbert will use a grant from the NSF Faculty Awards for Women
Program to pursue her research at the critical interface between phonetics and
phonology, between the physical properties of speech sounds and their abstract
mental representations. The immediate focus of her research will be on the
phonetics of words as they are produced in sentences, with special attention to
the constraints on syllable adjacency and the interaction of sentence-level
intonational contours with word structure and phonetics. Previous research (to
which Dr. Pierrehumbert has made important contributions) has given us a fairly
firm understanding of the phonetic and phonological characteristics of
syllables, and of sentence-level prosodic contours. The word level is where
these two systems interact, and here we have only sketchy, tantalizing evidence
so far of the constraints and patterns which apply. The research plan is to
determine those constraints empirically, and then develop a theoretical model of
the phonetics and phonology of word-formation in English. The model promises to
advance our understanding of the relationship between phonetics and phonology,
one of the most fundamental issues in linguistic science. It will also have
potential applications in such technologies as speech recognition and speech
synthesis. In addition to furthering Dr. Pierrehumbert's important research
program, this award will also enhance graduate education at her university, by
enabling her to employ graduate students as research assistants on her project,
and to purchase specialized equipment and software to keep her lab up to date
with the newest developments in technology.