* 9022613
* The Role of Ice in Ozone Depletion Chemistry: A Surface     Second Harmonic Generation Study
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/1991,09/30/1994
* Janice Hicks, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 09/30/1994
* USD 258,200.00

Recently, chlorocompound/ice and nitrocompound/ice reactions have been proposed
as key heterogeneous steps in the process leading to destruction of Antarctic
stratospheric ozone. In order to understand the role of the ice during the
process, there is a need for new laboratory techniques that (1) yield accurate
molecular-level data on ice surfaces and associated adspecies and (2) allow in
situ on-surface monitoring of chemistry on ice crystals. Whereas most surface
science techniques are not suitable for high vapor pressure insulating
substrates, the new surface sensitive laser technique, second harmonic
generation (SHG), has great potential for probing chemistry of this kind. SHG
signals produced by a tunable, sub-picosecond laser directly yield highly
accurate data such as sticking coefficients electronic spectra and orientations
of molecules comprising a single monolayer on an insulating surface. SHG will be
utilized for the first time on ice surfaces, to isolate and examine key steps in
the stratospheric ozone depletion chemistry: adsorption, reaction and desorption
processes of compounds such as CIONO2 and N2O5. In order to simulate
stratospheric ice, a single crystal ice sample is housed in a temperature and
pressure controlled chamber. An important aspect of the study is a novel method
for studying the effects of ice composition (HCl and HNO3 content) on the
reactions. The objectives are to (1) accurately quantify reaction parameters at
various temperatures from data taken directly at the ice surface and (2)
understand the mechanisms of the surface reactions.