* 9022293
* Modeling the Limitations of Knowledge Represenations in     a Knowledge Acquisition Tool
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/1991,03/31/1994
* William Clancey, Institute for Research on Learning
* Continuing grant
* Larry H. Reeker
* 03/31/1994
* USD 149,835.00

Knowledge engineering is concerned with the development of qualitative computer
models of processes, and procedures for applying these models to practical
problems of diagnosis, design, control, etc. of complex systems. Knowledge
acquisition research focuses on the development of computer tool for
facilitating this modeling process, especially the accumulation of general
representations and reasoning procedures that can be used for many problems.
This work studies the foundational issues of formalization and human cognition
that lie behind reuse of representation in new settings for new purposes.
Situated cognition research suggests that people have capabilities for creating
new representations that today's computers lack; furthermore, the meaning of a
representation and the context that justifies it are always open to
reinterpretation and can never be captured fully by representations. To deal
with this, the work will represent the assumptions that justify changes to a
model, so a knowledge acquisition program, but especially knowledge engineers
themselves, will be able to intelligently reconstruct the origin and meaning of
past representations, and hence more readily adapt them to new contexts. The
main idea is to study how people use a layered history of cases,
representations, and annotations to reinterpret and re-represent their past work
as they discover and argue for changes to an evolving model. The result is
improved failure-analysis techniques, coupled with a better understanding of
what aspects of the knowledge engineering process cannot be automatized using
current methods, but which appropriate tools can nevertheless facilitate.