* 9022467
* Rayleigh and Sodium Lidar Studies of the Troposphere,       Stratosphere and Mesosphere at the Amundsen-Scott South PoleStation
* O/D,OPP
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1994
* George Papen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* John T. Lynch
* 12/31/1994
* USD 360,000.00

This grant provides funds for the analysis of the data obtained from a sodium
lidar the was operated at South Pole throughout 1990 and also to begin the
development of improved lidar systems for a new South Pole lidar facility. The
earlier instrument made measurements of polar stratospheric clouds (PSCs), which
play an important role in the development of the annual stratospheric ozone
hole, and also measured the motions of the sodium layer near the mesopause
(approximately 90 km altitude) to elucidate the dynamics of the mesosphere and
lower thermosphere (MALT) region. It is expected that the proposed new lidar
facility will be built in conjunction with colleagues from the University of
Rome with the support of the Italian Antarctic Program. The improved lidar
systems will be able to measure high altitude temperatures and also determine
the characteristics of stratospheric aerosols as well as detect PSCs and the
sodium layer. These studies are important for the understanding of stratospheric
chemistry and the causes of polar ozone depletion and for understanding the
dynamics of the MALT region. There will be a significant contribution to the
Coupling of Energetics and Dynamics through Atmospheric Regions (CEDAR)
initiative. This project is jointly supported by NSF's Divisions of Polar
Programs and Atmospheric Sciences.