* 9022943
* Pilot Workshop for Engineering Deans:  Introducing Ethics   Into the Engineering Curriculum-Lubbock, TX, July 1991
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1991,04/30/1992
* Jimmy Smith, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 04/30/1992
* USD 20,239.00

Engineering educators and specialists outside engineering education increasingly
recognize that to prepare engineering students for the ethical issues they face
as engineers, the undergraduate engineering program must somehow be fashioned to
include the teaching of ethics. Toward that end, it is necessary to develop the
materials for teaching and the background and skills of engineering faculty, and
it is essential to enlist the support of engineering deans who have power to
affect the curriculum. This project is directed primarily to the latter goal;
the vehicle is an engineering ethics workshop prepared for about twenty
engineering deans in Texas. The workshop will provide an opportunity for the
deans to show their commitment and to study the subject in enough detail to
appreciate how teaching/learning engineering ethics is like certain traditional
components of engineering education (e.g. design courses) and how it differs
from traditional presentation of engineering technical material. The workshop
will also focus on methods for conveying to faculty the importance of ethics
teaching and for integrating engineering ethics in engineering degree programs.
Funds from NSF will be used to support the participation of outside consultants,
some administrative costs, and a portion of the principal investigator's time on
the project. The Texas State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers is
also contributing to funding this project. Results of the workshop will be
reported on in articles in periodicals aimed at two major audiences, engineering
educators and specialists outside engineering who work on ethics in engineering
and related issues. This proposal is a modest request for support to enable
leading engineering educators, with engineering ethics consultants, to take up
the task of enlisting engineering deans in the effort of incorporating
engineering ethics in engineering curricula. The principal investigator and
project associates are well qualified; institutional support is exceptional; the
workshop plans are well worked out; dissemination is likely to be broad and to
reach the appropriate audiences. Support is highly recommended.