* 9022560
* Equipment in Support of Parallel Processing Research
* CSE,EIA
* 04/15/1991,09/30/1993
* Mark Franklin, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 09/30/1993
* USD 127,000.00

This award is for the upgrade of an NCUBE parallel processor to the next
generation NCUBE processor. The research projects are in parallel hierarchical
simulation systems for use in computer-aided design, parallel iterative
algorithms for signal processing, and parallel finite element methods. The
upgraded NCUBE processor is necessary in order to tackle real world problems.
The computing challenge of the 90's is to put parallelism to work in solving
important computational intensive problems. The next wave of super computers
will be using thousands to millions of individual processors working in parallel
to solve problems. There must be some mechanism to split the work up evenly
amongst the processors in order to utilize parallelism to the fullest extent.
This research looks at three problem domains particularly suited for parallel
architectures where each processor has its own memory and executes its own
program. The first project is signal processing for medical image
reconstruction. It is very important the highest quality images be available for
diagnostic purposes and good parallel algorithms running on a fast parallel
processor are required in order to implement this medical image reconstruction
technology. The second project involves the design and simulation of VLSI
circuits. This is a particularly computation intensive process that is modular
enough so that it can be programmed on an NCUBE processor. The upgrade is needed
to run the simulations on real VLSI circuits. The final project is the
exploration of a set of techniques known as finite element methods for partial
differential equation solution. These techniques, when parallelized, may exhibit
a prohibitive communication cost between the individual computing elements. The
additional memory and better communications on the new NCUBE processor allows
further exploration of these numerical solution techniques.