* 9022123
* Research in Wireless Distributed Systems
* CSE,EIA
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1992
* Daniel Duchamp, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 03/31/1992
* USD 31,667.00

This award is for the purchase of radio modems and portable computers for
research into radio network (wireless) computer systems. The research will
concentrate on several aspects of wireless communication including: extending
the IP protocol to handle hosts that are not topologically fixed, techniques for
handing off from one radio cell to another without data or communications loss,
intelligent caching to reduce peak loads over slow radio links, self-organizing
load balancing, and distribution of kernel functionality. Wireless networks
provide an attractive alternative to the expense of running cables between and
within buildings so long as high communication speeds are not required. This
research is intended to solve some of the problems with wireless networks and to
build an experimental network at Columbia University. It is very expensive to
run wires or fiber optic cables between and within buildings. An alternative to
cabling is to build a wireless computer network much like the cellular phone
network is an alternative to the telephone line network. The problems with
building a wireless computer network are more complex than those involved in
building a wireless voice network. These problems include protocols to "hand
off" communications when cell boundaries are crossed (with voice, some noise is
acceptable, with data this must be minimized), load balancing methods so that
slow radio links don't get clogged, and distribution of operating system
functionality to reduce communications. The equipment funded by this grant will
enable an experimental wireless computer network to be built. The network will
be used to experimentally validate communication protocols and to validate
algorithms for load balancing and other methods needed to reduce communications
on the network.