* 9023373
* Estimation of a Model of Community Choice and Public Goods  Provision in System of Local Jurisdictions
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1993
* Thomas Romer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1993
* USD 158,808.00

This research investigates a setting in which individuals are mobile among many
localities or jurisdictions. In this setting, collective decisions determine tax
and spending levels within jurisdictions. Individuals determine the jurisdiction
in which they will reside and the amount of housing and other private goods they
will consume. Under previous NSF grants, the investigators developed and
analyzed fully articulated equilibrium models of these individual and collective
decisions and used these models to study a variety of issues related to
residential choice, housing prices, local government taxation and spending
decisions, redistribution, and land use restrictions. This work defined the
state of theoretical research on the political economy of local government, but
although the investigators have used the models for numerical simulations with
the parameters of the model set to empirically plausible magnitudes, no one has
yet succeeded in directly estimating or testing these models. The contribution
of this next phase of the project will be to test whether a fully articulated
theory of community choice is consistent with the data. This project develops an
empirically tractable framework that captures locational and collective goods
equilibrium in a multicommunity setting. It estimates the parameters of this
model using data from U.S. metropolitan areas. The estimates provide the basis
for predicting the distribution of households by income across communities,
given the levels of public goods provision across communities. In addition, the
estimates provide predictions about the distribution of publicly provided goods
across communities.