* 9023453
* Faculty Awards for Women Scientists and Engineers
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1991,04/30/1998
* Ellen Williams, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 04/30/1998
* USD 250,000.00

The NSF Awards for Women Scientists and Engineers recognizes the high quality
of the awardee's record in teaching and scholarship, as well as potential for
continued significant contributions to scientific research, the academic
profession, and the education of future scientists and engineers. Dr. Williams's
research under this award is in morphological aspects of solid surfaces. The
morphology of solid surfaces, e.g., their structure on a scale of nanometers to
microns, is the governing factor in a range of practical processes including
crystal growth, epitaxy and etching. To understand these processes, it is first
necessary to understand both the thermodynamics and kinetics of surface
morphology, which are in turn governed by the behavior of surface steps. Direct
measurements of step behavior, designed to allow quantitative analysis in terms
of statistical mechanical predictions, will be performed using diffraction and
imaging techniques. This grant will be used to foster excellence in this
research by supporting: 1) development and application of state- of-the-art
experimental capabilities to allow measurements in previously unexplored areas,
and 2) direct interaction with theorists to insure that experiments are relevant
to outstanding questions of theory. Within the broad criteria listed above, the
systems to be studied will be chosen to have practical materials significance.
Examples of relevant problems are the formation of quantum wires, the oxidative
etching of Si, and the faceting of metals surfaces under adsorption of chemical
reactants.