* 9023450
* Faculty Award for Women - Galaxy Formation and Evolution
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1991,10/31/1996
* Martha Haynes, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 10/31/1996
* USD 250,000.00

This Faculty Award for Women Scientists and Engineers is made to Dr. Martha P.
Haynes of the Department of Astronomy, Cornell University. The NSF Faculty Award
for Women Scientists and Engineers recognizes the high quality of the awardee's
record in teaching and scholarship as well as the potential for continued
significant contributions to scientific research, the academic profession, and
the education of future scientists. During the next five years, the research
will focus on how galaxy formation and evolution is affected the environment in
which a galaxy lives, primarily through ground-based radio and optical
observations. Of particular interest is how the fundamental properties of
galaxies (mass, luminosity, etc.) reflect conditions early in a galaxy's history
rather than later modifications due to evolutionary processes. The grant will be
used to enlarge the research group, particularly with the addition of a
postdoctoral research associate and an additional graduate student, as there is
much fertile research to be done to follow through on the efforts of the last
decade. Towards the end of the five year grant period, there will be early
observations made with the upgraded Arecibo Observatory radio antenna and with
the new 100m Green Bank Telescope. Experiments not previously possible will be
attempted.