* 9023931
* FAW: In Situ Elucidation of Reaction Pathways During Low    Pressure Chemical Vapor Deposition
* EHR,HRD
* 11/01/1991,04/30/1997
* Carol McConica, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 04/30/1997
* USD 250,000.00

The computation speed of modern computers is limited by the resistance of the
submicron metal lines used to interconnect devices. One solution to the problem
of inefficient interconnect is a vertical interconnect between layered devices,
a key to 3-D integration. Because IC fabrication is traditionally 2-D procedure,
no method has been developed to create vertical submicron diameter "wires". This
electron elevator could be made by a selective metal deposition process whereby
a material catalyzed its own deposition, filling a well in an insulating
material. Loss of selectivity (LOS), leading to shorts between metal lines, is
due to reaction with the noncatalytic insulator, gas phase reactions, nucleation
and deposition on the insulator, and chemistries between reactive intermediates
from the deposition reaction. Finding the process margin is a matter of
understanding all of the chemical pathways and relevant transport processes of
both the heterogeneous and homogeneous reactions. The LOS kinetics are quite
complex for the reactive species, have very short lifetimes, and can only be
seen with in situ diagnostics. The goal of the research is to answer some very
specific questions which cannot be answered in commercial or UHV reactors. What
is the role of thermodiffusion and recirculation in LPCVD reactors? What are the
gas phase intermediates, reactions, and products during selective CVD? How do
our LPCVD (1 torr) results compare with those we determine in the UHV studies
funded by NSF? Over the long term, the research will lead to understanding what
other reactants could be used to create selectively deposited vertical wires and
what the process margins are in terms of local composition and temperature. Once
the local conditions are known for selective deposition, it becomes necessary to
implement mathematical models of commercial reactors so that the inlet gas
composition which results in the desired near wafer composition can be
determined. This global model must also include modeling of the transience
within the submicron well as it fills. Current models will be extended to new
chemistries.