* 9023844
* Marine Biotechnology Fellowship:  Genetic Exchange in the   Marine Environment
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1991,10/30/1993
* Robert Gunsalus, University of California-Los Angeles
* Fellowship
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 10/30/1993
* USD 84,000.00

The focus of this research is to study gene transfer among marine microbial
communities through the application of molecular techniques that avoid the
selective process of isolation and cultivation. Since genetic material can be
transferred to receptive hosts without gene expression, this study will be
designed to detect the presence of marker gene sequences transferred by phage
transduction to recipient microbial hosts and complemented with studies designed
to determine the frequency of subsequent gene expression of the marker sequences
in recipient hosts. Biotintylated probes have been developed for visualizing the
presence of viral sequences in virus-infected cells and, because of its
sensitivity and specificity, is the most appropriate approach for tracking
specific gene sequences in native microbial communities. This methodology will
be applied to the study of plasmid DNA transduction by a generalized transducing
vibriophage. The ecologically important role of particulate organic matter on
the growth rate of the donor host, vibriophages, gene recipient hosts,
phage/host encounter rates, bacteriophage survival and gene transduction
frequency will be investigated. The results of these studies on gene
transduction in vibriophages isolated from the marine environment will serve as
a model for gene transfer in marine microorganisms and indicate the potential
importance of gene transfer in native marine microbial communities.