* 9023067
* International Conflict Among the Great Powers
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1993
* Paul Huth, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 08/31/1993
* USD 48,177.00

This award supports an ambitious program of research to advance understanding
of the conditions likely to promote or discourage war between major
international powers. A long standing assumption of international relations, but
one rarely tested systematically, is that the structure of the international
system significantly influences the probability of war. In particular, it is
held that the probability of war increases with the level of uncertainty in the
international system about the likely outcome of war. This is linked in turn to
the number and relative power of nations and alliances in the international
system. This research develops and tests a series of hypotheses about the
probability of war which derive from a theoretical model integrating the
structure of the international system with the propensity of national decision
makers to take risks. Systematic tests of these hypotheses will be undertaken
using data on the population of great power rivalries that have been catalogued
since 1816. In addition comparative case studies of both typical and deviant
cases will be undertaken to illustrate in greater detail the results of the
statistical analyses and to illuminate areas of weakness. Finally, the
implications of the analysis will be explored for possible lessons for reducing
the likelihood of great power war in the contemporary international system. When
completed this research will strengthen our theoretical understanding of the
effects of different international structures or world orders on the likelihood
of war and facilitate judgements about the desirability about proposed changes
in international structure.