* 9023501
* An Experimental Investigation of the Dynamic Torsional-     Translational Response of Reinforced Concrete Building      Structrues
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/1991,06/30/1993
* Mete Sozen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 06/30/1993
* USD 256,941.00

This project has two overall goals: (a) to develop basic experimental data on
the torsional-translational response of reinforced concrete structures in order
to test the theory and improve numerical models for nonlinear behavior and (b)
to seek relatively simple methods of representing the problem for design
applications. Results of the experimental work will be evaluated by studies
toward the goals indicated using nonlinear and modified linear models to
represent observed behavior. Both dynamic interaction and material interaction
affecting the coupled structural response will be investigated. The experiments
involve a specially designed specimen which is free to rotate about its
horizontal and vertical axes. The tendencies for rotation about Y and X are
resisted by reinforced concrete beams. The inertia force is eccentric with
respect to the vertical axis. The specimen configuration and the associated
experimental setup permits the independent variation of mass, stiffness, and
strength from specimen to specimen. Study will include earthquake-simulation
testing of eight specimens to investigate the effects of type of earthquake
motion, stiffness, and strength on combined torsional-translational response.
The project targets at the intersection of theory and experiments, and through
deliberately simple design of the test setup, tests existing theories and makes
straightforward dynamic modeling possible.