* 9023608
* Alkaloids of Importance in Plant-Insect Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1991,10/31/1994
* Frank Stermitz, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 10/31/1994
* USD 287,000.00

This research will focus on hemiparasitic species of the plant family
Scrophulariaceae. It will emphasize the alkaloid and iridoid glycoside chemistry
of the plants, how these metabolites may affect insect herbivores whose larvae
consume the plants, and how some of the isolated iridoid glycosides can be
utilized in the laboratory as chiral synthons. The plant species to be studied
are parasitic on the roots of host plants which contain alkaloids. These
alkaloids are transferred into the parasites and may themselves affect insect
herbivores. Utilization of the alkaloids by the parasites as herbivore defenses
will be studied as will specificity of the parasites for certain host plants and
alkaloid transport from the host into the parasite. Since insect herbivores
which utilize alkaloid- and iridoid-containing plants sequester and /or
metabolize the compounds, a study of chemical transformations in insect
metabolism of alkaloids and iridoids will be made. Relationships between iridoid
glycoside structures and their ease of conversion to pyridine alkaloids will be
investigated because, in some plants, iridoids are converted to pyridine
monoterpene alkaloids, but pyridine monoterpenes expected from several iridoids
found in very high plant concentration have never been isolated. Finally, since
iridoids are readily available in multigram quantities from some of the plants
under investigation and can be converted in high yield in a one-pot reaction to
chiral, pentasubstituted cyclopentanes, a study will be carried out to convert
these products to enantiomerically-pure carbocyclic nucleosides. %%% With this
award the Synthetic Organic Program of the Chemistry Division will support the
research of Dr. Frank R. Stermitz of the Department of Chemistry at Colorado
State University. This research will focus on hemiparasitic species of the plant
family Scrophularicaeae whose members are parasitic on the roots of host plants
which contain alkaloids. These alkaloids are transferred into the parasites and
may themselves affect insect herbivores. Utilization of the alkaloids by the
parasites as herbivore defenses will be studied as will specificity of the
parasites for certain host plants and alkaloid transport from the host into the
parasites. These latter two studies have important implications for the
biodiversity question that is becoming of crisis proportions as the earth's
rainforests are being threatened because simply preserving the genetic pool of
plant species may not be enough if secondary metabolite composition is also
dependant upon host species.