* 9023945
* Evolutionary Game Experiments
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1991,01/31/1994
* Daniel Friedman, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1994
* USD 96,766.00

How can intelligent agents in strategic interaction achieve equilibrium? This
equilibration question lies at the conceptual foundations of game theory.
Orthodox opinion since the early 1960's has been that agents are rational and
can be presumed to have sufficient endowments of common knowledge and sufficient
computational ability to reach a Nash Equilibrium directly. In the last few
years support for this orthodox view has begun to unravel, due in part to the
inability of game theorists to find compelling Nash Equilibrium selection
procedures. Many leading game theorists now believe that the equilibration
question is best thought of in terms of an evolutionary process. This project
represents a first empirical look at the new evolutionary approaches to the
equilibration question. The empirical work will help identify those aspects of
evolutionary game theory which do in fact show promise for positive economics.
This is an empirical study of the process by which Nash equilibrium (or other
coherent behavior) may be achieved by intelligent self-interested agents in
strategic interactions. Building on recent theoretical extensions of the
biologists' evolutionary games, this project presents populations of 6-24
undergraduate subjects with chosen payoff (or fitness) functions which embody
interesting sorts of strategic interactions. Each subject faces a given payoff
function and interacts anonymously with a fixed population of other subjects
over 10 to 100 decision periods. In each period each subject enters his choice
at a visually isolated computer terminal after viewing a computer display of the
population distribution by all subjects in previous periods. The actual time
paths of population distributions are compared to various theoretical time paths
proposed by biologists and economists. In particular, the project looks for
convergence to Nash equilibrium and to refinements of Nash equilibrium. The
results should add significantly to the empirical basis of modern game theory,
with eventual applications in diverse fields such as industrial organization and
international economic policy.