* 9023767
* The Funding of Young Investigators in the Biological and    Biomedical Sciences
* BIO,BIO
* 01/01/1991,09/30/1992
* Gary Dwoskin, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* W. F. Harris
* 09/30/1992
* USD 25,000.00

Preliminary funding evidence and anectodal information are causing a great deal
of concern in academic, government and industrial circles that increasing
numbers of young people may be discouraged from careers in academic biological
and biomedical research because of the difficulty that investigators are having
in obtaining funding. Young investigators are critical for the expansion of the
fundamental biological knowledge base ranging from ecology to medicine. This
knowledge fuels academic, industrial and economic growth. The Commission on Life
Sciences of the National Research Council proposes to examine the funding issue
by convening a committee of experts. While it is not the intent of this activity
to reinvestigate pipeline issues, the committee will review this subject where
relevant to this study. The committee will specifically address current funding
mechanisms for young investigators in the biological and biomedical sciences by
major federal agencies and private organizations, the current state of funding
by these entities, and the major problems and constraints in the funding system.
The committee will determine the impact of these issues on the ability to
recruit and retain young researchers in academics and will report the details of
each point and include recommendations on ways to improve their funding
situation in a report. This project is expected to take 15 months, at an
estimated cost of $373,410 derived from federal and private sources. An award of
$25,000 is recommended.