* 9023240
* Emulsion and Dispersion Polymerization
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1991,10/31/1994
* Gary Poehlein, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 10/31/1994
* USD 249,827.00

Emulsion polymerization is one of the most important commercial processes for
converting unsaturated monomers into synthetic polymers. Billions of pounds of
latex are produced annually for a broad range of applications such as: surface
coatings, synthetic elastomers, adhesions, binders for non- woven materials,
high-impact plastics, additives for construction materials and fluid property
modifiers. Small volumes of latex products are also used in biomedical and
scientific applications. Conventional emulsion polymerization involves the
dispersion of a hydrophobic monomer, or monomers, into water with an oil-in-
water emulsifier, followed by polymerization with a water-soluble initiator.
Although the droplets in the monomer emulsion are usually 2 to 10 >m, the
diameters of the polymer particles in the final product are almost always in the
submicron range. Hence, the reaction includes particle nucleation rather than
simply polymerization in the monomer droplets. These systems exhibit
characteristically high reaction rates and a high degree of polymerization. The
product is comprised of colloidal polymer particles in a stable suspense,
referred to as a latex dispersed in the aqueous phase. Dispersion polymerization
is a process in which the continuous phase us a solvent for the monomers but not
the resulting polymer formed is generally stabilized by block or graft
copolymers. Resultant polymer particle size is many microns in diameter-the
lower end of the suspension polymerization range. This research is aimed at
obtaining a better knowledge of the reactions in the separate phases in
heterogenous free radical polymerization systems. The main thrust is to examine
the impact of reactions in the continuous phase when monomers with different
solubilities are polymerized and when polymeric stabilizers are used with
conventional monomers. Work in emulsion and dispersion polymerization will be
done. The research will consist of both experimental and theoretical work. The
experimental work will involve measurement of reaction rates, reagent
concentrations, particle size distributions, copolymer compositional parameters
and molecular weights. Model simulations will be used to evaluate the data and
to extrapolate to new operating conditions. The results will be used to help
custom design new molecules and products for specific high-value applications.
The increased understanding of continuous-phase phenomena will also lead to
improvements in existing products and processes.*** //