* 9023662
* A Control Sample of Reindeer Dental Heights and Annuli
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/1991,06/30/1993
* Randall White, New York University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1993
* USD 59,762.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Anne Pike-Tay will study the teeth
of nearly 1000 reindeer/caribou individuals which were assembled by the Canadian
Wildlife Service. This is the largest and most statistically representative
sample of a modern reindeer population. The exact date of death, age in months,
sex, size, weight, reproductive condition, diet and geographic range are
documented for each specimen. For each, she will measure the crown height above
the mandible and also section individual teeth to study the cementum annuli.
These latter structures are usually deposited annually much like tree rings and
serve to anchor the tooth in the jaw. Together these measures permit one to
estimate the age of an animal as well as the season of death. Dr. Pike-Tay has
two goals. The first is a quantitative evaluation of the biological and
environmental factors which affect cementum deposition. This will allow better
seasonality determinations. Secondly, she will analyze the annuli and crown
height measurements to derive techniques for age estimation. Reindeer provided
an important source of food and other materials such as antler and hide for
prehistoric peoples in both North America and Europe. Their bones are often
found in archaeological sites and therefore constitute an important focus for
archaeological analysis. In their attempts to reconstruct how prehistoric
peoples lived, archaeologists try to determine how long and in what season
individual sites were occupied. They also want to learn how animals were hunted.
By knowing a reindeer's age of death and the season in which it was killed these
questions can be directly addressed. While many scientists have recognized the
potential of crown height measurements and annuli counts, the basic essential
work which Dr. Pike-Tay has undertaken has never been done. This research is
important for several reasons. It will provide an extremely valuable tool not
only to archaeologists ,but to biologists and wildlife management specialists.
It will be applicable in a wide variety of situations. Since a graduate student
is included, the project will also serve a training role.