* 9023669
* Primary Productivity in Antarctic Pack Ice: Time Series     Studies at Ice Station
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1991,05/31/1994
* James Kremer, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 05/31/1994
* USD 220,770.00

The significance of the proposed research is that it is the first chance sea ice
ecologists have of obtaining time series data on microbial biomass accumulation,
growth rates and productivity in the Antarctic pack ice ecosystem. This
information is essential to understanding overall Southern Ocean productivity.
Pack ice covers 20 million square kilometers of the surface of the Southern
Ocean. Because of the multi-disciplinary nature of the AnZone project, Dr.
Sullivan proposes to investigate primary production and factors that influence
the growth and development of microalgal and bacterial assemblages with the
first and second year pack ice. AnZone project is an international cooperative
program located in western Weddell Sea. The research planned under the AnZone
project will contribute substantially to understanding biological rate processes
in sea ice. Additionally, Dr. Sullivan proposes to examine indicators of natural
cell metabolism as indices of natural growth of pack ice microalgae. Throughout
these investigations, Dr. Sullivan will test the hypothesis that a substantial
fraction of primary and secondary productivity within the ice covered region of
the Southern Ocean occurs within the pack ice and that it is mediated by
microalgae and bacteria associated with the extensive ice crystal surfaces of
the pack ice habitat.