* 9023293
* Maternal Effect Locus Modulates Distal Bithorax-Complex     Mutants
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1995
* David Kuhn, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 08/31/1995
* USD 270,000.00

An underlying mechanism is being sought to explain the modulation of the
homeotic tuh-3 gene by maternal effect alleles. Homeotic mutants cause the
appearance of normal anatomical structures in the wrong location of the body.
The homeotic tumorous-head (tuh-3) mutant in Drosophila melanogaster was
selected for these studies. It is located at the distal end of a complex of
genes (bithorax- complex, BX-C), which provides identity to some thoracic and
all abdominal segments in the fly. Tuh-3 and other mutants at the end of the
complex are modulated by the tuh-1 maternal effect locus at the base of the
X-chromosome. Tuh-3 functions as a dominant mutant in the presence of the
recessive tuh-1h maternal effect, causing genital expression in the head. Head
defects totally disappear and tuh-3 acts as a simple recessive in the presence
of the dominant tuh-1g maternal effect allele. In order to understand how this
genetic system works, we have cloned tuh-1 and are determining how tuh-3
interacts with the mutants of the distal BX-C. We now propose to prove that
tuh-1 has been cloned by P-element transformation, determine which cells in the
oocyte produce the tuh-1 mRNA, follow its distribution pattern in the egg and
embryo, demonstrate the distribution profile for the tuh-1 protein and use the
inferred amino acid sequence to suggest a role for the protein. At present we
suspect that the tuh-1h allele yields no functional gene product and therefore
is incapable of suppressing mutant gene activity in more anterior locations,
making tuh-3 function like a dominant mutant. The proposed role of the wild type
tuh-1g function is to suppress BX-C activity in the anterior of the embryo,
causing tuh-3 to act as a simple recessive loss of function mutant in the
posterior of the embryo. The proposed experiments directly test this model.
Continued genetic studies of the interactions between tuh-3 and the distal BX-C
mutants should clarify the function of tuh-3 in the BX- C, while continued
physical mapping of these mutants will provide insights into their BX-C
functions and suggest where and how tuh-1 may modulate their function.***//