* 9023554
* Faculty Award for Women - Energetic Winds and Disk Accretionin Low Mass Young Stars
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1991,04/30/1998
* Suzan Edwards, Smith College
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 04/30/1998
* USD 250,000.00

This faculty award for Women Scientists and Engineers is made to Dr. Suzan
Edwards of the Five College Astronomy Department at Smith College. The NSF
Faculty Award for Women Scientists and Engineers recognizes the high quality of
the awardee's record in teaching and scholarship as well as the potential for
continued significant contributions to scientific research, the academic
profession, and the education of future scientists. Dr. Edwards will carry out
research on energetic winds and disk accretion in low mass young stars. Current
observational and theoretical work on star formation suggests that the
gravitational collapse of dense, rotating cores in molecular clouds results in
an initial configuration of a protostar which is dominated by a flattened
spinning disk of roughly solar system dimension. During the first hundred
thousand years, the simultaneous processes of mass infall onto the outer part of
the disk and accretion of material through the disk and onto the central stellar
object are hidden from direct view by the opaque screen provided by dust in the
infalling remnant core material. Very early in this process, however,
observations show that the protostellar system turns on an energetic bipolar
wind. While the driving mechanism for this wind is not yet understood,
theoretical arguments suggest that such a wind is required in order for the
central object to shed sufficient angular momentum to grow to stellar
dimensions. After several hundred thousand years, the energetic wind has removed
enough of the remnant infalling core material that the star/energetic
wind/accretion disk system becomes optically revealed as a T Tauri "star". A
high resolution optical spectroscopic survey of T Tauri systems will be carried
out at the 4m telescope at Kitt Peak National Observatory in a double-pronged
study to investigate atomic lines formed in two distinct regions. Data from
Observations of spectral lines formed in the energetic winds will be used to
probe the wind origin and collimation mechanism, and to better constrain wind
mass loss rates. Observations of lines formed in regions where mass accretion
onto the stellar surface is occurring will be used to determine whether mass
transfer from disk to star is conducted through a classical equatorial boundary
layer or whether the stellar magnetic field interrupts the disk and channels
disk material along field lines to the stellar surface.