* 9023517
* Structural Recognition in Complexation of Organic Compounds
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1991,02/28/1994
* Donald Cram, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 02/28/1994
* USD 527,100.00

The chemical character of complexes between organic hosts and guests will be
studied. The research will focus on the incarceration of guests in rigidly
hollow hosts either without holes (carcerands) or with holes (hemicarcerands) in
their shells. The free energies of constrictive binding by hemicarceplexes will
be measured for both aliphatic and aromatic guests in the molecular weight range
of about 80-120. The rates of complexation and decomplexation will be correlated
with the relative sizes of the guests and portals in hemicarceplexes.
Comparisons will be made between the rates and products of reactions run in the
interior phases of dissolved demicarceplexes, and those run in the same solvents
free of the hosts. Guests will be designed, prepared, and studied, only a part
of which can be incarcerated, the rest being too large to pass through the
portals of the hosts. A small molecular tether will connect the two parts. Other
guests will be studied, one part of which will be contained in one hemicarcerand
and a second part in a second hemicarcerand. The product will be two
hemicarceplexes connected by a short molecular tether. New families of
carcerands and hemicarcerands will be designed and synthesized. The Organic
Synthesis Program is funding the renewal of this Nobel Prize research. It will
continue its development of the chemistry of small molecules imprisoned inside
larger molecules. The work has the potential to lead to very unique new patterns
of reactivity.