* 9023770
* Adaptive Techniques Applied ot the Solution of the Hydro-   dynamic Equations for Semiconductor Devices Simulations
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1993
* Christine Maziar, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* George K. Lea
* 12/31/1993
* USD 149,518.00

This research is carried out in recognition of the fact that numerical
simulations have increased in importance in almost all areas of engineering,
although they may often be too expensive for routine applications in many areas
of engineering and applied science. Recently, a new generation of algorithms
that change form and structure during the computation procedure (adaptive) have
been introduced in order to address issues of accuracy and efficiency of
numerical simulations. Based on the initial success of adaptive algorithms in
computational mechanics it is highly desirable that those schemes be extended to
applications in other areas of engineering. One such area is semiconductor
device modeling. One of the best "tools" for numerical simulation of charge
transport in semiconductor devices is the hydrodynamic model, which has the
advantage over the widely used drift-diffusion formalism of providing average
carrier energy throughout the structure. Such information is essential in
improving physically based models of semiconductor device phenomena (e.g.
improved models for velocity overshoot, impact ionization, etc.) Unfortunately,
the hydrodynamic approach may be quite expensive for routine device simulations
when used in conjunction with conventional numerical algorithms. Here, adaptive
algorithms will be employed in order to increase the efficiency and accuracy of
the hydrodynamic model for device simulation. Solutions of the hydrodynamic
equations may be quite sensitive to model parameters such as momentum and energy
relaxation times. Promising numerical algorithms are more quickly adopted by the
device modeling community when they are demonstrated using physically reasonable
and reliable model. An important feature of the proposed program addresses the
need for doing model develop in concert with algorithm development. This
research program has been designed to bring together the backgrounds and talents
of a numerical methods specialist and a semiconductor device engineer.