* 9023352
* A Reprise of Size and R&amp;D
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1991,01/31/1993
* Wesley Cohen, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Vincy Fon
* 01/31/1993
* USD 68,821.00

Schumpeter and Galbraith hypothesized that larger firms experience lower costs
and greater returns from R&amp;D and as a consequence would be expected to
perform a disproportionate share of innovative activity relative to their size.
Numerous studies of the relationship between firm size and R&amp;D effort have
been conducted. The findings are that within the modal industry, above a modest
size threshold, R&amp;D effort does not rise proportionally with firm size.
Having apparently failed to support the Schumpeterian hypothesis, however, these
stylized facts have been largely ignored. Initially assuming that firms exploit
their innovations through their own sales and that growth due to innovation is
conditioned by current output, this project uses a simple model to explain these
stylized facts. The model is then used to explain observed departures from the
modal relationships as well. The objective is to explain how industry factors -
particularly dynamic factors and appropriability mechanisms within industries --
condition the relationship between firm size and R&amp;D. Using data from the
Federal Trade Commission's Line of Business Program, patent data compiled from
Scherer and data from the Levin et al. survey on technological opportunity and
appropriability conditions in U.S. manufacturing industries, the model is tested
to see if the correctly postulated factors that condition the relationship have
been specified. The model used in the project provides a distinctive
interpretation of the proportional relationship betweeen R&amp;D effort and firm
size among R&amp;D performers. In the past, proportionality has been widely
interpreted to indicate that there are no particular advantages or disadvantages
of size in R&amp;D. In this model, however, the proportional relationship
reflects the link between the expected returns from R&amp;D and the firm's ex
ante output. It suggests that larger firms will earn greater returns from any
given R&amp;D effort than smaller firms, implying an advantage of size and
R&amp;D. Thus, the stylized fact that led to the rejection of the Schumpeterian
hypothesis, namely the proportional relationship between R&amp;D effort and firm
size, may actually reveal an advantage of size. An important implication of the
argument is that the returns to innovation are an increasing function of firm
size, implying an advantage to firm size in R&amp;D.