* 9023875
* Mathematical Sciences: Laplacians on Reimannian Manifolds
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1994
* Steven Rosenberg, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* James Glazebrook
* 11/30/1994
* USD 46,602.00

The principal investigator will analyze the geometry and topology of manifolds
by comparing different partial differential operators defined on the manifold.
It is known that there is a relationship between certain invariants of a partial
differential operator and the geometry of the space on which the operator is
defined. The principal investigator will use heat kernel methods to approximate
the invariants associated to the differential operators. He will use this
approach to try to find an index theorem for a Laplace operator which was
originally introduced to study certain problems in physics. The index theorem is
the main tool used to link the topology and geometry of a space to the
differential equations defined on the space. Hence if the investigator can find
an index for this particular Laplace operator he will have established a method
which can be applied to the study of the geometry of the space. It will be
important to understand the role of curvature in such an index theory. A
manifold is the mathematical object which formalizes our understanding of form,
shape, and distance; a curved surface is an example of a two dimensional
manifold. Partial differential equations are the equations used to describe most
physical phenomena. The study of the solutions of these equations is a major
branch of mathematics in itself. The principal investigator will study problems
which involve both of these topics and the relationship between shape and
solutions of partial differential equations. //