* 9023462
* The Emergence of the West German Petrochemical Industry
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/1991,12/31/1992
* Raymond Stokes, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 12/31/1992
* USD 50,518.00

Between 1945 and 1961, West German chemical producers made the transition from
primarily coal-based to predominately petroleum- based feedstocks for
manufacture of organic chemicals, thus following American leadership in
petrochemical technology and ensuring their long-term competitiveness. Dr.
Stokes is examining this significant change, combining approaches drawn from
political and economic history with those from history of technology. This study
will contribute to broader issues including the political, economic and social
factors affecting technological choice; technological transfer in its political
context, and the state's role in shaping technological development. Under this
grant, Dr. Stokes is completing research including travel to Germany to examine
the archives of the BASF and Bayer companies and Federal Archives in Koblenz.
This research promises to produce a detailed examination of the emergence of the
West German petrochemical industry. Understanding how this German industry
transformed itself from technological backwardness (compared to its British and
American counterparts) to world leadership will shed light on the process and
effective strategies of technological change. It will also help us to understand
the bases of West Germany's political, economic, and technological performance
in the postwar world.