* 9023362
* Simulations of Systems with Spatio-Temporal Structure: A    Model Reduction Approach for Complex Geometrics
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1994
* Yannis Kevrekidis, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* George K. Lea
* 12/31/1994
* USD 267,353.00

A systematic procedure for computer- aided studies of largescale engineering
systems combining complex spatial structure with nonlinear dynamics behavior
will be developed. A general methodology is developed, interfacing direct
simulations, model reduction, and modern stability and bifurcation algorithms.
This procedure will be validated on a number of representative engineering
problems in complex geometries, involving and reaction phenomena. More
specifically, high-order direct simulations based on spectral element
discretizations will be combined with the Proper Orthogonal Decomposition
method, in order to extract a small number of global modes governing the
behavior of spatially extended systems. A Galerkin weighted residual formulation
employing these global modes yields low-dimensional accurate dynamic models,
which can subsequently be used to analyze spatial and temporal system behavior,
including stability and transition to time-periodic and chaotic states. The
proposed methodology can be expected to become a standard powerful computational
tool for studying the dynamic behavior of realistic engineering systems.
Furthermore, the low-dimensional engineering models resulting from this
methodology will be useful in a wide variety of applications, from modeling and
analysis, to design, prediction and control of spatially extended systems.