* 9023279
* Incomplete Contracts
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1994
* Oliver Hart, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1994
* USD 217,979.00

This is an accomplishment-based renewal of research by one of the architects
and leading contributors to the incomplete contracts paradigm for analyzing
economic decisions under incomplete information. The key feature of this
approach is that it incorporates transaction costs inherent in the writing of
long- term contracts (for example, thinking, negotiation, writing and
enforcement costs). Because of these transaction costs parties will write
contracts that are incomplete ex-ante, knowing that these contracts will be
renegotiated later on as new information comes in. The approach studies how this
renegotiation takes place and what implications it has for agents' incentives to
take various ex-ante actions. Under the previous NSF grant the investigator made
important contributions in three areas: the theory of the firm, vertical
integration and market foreclosure, and the financial structure of the firm.
Continued support will lead to further advances in our understanding of the
nature of business internal organization and financial structure. This grant
continues work on contract and control issues in firms and corporations. It
provides a better understanding of what determines the structure of claims in
corporations and the various rights possessed by claim-holders, e.g., why debt
has priority over equity, creditors have the right to liquidate assets in the
event of default and equity-holders have votes. One especially interesting paper
in this line of research will be a study of what lessons the emerging Eastern
European democracies can learn from the Western experience with different
bankruptcy procedures. The project will also continue to study how transactions
within firms differ from those between firms, and what are the motives for
integration by firms.