* 9023309
* Advanced Techniques for the Representation and Use of       Geographic Information
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1991,10/30/1997
* Donna Peuquet, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 10/30/1997
* USD 250,000.00

This award provides support for Dr. Donna Peuquet through the National Science
Foundation's Faculty Awards for Women Scientists and Engineers Program. The
objectives of this program are to recognize some of the nation's most
outstanding and promising women scientists and engineers holding academic
positions combining research and teaching, to retain them in academia, and to
facilitate the further development of their careers. This award will allow Dr.
Peuquet to continue her research on the ways that geographic information is
represented, both conceptually and physically, as computer-based data
observations. This research will build on research already conducted by the
investigator that establishes a conceptual framework for the representation of
physical space in geographic information systems (GISs). Software also has been
developed to permit synthesis of location-based and object-based representations
of data in GISs. The investigator's next lines of inquiry will include expansion
of the representational framework to include a temporal dimension, thereby
enhancing the capabilities of GISs to assist in analysis of the spatial-temporal
dimensions of geographic processes. The investigator also will begin to define a
formal spatial language that describes spatial-temporal processes while still
incorporating the context dependencies and inexact properties that often are
characteristic of these processes. Such a formal language should provide a more
robust and flexible spatial database query language than is available using
standard query language-based approaches.