* 9023037
* Further Generalizations of Cointegration: Modeling Many     Variables and Introducing Repellors
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/1991,12/31/1993
* Clive Granger, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1993
* USD 90,300.00

This project makes an important contribution to the statistical theory of the
analysis of economic time series. It represents a continuation of earlier work
on cointegration, which is a way to capture equilibrium relations among dynamic
variables. A vector time series xt is said to be cointegrated if a linear
combination of the levels of the elements of xt is stationary with finite
variance. Much empirical research in macroeconomics has shown that economic time
series data typically include non-stationary processes such as trends and are
therefore linked together in the long run. To gain any meaningful insight into
the actual movements of the variable in the economy, they must be purged of the
influence of the non-stationary processes. Cointegration is a way of doing this
since the linear combinations of the levels of time series variables are
stationary, even if the underlying series are not. In prior work, the linear
combination is an attractor for the levels of the series. The extension of these
concepts in this project involve the concept of a repellor, which is a region in
the phase space, away from which xt is relatively likely to move. The concept of
a negative strength of attraction is developed for a repellor. Both attractors
and repellors are related to stable and unstable equilibria in deterministic
models and the work in this project will develop statistical tests for their
presence. The goal is to provide a more general set of tools for studying short
memory economic processes, through attractors and varying strength of
attraction; and for modelling long memory processes, including trends, with
repellors. A second part of the project involves work on the dimensionality
problems in linear systems of cointegrated time series. The economy is divided
into sectors and a common vector of each sector is estimated and analyzed. This
will allow for an analysis with many fewer variables than if all of the series
are considered jointly.