* 9023476
* The Meaning of Precision:  The Utility of Exact Experiment  in 19th c. Prussia
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1991,01/31/1994
* Kathryn Olesko, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 01/31/1994
* USD 50,000.00

A prerequisite for the development of contemporary scientific research was the
development of instrumentation for precision measurement to a degree of accuracy
which was thought impossible prior to the 19th century. In her study, "The
Meaning of Precision," Dr. Olesko is examining the objective and subjective
significance of precision instruments when they first really began to be
systematically developed, i.e. in Prussian science and scientific culture from
the late 1810s to the 1870s. The 1810's was the time when the method of least
squares was first introduced into physical investigations; the 1860s and 1870s
was the time when the consequences of the first state-supported projects
requiring precision instruments (weights and measures, triangulation, and
heating power of fuels) were felt in Prussian society. Dr. Olesko is examining
selected issues concerning precision measurement in science (chiefly physics,
but also chemistry and to some extent physiology) and in science teaching
(chiefly physics). She is also exploring the utility of exact experiment and
precision measurement for the Prussian state. In addition, by looking at images,
metaphors and rhetoric, she is including studies of the symbolic and cultural
meaning of precision. Finally, she is including a comparative component--
primarily by examining American notions of precision during this period, but
also other comparisons are being considered. This study is essential for a
proper understanding of the rise of contemporary science.