* 9023254
* Faculty Award for Women - An Atomic Hydrogen (HI) Image of  the Universe
* EHR,HRD
* 11/01/1991,10/31/1997
* Jacqueline van Gorkom, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 10/31/1997
* USD 250,000.00

This Faculty Award for Women Scientists and Engineers is made to Dr. Jacqueline
H. Van Gorkom in the Department of Astronomy at Columbia University. The NSF
Faculty Award for Women Scientists and Engineers recognizes the high quality of
the awardee's record in teaching and scholarship as well as the potential for
continued significant contributions to scientific research, the academic
profession, and the education of future scientists. The emphasis of the research
will be on the formation and evolution of galaxies and the large scale structure
of the universe. These issues will be explored by making images of the atomic
hydrogen in and between galaxies, in isolated galaxies, interacting galaxies,
small groups of galaxies, clusters of galaxies and in regions where there might
be no galaxies at all, the voids. The large-scale structure of the universe as
we know it today, with large filaments and sheets is based almost entirely on
high luminosity galaxies, seen at optical wavelengths. Biased galaxy formation
predicts a separation between luminosity (bright galaxies) and mass (dark
matter). Dwarf galaxies are expected to be more uniformly distributed and should
be a better tracer of the dark mass. These dwarfs could be too faint to be
included in optical catalogs. They will be observed in the radio region of the
spectrum. Other similar surveys which will address slightly different questions
are a volume limited survey of the Hydra Cluster of galaxies and HI observations
of all the optically known galaxies in the Bootes void. The Hydra survey will
extend the determination of the spatial distribution of gas rich galaxies to a
very high density region. Even more interesting will be a comparison of the HI
morphology of the galaxies in Hydra and in Virgo (already completed) with those
in the Bootes void. This will provide us with unique material on the effects of
the environment on galaxies. There will be several collaborators and graduate
students involved in the projects.