* 9023417
* Development of an Efficient and Intense Cooling Technique   Using Electrostatically Charged Sprays
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1991,08/01/1992
* Kyung-Jin Choi, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 08/01/1992
* USD 52,719.00

Efficient and intense heat removal from a hot surface is of great importance in
various engineering problems, such as nuclear power plant emergency cooling,
continuous material casting processes, design of compact heat exchanges, etc.
Spray cooling has been widely used in various industries and thermal management
due to its convenience of use, low cost of operation, and more importantly high
intensity of cooling rate. However, the conventional spray cooling process
cannot reach its full potential until its shortcomings, i.e., inefficient
utilization of coolant and non-uniform distribution of heat dissipation rates
over a hot surface can be remedied. This research involves the use of
electrostatically charged liquid sprays in the cooling process. Preliminary
experiments conducted at the University of Illinois at Chicago revealed that
electrically charged water droplets dissipate heat about 40% greater than the
uncharged conventional case. In addition, various interesting effects of charged
droplets were observed, i.e., increased critical heat flux (CHF), extended CHF
temperature, and increased heat dissipation in the film boiling region of the
coolant. Effects of charged droplets, namely, electric charge density, droplet
size, droplet number density, liquid properties, and heater surface temperature
are being investigated by both experimental and hybrid-analytical methods in
this study. Using specially designed experimental apparatus and recently
developed instruments, visualization tests of droplet impaction and heat
transfer experiments will be performed. In the heat transfer experiments, two
different boundary conditions for a hot surface, i.e., a transient surface
temperature and a constant temperature boundary conditions, will be tested in
order to see whether a boiling hysteresis exists in charged spray cooling heat
transfer. In addition to the laboratory type of heat transfer experiment, real
scaled experiments will be conducted by using commercially available
electrostatic spray atomizers. All the information obtained through these tasks
will serve as a sound data base for future development of an efficient and high
intense cooling technique.