* 9023714
* Microstructural Modeling and Probabilistic Prediction of    Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems Response                   (REU Supplement)
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1995
* George Johnson, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* George K. Lea
* 07/31/1995
* USD 591,612.00

This is a research project aimed at developing an improved understanding of the
behavior of materials and structural elements (beams, plates, membranes)
employed in the manufacture of micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS), on the
basis of the microstructure exhibited by the materials, with the goal of
assessing the performance reliability of such systems. Effective (overall)
physical properties, primarily elasticity and strength, and the associated
structural response will be evaluated with the recognition that there are a
number of microstructural effects that are important at the length scales
associated with MEMS but which are unimportant at larger length scales. These
include the typical linear dimension of a crystallite within the material being
on the same order of magnitude as the thickness of the film, substantial
through-thickness variations in grain size and shape, the presence of
considerable alignment of the grains (texture) leading to anisotropy of
response, and large levels of residual stress arising form the processes used to
create may MEMS. Such effects may preclude direct application of classical
theories for structural elements, thus necessitating the development of new
theories. Furthermore, the variability inherent in the microstructure, which
depends strongly on the process conditions, requires a probabilistic description
of the material behavior and structural response evaluation aimed at assessing
the performance reliability of MEMS. To this end, this research will address:
(1) mathematical modeling of material strength and effective properties, (2)
influence of microstructure on the structural response of MEMS, and (3)
reliability analysis of MEMS using stochastic finite-element methods.