* 9023789
* FAW:  The Evolution of Lek Mating Systems From Resource     Defense Territoriality
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1991,10/31/1998
* Catherine Toft, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 10/31/1998
* USD 250,000.00

A conceptually new aspect of insect population biology studies is the bridging
of theory on the evolution of mating systems and theory of population
dynamics..which so far have been developed independently. Factors that
ultimately affect the growth and dynamics of populations simultaneously
determine behaviors involved in the mate search and resource defense. Ecologists
are increasingly taking a more mechanistic approach to explaining patterns in
populations and communities. That is, they try to explain the "higher level"
patterns in populations and communities, such as population dynamics or species
diversity, by examining "lower level" phenomena, such as behavior, physiology
and morphology of individuals, which determine the individual's ability to
survive and reproduce. The research program proposed here fits into this new
trend in examining how determinants of mating behavior and an individual's use
of habitat and food resources relate to population structure and dynamics and
eventually to interspecific interactions. The specific system of study comprises
several species of Lordotus bee flies. Species in this genus have different
morphologies related to mating behavior and presumably have different mating
behaviors. Preliminary studies of two congeners at one site reveal that, indeed,
they have different mating systems and populations structures although they
occur syntopically and use the same resources. The proposed program will focus
primarily on detailed population studies of these two species and will test
hypotheses proposed by Bradbury and colleagues on the evolution of lek mating
systems from resource.defense territoriality. This research plan will include
detailed characterization of occupied and randomly.chosen unoccupied sites,
long.term monitoring of population densities, and experimental manipulation of
sites and population densities. In the last two (of five) seasons, work will
continue on the demography and mating system of L. miscellus and pilot studies
will be initiated on a parapatric species L. gibbus. Together, detailed studies
on these closely related and ecologically similar species constitute a powerful
comparative approach to testing hypotheses on the relations among resource
distributions, mating systems, and population structures.