* 9023469
* Substitution and Complementarity in Models of Growth with   Many Goods
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1991,07/31/1994
* Paul Romer, National Opinion Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1994
* USD 129,992.00

This project is a continuation of research by the investigator on the
theoretical foundation of long run economic growth. Previous work emphasized
bridging the gap between our microeconomic understanding of firms and industries
on the one hand and our understanding of aggregate growth on the other. More
specifically, aggregate growth theory is increasingly being forced to consider
the large numbers of distinct goods that are hidden by the familiar univariate
measures of capital or consumption. Once one begins to take seriously the
enormous diversity of goods, one is inevitably lead to reexamine existing
assumptions about how these goods interact with each other. Traditional
aggregate theory makes the implicit assumption that these goods are functionally
identical in the sense that there is an infinite elasticity of substitution
between these goods. An alternative assumption is that the large variety of
goods enter into production or consumption in a way that is additively
separable. Virtually all of the work on aggregate economics falls into one of
these two categories. This project develops new tractable mathematical models
that can allow for many goods, for the introduction of new goods, and for
complicated interactions between goods. The motivation for constructing models
with richer sets of goods and interactions is to answer specific questions about
technology, economic growth, savings and trade that can not be understood
without this additional structure. This project uses models of technological
change in the presence of many goods to address important and fundamental
economic questions. These questions include the following: 1. Is technological
change responsible for the divergence in the rate of growth of wages for skilled
and unskilled labor that has been observed in the U.S.? Can technological change
lead to stagnant or declining wages for unskilled labor? 2. Why is it that most
trade takes place between countries at similar stages of development? 3. How can
it be that savings rates are high, rates of consumption growth are high, and
rates of return are low in some developing countries?