* 9023968
* The Role of the Hippocampus in the Development of the HomingPigeon Navigational Map
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1991,06/30/1993
* Verner Bingman, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 06/30/1993
* USD 23,988.00

The ability of animals and human beings to learn and remember is an adaptation
that permits organisms to change their behavior when confronted with changing
environmental conditions. The ability to learn and remember is a consequence of
having a brain that can change in response to new experiences. One of the major
goals for researchers studying the nervous system is to identify particular
brain areas or structures that are important for specific kinds of learning and
memory. To do so, a variety of animals are studied. In choosing an experimental
animal, one generally looks for specialized behavior that may simplify the task
of linking brain regions with particular functions. Dr. Bingman's research tries
to take advantage of the specialized navigational skills of homing pigeons to
identify brain regions important for spatial learning and spatial memory. The
basic design of the research project is to surgically remove specific brain
regions and then examine what effect such treatment has on homing-pigeon
navigational behavior. By examining homing-pigeon behavior following surgical
manipulation of the brain, one can begin to construct how various brain regions
contribute to the spatial learning and spatial memory used by pigeons to
navigate home. Dr. Bingman's research should result in a better understanding of
the relationship between memory/learning and the brain. By clarifying how
changes in the brain may lead to memory impairments, this research may also help
to enhance our understanding of memory disorders in humans.