* 9023197
* In-situ Growth of Indium Arsenide/Antimonide Long           Wavelength Photodiodes
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1992,08/31/1994
* William Chan, Electro-Optek Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 08/31/1994
* USD 252,228.00

The new technology of strained superlattice (SSL) of InAsSb and in- situ
formation of photodiode on silicon (Si) has the potential of fabricating
producible long-wavelength infrared (L-WIR) photodiodes for diverse and military
applications. An investigation on the molecular beam epitaxial (MBE) growth of
the SSL on Si has been made in a phase I SBIR program, aimed at fabricating
producible LWIR arrays. This was accomplished in phase I: (1) all required MBE
modifications compatible to the MBE system have been designed and some have been
reduced to practice; (2) the MBE processes for growing a lattice-matching
buffer, SSL and photojunction have been delineated; (3) the feasibility of
growing high quality buffer and InAsSb epitaxial layers on Si has been
demonstrated by numerous MBE growth runs; and (4) a detailed plan for phase II
has been established. The MBE growth runs performed have consistently produced
good epitaxial growth, manifested by well-ordered reflective high energy
electron diffraction (RHEED) patterns, high growth stability, mirror-like
surface morphology and high carrier mobility. These runs have reduced the high
risk elements and increase the probability of success of phase II. The first
goal in phase II is to optimize the growth of the buffer and InAsSb SSL to
establish a cutoff wavelength of 12 microns. Second goal is to develop the
photodiode detector using MBE. A special buffer on Si for lattice matching an
defect blocking will be developed then the growth of SSL on the buffer, followed
by the in-situ growth of the photodiodes will be established. The low- defect
SSL will provide high detector performance, producibility and uniformity, while
the sequential multilayer growth will produce a straightforward in-situ
photodiode formation process.