* 9023744
* Wonders and the Order of Nature
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1991,02/28/1993
* Katharine Park, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 02/28/1993
* USD 50,000.00

A major task for the history of science is to understand how science rose and
became such a driving force in the transformation of our culture. This project
makes it clear that the rise of modern science in the Scientific Revolution was
not simply a phenomenon connected to the rejection of the Ptolemaic system and
its eventual replacement by the Newtonian theory of gravitation. The revolution
went beyond this narrower scientific achievement to lay the foundation for a
systematic study of nature. Such a study required the observer of nature to
search for regularities and natural laws. Dr. Park, with her collaborator, Dr.
Lorraine J. Daston, are seeking to document and analyze changing views of
natural law and natural order in Western culture during the period broadly
defined as the Scientific Revolution. They are tracing the shift in scientific
writing from a view of nature that emphasized the anomalous and the bizarre
(monstrous births, celestial apparitions, unusual meteorological phenomena,
exotic plants and animals) to a view that privileged the typical and the
regular. They argue that the former view, which grew out of both the new
discoveries of the age of European exploration and the focus on portents and
prodigies associated with the religious struggles of the Reformation,
represented--despite its unfamiliarity--a critical phase in the consolidation of
the new science. Their principal sources are the works of sixteenth and
seventeenth century writers, but they are also drawing on non-scientific sources
--literary, legal, and artistic--to relate these developments to other aspects
of contemporary culture.