* 9023778
* Faculty Awards for Women: Catalytic Hydrogenitrogenation of Petroleum Derivatives
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1991,10/31/1997
* Umit Ozkan, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 10/31/1997
* USD 250,000.00

The research program will focus on investigating the catalytic phenomena
involved in hydrodenitrogenation reactions over sulfided and unsulfided Ni-Mo
catalysts. The catalysts to be used in this study will be synthesized by three
different techniques, namely, homogeneous sulfide precipitation, impregnated
thiosalt decomposition and intercalation of nickel and molybdenum cations in
clay matrices. Catalyst characterization will be performed using various
techniques including BET surface area and pore size distribution analysis, X-ray
diffraction, scanning and transmission electron microscopy, energy dispersive
X-ray analysis, laser Raman Spectroscopy and Raman microprobe and X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy. Thermal analysis techniques will also be used
through temperature-programmed reduction, desorption and sulfidation studies. In
addition to ambient characterization of the catalysts, in-situ characterization
techniques will also be adopted using a laser Raman spectrometer and a specially
designed in-situ Raman cell. The changes that take place in the catalyst during
oxidation, reduction, sulfidation, reaction and deactivation processes will be
examined in-situ. These studies will be used to investigate the nature of the
active form of the catalyst and the catalyst support interactions. In addition
to examining the reaction network, the effect of reaction parameters such as
hydrogen partial pressure, reaction temperature and pressure and the effect of
substituents will also be investigated. Finally, isotopic labelling techniques
will be combined with kinetic studies and in-situ laser Raman spectroscopy
studies to gain insight into the catalytic phenomena involved in
hydrodenitrogenation reactions.