* 9023411
* The Scientific and Industrial Culture of the First          European Entrepreneurs
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1991,04/30/1993
* Margaret Jacob, The New School
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 04/30/1993
* USD 38,540.00

The relationship between science and commerce plays a crucial but little
understood role in modern society. For much of its life as a nation, the US
entrepreneurs "imported" scientific work from European nations to develop
American industry. Currently, Japanese entrepreneurs are said to be taking
advantage of scientific and technological knowledge produced in the US and
Europe. But how do entrepreneurs take advantage of scientific developments in
order to establish commercially profitable technological enterprises? One way to
get at this issue is to examine the historical record and this is what Professor
Margaret Jacob is proposing to do. Professor Jacob is exploring the feasibility
of undertaking a major research effort to rediscover the mental universe of the
first generation of European industrial entrepreneurs during the first
industrial revolution, that is from about 1770 to 1820. She is seeking to
discover their education in applied as well as theoretical science, to examine
the role played in their thinking by mechanical imagery and analogy, by the
ideology of science in relation to discipline and work, order and design,
progress and the control of humankind and nature. While examining the
differences, she is seeking by means of a comparative approach that will focus
upon archives in English, French, Dutch, Flemish and German, to understand the
common assumptions of European entrepreneurs, that is the knowledge and values
they shared, as well as what was distinctively national, regional and
individual. Under this exploratory grant, Professor Jacob and a graduate student
will be determining whether they can in fact achieve this understanding with the
archival data available in Britain, Belgium, the Netherlands, France and
Germany.