* 9023988
* FAW:  Molecular Mechanisms of Glial-Guided Neuronal         Migration
* EHR,HRD
* 11/01/1991,10/31/1992
* Mary Hatten, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 10/31/1992
* USD 50,000.00

With a Faculty Award for Women Scientists and Engineers from the National
Science Foundation, Dr. Mary Hatten will continue to study the developmental
mechanisms of neuronal-glial interactions in the central nervous system. The
primary goal of this research is to elucidate the genetic and molecular genetic
regulation of neuronal migrations in the developing mammalian brain by employing
molecular biological methods and mutant mouse models. An in vitro model system
for mouse cerebellar cells has been developed in Dr. Hatten's laboratory to
define the cellular and molecular mechanisms of migration. Mutant mice with
phenotypic defects, expressed by the weaver gene, in glial-guided migration will
be utilized to analyze the genetic regulation of migration. A novel adhesion
ligand, astrotactin, has been identified to mediate neuron-glia binding and will
be used to describe the molecular components of migration. Functional studies
indicate that glial-guided neuronal migration utilizes astrotactin rather than
neural cell adhesion molecules. The expression of this ligand will be examined
in other brain regions, such as the hippocampus, cortex and subcortical regions
and astrotactin cDNAs will be used to clone astrotactin and related genes from
cDNA libraries of other brain regions. This work will provide information on the
sequence of astrotactin, its structure, function and homology with known
proteins.