* 9023183
* The D0 Experiment at the Fermilab Antiproton-Proton Collider
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1991,05/31/1995
* Paul Grannis, FERMI National Accelerator Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 05/31/1995
* USD 180,000.00

Description: Under this project a team headed by Dr. R. Raja of Fermi
Laboratory and Dr. J. M. Kohli of Panjab University in Chandigarh, India will
participate in the D0 Experiment. That experiment is the second all purpose
colliding beams detector at the Fermilab Tevatron. Using high resolution uranium
argon calorimetry, they hope to look for effects beyond the standard model of
interactions. Supersymmetry technicolor and other such predicted but as yet
unobserved effects will be searched for. Within the standard model, it is hoped
to find evidence for the hitherto unconfirmed top quark as well as measure the
mass difference between the W and Z particles to a precision that makes possible
the study of the radiative effects within the standard model. Scope: The Indian
physicists will contribute by fabricating hardware and electronic components in
India to be used as components in the D0 detector in the experiment at Fermilab.
They will also participate in the development of data acquisition software and
data analysis. The collaboration is beneficial to the U.S. and Indian scientists
and fully meets the objectives of the U.S.-India Program. This project is funded
under two grants: INT 9023183 to Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory INT
9100700 to Panjab University, Chandigarh, India