* 9023464
* Faculty Awards for Women.  Scientific Inquiry in the Social Sciences: The Market for (IR) Reproducible Research in      Economics
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1991,06/30/1999
* Susan Feigenbaum, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 06/30/1999
* USD 250,000.00

This award provides support to Dr. Susan Feigenbaum under the National Science
Foundation's Faculty Awards for Women Scientists and Engineers Program. The
objectives of this program are to recognize the nation's most outstanding and
promising women scientists and engineers in academic careers in research and
teaching, to retain them in academia, and to facilitate the further development
of their careers. This award will allow the investigator to pursue her research
agenda concerning the impact of institutional design on individual and
organizational behavior. In particular, she will study institutional constraints
facing economic researchers and examine the resulting (dis)incentives to engage
in careful quantitative analysis. She will provide an in-depth theoretical and
empirical study of the "market" for (ir)reproducible statistical analysis. It
will evaluate the sufficiency of existing mechanisms to monitor empirical work
and propose alternative institutional responses. Her topics to be studied
include: (i) the impact of computing price declines on the volume and complexity
of data analysis, data availability, and replicability; (ii) the relationship
between expositional quality and degree of replication, and their relative
importance in terms of journal acceptance; (iii) the effect of co- authors and
researcher specialization on the production of careful research; (iv)
differential incentives created by government versus private funding mechanisms
to promote research quality; (v) the role of the editorial process and peer
review in assuring reproducible results; and (vi) the relative success of
scientific institutions in self-policing "important" disciplinary and policy
research discoveries.