* 9023022
* Firm Age and Wages
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1994
* James Medoff, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/1994
* USD 185,249.00

Although a great deal is known about how the characteristics of individuals and
economic outcomes are related, much less is known about the association between
characteristics of firms (other than size and unionization) and labor market
phenomena. A key characteristic of firms is their age. This project will focus
on the age related differences in the survival-relevant characteristics of firms
as well as attributes such as firm size or industry. The project begins with an
analysis of firm age and wages, including the size and sign of the relationship
on average and checks for departures from this norm across settings. An attempt
will be made to explain why such differentials exist and how they can persist in
reasonable competitive product markets. Existing data sets will be utilized for
the analysis, including the Minimum Wage Employer Survey and the British
Workplace Industrial Relations Survey. However, a major part of the project will
involve matching estimates of age of employer to observations in data files
which lack an explicit measure of employer age but have large samples and more
detail on worker characteristics. Specifically, the Dun and Bradstreet or the
Bureau of Economic Analysis County Business Patterns which obtain information on
average age of firm by industry size and region will be matched to individual
records in the Current Population Survey. In addition, a supplement to the
Survey of Consumers would include questions which would enable worker
characteristics to be controlled for. This new data set would be made available
through a data archive for other researchers in economics.