* 9023389
* FAW:  The Evolutionary Significance Of Physiological and    Morphological Plasticity in Plantago lanceolata
* EHR,HRD
* 11/01/1991,04/30/1998
* Johanna Schmitt, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 04/30/1998
* USD 250,000.00

A critical question in plant population biology is how phenotypic plasticity
affects response to natural selection to heterogenous environments. A classic
example of physiological plasticity is the production of sun or shade leaves
under different light conditions. One particularly interesting question is
whether there is a trade.off between fitness within an environment and capacity
for plastic response across environments. In this research, the investigator
proposes to examine physiological, morphological and life history traits in
Plantain (>>>Plantago> >lanceolata>) to address four questions: . Is there
genetic variation for norms of reaction within and between natural populations?
. How does the strength and direction of natural selection on these traits vary
with light environment? . What is the relationship between plasticity and
fitness within and across environments? .Is there short.term evolutionary
response to microgeographic heterogeneity in selective pressures? The
investigator will clonally replicate plants that have experienced different
selective pressures for many generations. These clones will be planted and
subjected to different shade regimes. Periodically, a variety of morphological
and physiological measurements will be taken to examine the plants'
physiological reactions. These data will permit the examination of genetic
variation within and between populations for plant traits and for response of
these traits to environmental variation. Fecundity and survivorship will be
measured to determine the strength and direction of natural selection on the
traits of interest in each environment. To test the hypothesis that local
variation in selective pressures can lead to microgeographic evolutionary
response, experimental mowing regimes will be continued for five years. Each
year, a random sample of the seeds produced in each plot will be grown under
uniform conditions to determine whether character means shown to be under
differential phenotypic selection in the different treatments change in the
predicted directions in successive offspring generations. This study will
integrate ecological genetics and physiological ecology, and will thereby
provide valuable information about the genetic basis and evolutionary
consequences of phenotypic plasticity in natural populations.