* 9023063
* Mathematical Sciences: The Analysis of Particle Methods for Solving Vlasov Kinetic Equation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1994
* Edward Allen, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/1994
* USD 106,000.00

The primary objective of this project is to study and analyze random particle
methods for Vlasov-Poisson-Fokker-Planck systems. It is proposed to see if a
random particle-in-cell method can be implemented that takes into account the
fact that plasma particles (ions and electrons) undergo Brownian motion due to
collisions with the medium or background particles. The research efforts will be
mainly devoted to the convergence analysis and numerical implementation of these
methods. Simultaneously, the investigators shall continue investigations on
particle methods for solving Vlasov-Poisson systems. Their research will be
addressed to improving convergence rates for simulation methods, introducing
time discretization of particle-in-cell methods, and analyzing more efficient
algorithms. For problems of controlled fusion and laser fusion, the physics of
laser-matter interactions is still not well understood. Consequently, scientists
are turning more and more to microscopic models based on kinetic equations to
better understand these phenomena. For modeling the evolution of rarefied
plasmas for those times less than the binary collision times, the Vlasov-Poisson
system of equations is used for the relevant kinetic model, when the magnetic
fields vary slowly. Particle simulation methods consist of replacing the plasma
by a large set of charged superparticles that obey the usual laws of classical
and modern physics, and then computing the interactions of these superparticles.
A thorough understanding of the accuracy properties of these methods will enable
the scientist to use different approximate parameters efficiently in a numerical
simulation (e.g., the minimum number of particles to obtain a given accuracy).
The Vlasov-Poisson-Fokker-Planck system of kinetic equations incorporates
collisional effects of a plasma with the background material (e.g., a plasma
system in a thermal bath or "reservoir") by regarding the motion of a particle
as Brownian motion caused by collisions with the background. This model is
analogous to the classical description of the irregular or Brownian motion
exhibited by a particle of colloidal size immersed in a fluid. In stellar
dynamics also, the effect of encounters between stars under gravitational forces
influences their motion in the manner of Brownian motion. The random particle
method for Vlasov-Poisson-Fokker-Planck models is proposed in order to better
understand the effects of collisions by incorporating the Brownian motion in the
numerical schemes.