* 9023636
* Transition Metal Complexes Containing Quinone and           Hydroxyquinone Ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1994
* Cortlandt Pierpont, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 12/31/1994
* USD 326,400.00

In this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of
the Chemistry Division, Pierpont will continue studies on transition metal
complexes that contain electroactive organic ligands. The synthesis and
characterization of transition metal complexes that contain catecholate,
semiquinone, and related electroactive organic ligands will be pursued. These
complexes exhibit selective redox activity at either the metal or ligand, thus
allowing investigation of intramolecular metal-quinone electron transfer
reactions. The photochemical and photophysical properties of quinone complexes
of the platinum group metals will be examined. Multinuclear complex ensembles
will be investigated for their activity as catalysts in photoconversion
processes. Electronic effects in intramolecular metal-quinone electron transfer
reactions and their potential involvement with bioinorganic reactions will be
studied in functional models for metalloenzymatic processes. %%% Catechols,
quinones and other quinoid molecules are common components of biological
systems, in which they usually function in association with metal ions. In some
cases these molecules function in the binding and transport of metals, and in
other cases their metal complexes have a role in electron transfer and/or
substrate activation. The semiquinone and catecholate metal complexes which will
be synthesized in this project will serve as models of the similar natural
molecules.