* 9023565
* Democratization in the USSR:  The Impact of Political       Culture on Processes of Political Change
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1994
* Raymond Duch, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 09/30/1994
* USD 265,179.00

This award supports exploratory research on the political and legal culture of
the Soviet Union. The political culture of the Soviet Union is experiencing
profound strains. In part, these are the cause, and in part an effect, of the
dramatic convulsions taking place in the politics of that country as it attempts
the difficult transition from authoritarian government and socialist economy to
democracy and markets. This research examines the linkages between public
opinion, political change, and the process of democratization. This project is
structured around national surveys of public opinion and political elite
attitudes to be conducted in the Soviet Union in mid-1991. The research will
provide the basis for developing a profile of the major attributes of Soviet
legal and political culture, permit the testing of hypotheses about the origins
of and recent changes in Soviet values, and facilitate comparisons of the
differences in value content and structure between the Soviet Union, Western
Europe and the United States. When completed this research will provide valuable
evidence for understanding the changes underway in the Soviet Union. It should
facilitate assessments of the distance the Soviet Union has traveled down the
road to democracy and whether it is likely to continue moving along that road.
More generally, this research should help us understand the role of political
culture in processes of democratization and global change.