* 9023176
* Expression of Bacterial Pesticidal Genes in Plants, U.S.-   Pakistan Cooperative Research
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1991,02/28/1994
* Milton Gordon, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/28/1994
* USD 20,000.00

Technical Narrative: A collaborative research project is proposed between Dr.
Gordon's laboratory, University of Washington, Seattle and Dr. Riazuddin's
laboratory, Centre for Advanced Molecular Biology, Lahore, Pakistan. Their
research will evaluate the potential of transgenic plant technology to manage
and control important crop pests. These studies will address three main
objectives. First, pesticidal genes will be identified in the local bacterial
isolates and cloned in plant expression vectors under the control of specific
promoters. Secondly, bacterial pesticidal genes will be introduced and expressed
in Nicotiana tabaccum which will be used as a model plant system. Finally,
resultant transgenic plants will be examined for the level of expression of the
pesticidal genes and their insect resistance. The findings of these studies will
be a basis for extending transgenic plant technology to other agriculturally
important crops in Pakistan including rice, cotton and chick peas. It is
proposed that isolation, cloning and introduction of pesticidal genes into
plants will be done in Pakistan where Dr. Riazuddin's laboratory has the
required level of experience and where the necessary infrastructure exists.
However, the provision of expendable biologicals unavailable in Pakistan must be
ensured. Dr. Riazuddin or his associates will spend about three months in the
U.S. to obtain specialized training in the use of various promoters and amino
acid sequencing of purified pesticidal proteins. Work with such sequencing
methodologies is routine at Dr. Gordon's laboratory at the University of
Washington. Scope: The use of engineered plants to protect crops from insect
attack has great potential not only in Pakistan but throughout the developing
world for achieving effective, low cost, and environmentally acceptable pest
control. Unlike traditional strategies which use chemical insecticides,
biological control avoids the induction of downstream burdens on the
agricultural infra-structure. The proposed research is part of a major program
on transgenic plant technology currently being pursued at laboratories of the
Centre for Advanced Molecular Biology in Pakistan. With moderate dollar support,
there are many mutual benefits including provision of critical laboratory
materials that are not available in Pakistan, training in sophisticated
methodologies, the opportunity for U.S. scientists to engage in research,
teaching, the exchange of information on a topic of common interest, and the
promotion of the scientific relationship between the institutions. Locally, this
project has strong backing from Punjab University and from Pakistan's
agricultural planners.