* 9023082
* The Wisconsin Longitudinal Survey:  Adults As Parents and   Children at Age 50
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1993
* Robert Hauser, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 08/31/1993
* USD 50,000.00

This project continues a longitudinal study of 9000 men and women, first
interviewed as high school seniors in 1957. Subse- quent interviews in 1958,
1964, and 1975 have tracked family for- mation, entry and progression in the
labor force, and orientation to work and career. This survey, with respondents
now in their 50s, permits study of aging phenomena, retirements, grandchil-
dren, health, death of family members, wealth transfer, and stability or breakup
of marriages. In addition, 7500 siblings of the respondents will be interviewed,
providing information on the social context of ambition and other factors in
respondents' lives. The main goals of this project are (1) to identify and
measure characteristics of people, firms, and job type that influence chances of
employment; (2) to develop and extend mea- surement methods and models of
achievement and earnings; (3) to elaborate the effects of sibling influences on
achievement, social participation, well-being, health, success in child rear-
ing, providing for retirement, and patterns of health and mor- tality; (4) to
measure social and economic exchange relations with parents, children,
grandchildren, and siblings to assess consequences of those relationships for
well being. Results will improve sociological theories of stratification and
mobility, aging, and family processes, as well as having implications for
policies affecting the aging nature of the U.S. population.