* 9023640
* Determinations of the Products of Electron-Ion Recombinationfor Interstellar Ions
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/1991,04/30/1995
* Nigel Adams, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 04/30/1995
* USD 207,000.00

Dr. Adams will use the laboratory technique of flowing afterglow to create
electron-ion plasmas of those ions which take part in the synthesis of
interstellar molecules. Plasmas of sufficient density can be created to ensure
that these ions rapidly recombine by dissociative electron-ion recombination
before they can undergo further ion-neutral reactions. The rate coefficients for
the recombinations will be determined using a Langmuir probe for cases where the
data are not available in the literature. The neutral products will be
identified and their contribution to the product distribution will be determined
using the spectroscopic techniques of laser induced fluorescence, resonance
enhanced multi-photon ionization, vacuum ultraviolet absorption spectroscopy,
and emission spectroscopy. The data that Dr. Adams will obtain are critical for
establishing the ion-chemical routes for molecular synthesis in interstellar gas
clouds. With these data, the available theoretical models for molecular
synthesis can be used with confidence, an essential requirement if the
astronomical observations of molecular emissions and absorptions are to be used
to deduce many of the fundamental properties of the molecular clouds. The rate
data are also necessary for determining the viability of the current theories of
the recombination process.