* 9023776
* Labor Market Turnover and Self-Employment:                  An Empirical Analysis for the U.S. Using SIPP
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1995
* Theresa Devine, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* jerry blackmon
* 06/30/1995
* USD 102,642.00

It has long been agreed that understanding variation in job-exit, job-entry,
and job-to-job transitions among workers having different demographic and skill
characteristics is key to understanding variation in unemployment rates and the
distribution of income among major groups in the United States. More recently,
as self employment has increased, it has been recognized that discussions of
labor market activity should not be restricted to the wage-and-salary sector.
Limited information on employer-employee separations and self-employment
activity available in previously existing data sets has precluded adequate
measurement of labor market turnover for specific groups in the United States,
however, while non-representative sample designs have prevented analysis of
variation across all groups using even the limited measures available.
Systematic empirical analysis of underlying dynamic processes that existing
theories suggest might give rise to patterns of variation among individuals has
thus been constrained. This, in turn has further limited the development and
refinement of theory. The proposed research will provide the first comprehensive
measurement and analysis of job-entry, job- exit, and job-to-job transitions,
including transitions into and out of self-employment, for all major groups in
the United States population. It will exploit data from the Rectangular
Microdata files for the 1986 and 1987 Panels of the Survey of Income and Program
Participation (SIPP). For representative samples of the non-institutionalized
U.S. population, these Microdata Files provide detailed information on the
variables that are key to the measurement and analysis of labor market turnover.
The major drawback of the SIPP data is the complexity of the survey instruments
and the structure of the public use files, particularly when attempting to
exploit SIPP's longitudinal features. The planned research will enhance the data
for the 1986 and 1987 Panels by constructing detailed work histories from the
Microdata Files. The investigator is extremely knowledgeable about the
structure, content, and problems associated with the current SIPP data files,
and their restructuring into something more readily usable promises to be of
great value for the study of labor market dynamics.