* 9023955
* The Role of Concepts in Mathematical Knowledge
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/1991,12/31/1993
* Kenneth Manders, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 12/31/1993
* USD 20,000.00

Dr. Manders is developing a novel philosophical view of mathematical knowledge
that long-range intellectual accomplishment in mathematics consists primarily in
making things clear by appropriate use of concepts. Dr. Manders is extending
case studies testing explanations of how conceptual changes affect mathematical
understanding. The studies compare how given problems are dealt with in
different conceptual settings. They seek to account for historically observed
differences in understandability in the different settings by theoretical models
of conceptual settings and their relationships to each other. The studies
concern (a) algebraic reasoning in Cartesian geometry vs. traditional
figure=based geometrical reasoning; (b) the meta- mathematical notion of "model
completion" as a schematic paradigm for the historical development of the number
concept to include real and complex numbers, and for the movement from affine to
projective viewpoint in geometry; (c) the algebraic notion of "completion of a
partial group action" as a model for projective closure and conformal
compactification. For example, algebraic methods promote clarity in ceratin
phases of geometrical problem solving by allowing one to suppress irrelevant
geometric information. Figures must by their nature display this information,
whereas algebraic formulas need not. Such differences may be brought out by
systematically comparing the functioning of algebraic and figure-based
representation. They are expected to account for many of the historically
observed differences between Cartesian and traditional geometry.