* 9023323
* FAW:  Phonological Feature Interdependencies
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1991,12/31/1998
* Diana Archangeli, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 12/31/1998
* USD 250,000.00

Dr. Diana Archangeli will use a grant from the NSF Faculty Awards for Women
Program to continue her research in phonological theory, the theory governing
the sound systems of natural human languages. Atomic elements of phonological
theory are binary features, which in sets characterize the nature of a sound
segment. Several decades of research have fairly well established the inventory
of such features in human languages around the globe. The number of features,
however, is such as to permit many more combinations than there are actually
possible sound segments in the world's languages. Therefore in this respect
phonological theory is inadequately constrained. The aim of Dr. Archangeli's
research is to explore the possible applicability of one fundamental constraint
on feature combination which she has proposed, which she calls the "Grounding
Hypothesis". The GH rests on the fact that although the features are abstract
entities, they arise from and denote certain physical factors about deformations
of the oral cavity in the process of speech. The GH states that all possible
formal conditions on feature combinations follow from the physical content of
the factor which the feature denotes. This is far from a self-evident
proposition; in fact, it is controversial within the field. Dr. Archangeli,
however, has devised a research program to subject the GH to empirical tests
across a wide range of phenomena. Most immediately, the tests will involve
studying the sound systems of a number of languages of Indonesia, which have
interesting relevant phonological properties. She will then expand the research
to other languages, and to implications in such areas as language change and
language acquisition. Dr. Archangeli is a committed and successful teacher, who
is achieving a strong reputation for the number and quality of graduate students
studying with her. This FAW award will enable her to support some of these
students and involve them directly in her research program.