* 9023943
* Molecular Probes for the Study of Bacterial Iron Reduction  in Anaerobic Marine Environments, Marine Biotech Fellowship
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/1991,07/31/1993
* Thomas DiChristina, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Fellowship Award
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/1993
* USD 84,000.00

Iron reduction is an important ecological process in marine environments since
availability can be a limiting factor in both the primary productivity of
surface waters and the remineralization of organic matter in bottom sediments.
The primary objective of this project is to use molecular probes to study the
microbial ecology of iron-reducing bacteria in anaerobic marine environments.
Ferri-reductase antibody probes, ferri-reductase structural gene probes and
genera-specific rRNA probes will be constructed and used to determine: (1) the
distribution and (2) the environmental parameters which control expression of
iron reduction genes and enzymes in those environments. In order to construct
the ferri-reductase molecular probes, the project will initially focus on
understanding the process of microbial iron reduction. Shewanella putrefaciens
will be used as a model iron-reducing marine organism, selected largely because
it is commonly isolated from a variety of marine sources, and because of its
unique metabolic versatility: S. putrefaciens is capable of coupling the
oxidation of an extensive array of organic compounds to the reduction of many of
the respiratory electron acceptors found in marine environments including O2,
NO3-, NO2-, MnO2, SO32- and Fe(III). Preliminary molecular work has centered on
the isolation and characterization of mutant strains deficient in iron reduction
capability. The project will use complimentary genetic and biochemical
techniques to clone and characterize the genes and gene products involved in
expression of a functional ferri-reductase. Ferri-reductase antibody probes and
ferri- reductase structural gene probes will be constructed and used in
ecological studies to detect the presence of iron-reducing bacteria in marine
waters and sediments, and to determine which environmental parameters control
expression of iron reduction genes and enzymes in those environments. Results
from the project will provide details on the molecular biology and ecology of
microbially-mediated iron reduction in the marine environment.//