* 9023964
* Marine Biotech Fellowship:  Dietary Regulation of Gene      Expression During Opportunistic Growth in a Polychaete
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/1991,11/30/1993
* Adam Marsh, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute
* Fellowship
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/30/1993
* USD 84,000.00

In temperate ecosystems, most benthic communities exhibit between-year
variability in the seasonal appearance and abundance of their opportunistic
members. It seems likely that the life-history strategies of these organisms
directly regulates their growth and reproduction. This may result form annual
differences in the availability of dietary micronutrients. Opportunistic,
deposit-feeding polychaetes face a unique nutritional constraint: their small
body size limits the amount of assimilated materials they can store. They are
dependent on the immediate availabilities of their dietary requirements to fuel
their growth and reproduction. Although growth and reproduction in opportunists
in stimulated by food supply, little is known about the dietary components that
regulate how much and how fast an opportunist can grow. This project will assess
the potential for two micronutrients (vitamin D and the carotenoid, B-Carotene)
to stimulate somatic cell divisions at the gene transcription level in the
polycheate worm, Streblospio benedicti. The C-myc protooncogne will be used to
assay tissue responses to dietary composition immediately (0-24h) after feeding.
Quantifying c- myc mRNA transcript levels will provide an instantaneous snapshot
of cell division activity in a tissue sample. Relating tissue responses to a
life-history pattern of rapid growth and reproduction will primarily focus on
evaluating the potential for vitamin D or B-carotene to initiate and maintain
mitotic cycling independent of dietary composition.