* 9023978
* Mathematical Sciences: Institute for Mathematics and its    Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1998
* Robert Gulliver, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 02/28/1998
* USD 8,955,870.00

This project supports the research and programmatic activities of the Institute
for Mathematics and Its Applications located at the University of Minnesota. The
Institute for Mathematics and Its Applications (IMA) is a unique National
Science Foundation institute addressing a national need. The IMA is reviving and
strengthening the natural and historic ties between the mathematical sciences
and other sciences and engineering and between academic scholarship and
industrial research. The IMA programs identify problems and areas of
mathematical sciences research of concern to other sciences, encourage the
development and study of new areas of the mathematical sciences, and stimulate
collaboration between mathematical scientists and other scientists. The IMA
encourages participation of mathematical sciences in areas of application by:
providing an atmosphere conducive to the solution of major problems in various
areas of the mathematical sciences; presenting important scientific and
technological problems that provide real challenges to mathematical scientists;
and demonstrating that research in the mathematical sciences has significant
impact in science and engineering. Yearly IMA programs are carefully chosen to
provide a meeting ground for mathematical scientists with engineers and
scientists from academia, industry, and government laboratories. A year's topic
may be in an area of application which requires a number of different
mathematical fields, or it may be a broad area of the mathematical sciences
known to have applications in a number of scientific disciplines. A typical
yearly program is designed around a cadre of senior scientists who are in
residence for periods of three to ten months. These senior scientists provide
continuity for the program and scientific guidance for the postdoctoral members.
The mentoring of postdoctoral fellows is a key component of the IMA programs. In
addition to National Science Foundation support, the IMA is supported by 24
sponsoring universities and 13 sponsoring corporations.