* 9023177
* United States-Malaysia Seminar on Innovation and            Commercialization in Research, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia,      November 12-16, 1990
* O/D,OISE
* 10/15/1990,09/30/1992
* Malcolm McLaren, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 09/30/1992
* USD 43,868.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Malcolm G. McLaren, Director,
Institute for Engineered Materials, Rutgers University, to conduct with Dr.
Ahmad Tajuddin Ali, Controller, Standards and Industrial Research Institute of
Malaysia (SIRIM),the 1990 U.S.-Malaysia Seminar on Innovation and
Commercialization of Research, November 12-16, 1990, at Genting Highlands and
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. The joint seminar will involve eight U.S. participants,
who, with a like number of Malaysian participants, will address several topics
of mutual interest. A limited number of other Malaysian, ASEAN, and African
scientists/engineers will be invited to participate as observers. The purpose of
this seminar is to bring together for mutual benefit U.S. and Malaysian
scientists/engineers to exchange ideas on innovation and commercialization of
research and, within the scope of the seminar, to identify priority areas for
future U.S.-Malaysian research cooperation. The Malaysian economy has shown a
sustained rapid growth and diversification for most of the period from 1965 to
the present with the exception of a decline due to falling commodity prices in
1985 and 1986. Manufacturing has replaced agriculture as the Malaysian economy's
largest sector, but commodities account for 45 percent of that country's
exports. Through its "New Economic Policy" (NEP), Malaysia seeks to strengthen
its economy and become more competitive by using its labor community in a value-
added mode. Toward this end, Malaysia seeks technology transfer and a broader
use of science for development. The joint seminar will provide a unique
opportunity for U.S. scientists/engineers to gain an insight into the state of
development in Malaysia and the official policies which are guiding that rapid
development. It is expected that this seminar will be instrumental in fostering
future collaborative research that will be beneficial to the United States and
Malaysia. This project is relevant to the objectives of the Science in
Developing Countries Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation
between U.S. scientists and engineers and their counterparts in developing
countries through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and
techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. Support of
non-U.S. participants is provided from sources other than the National Science
Foundation.