* 9023579
* Structure and Rearrangements of Carbocations.  The Isotopic Perturbation Method
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1994
* Martin Saunders, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/1994
* USD 265,000.00

With support from the Organic Dynamics Program, Dr. Saunders will employ an
extension of his isotopic perturbation method to clarify details of bonding and
structure in carbocations. This approach, which takes advantage of the
cooperative effects of multiple specific deuteration, affords information which
cannot otherwise be obtained via observations made on molecules that are
substituted with a single isotopic atom. The experimental studies will be
supplemented by relevant ab initio quantum mechanical calculations. This will be
done to predict carbocation structures and energies and also to predict
equilibrium isotope effect values that can be compared with the corresponding
values obtained experimentally. The operation of cooperative effects of multiple
deuteration results in equilibrium isotope effects which are non-linear
functions of the number of interacting deuterium atoms. Rapid processes, which
can lead to non-linear isotope effects, include rotation around single bonds
(which varies dihedral angles between carbocation orbitals and neighboring C-H
and C-C bonds). The angular dependence of the isotope effects provides a highly
sensitive probe of hyperconjugative distortion of carbocation structures. Dr.
Saunders' research project is designed to improve our understanding of
carbocations, where partial bonding and stereospecific interactions of bonds
with cationic centers (i.e., hyperconjugation) play important roles. In recent
years, a combination of new developments in experimental methodology and
improvements in the quality of theoretical calculations has provided new insight
into structural details and energy surfaces for carbocationic rearrangement
processes. The present project focuses upon experimental extentions of Dr.
Saunders' "isotopic perturbation method" (in which multiple deuteration results
in cooperative effects that result in equilibrium isotope effects which are
nonlinear functions of the number of deuterium atoms).