* 9023861
* Proteins Required for Zygotic Nuclear Fusion
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/1991,08/31/1993
* E. Virginia Armbrust, Washington University
* Fellowship Award
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/1993
* USD 84,000.00

The long-term objectives of this project are to understand how haploid nuclei
within a newly formed zygote recognize each other as appropriate partners for
eventual fusion, how they move towards one another, and how the fusion event
itself is initiated. If any one of the preceding steps goes awry, the zygote can
not develop. The creation of a single diploid nucleus within the zygote
eliminates the last barriers to an intermingling of the chromosomes from two
different organisms and thus enables the generation of genetic diversity.
Despite its central importance, however, a detailed understanding of nuclear
fusion or karyogamy has only just begun. The specific aims of this proposal are:
to 1) immunolocalize the gene products of two zygote-specific cDNAs which are
candidates for involvement in nuclear fusion in the unicellular alga,
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii and 2) to screen C. reinhardtii libraries for
sequences that are homologous to the yeast KAR genes already implicated in this
process. The first goal will be accomplished by generating antibodies against
fusion proteins created using an expression vector that positions a collagen
linker between B-galactosidase and the cDNA of interest. These antibodies will
then be used to immunolocalize their respective proteins within the developing
zygote. It is hypothesized that at least one of the polypeptides will localize
solely to the endoplasmic reticulum and the nuclear envelope due to its
involvement in the fusion of the haploid nuclei. The second goal will be
achieved by generating oligonucleotides based on the predicted amino acid
sequences of the yeast KAR genes and then screening C. reinhardtii libraries for
the presence of similar sequences. It will then be possible to determine during
which developmental stages these genes are expressed and whether their function
in C. reinhardtii is homologous to that in yeast.