* 9023561
* Faculty Awards for Women Scientists and Engineers (FAW)
* EHR,HRD
* 11/01/1991,04/30/1997
* Carolyn Meyers, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 04/30/1997
* USD 250,000.00

Structure-property relationships in engineering materials is the broad area of
interest of the P.I. Current work falls into three categories: solidification
processing of alloys and metal-matrix composites, toughening mechanisms in
nonferrous alloys and ceramic composites, and the study of the structural
changes in friction materials. Analytical work in the area of solidification
processing has focused on the two dimensional simulation of the phenomenon of
microsegregation in alloy castings. Finite element and finite difference
techniques are employed to investigate transient temperature and composition
profiles and to determine the interface morphology for alloys and pure metals,
including natural convection effects, the heat storage effect in the mold media,
and the dissipation of the surface wave during mold filling. The algorithms,
developed from first principles of mass, momentum and energy, yield results
which agree well with those reported in the literature. Future plans in this
area involve the extension of this work to three dimensions and the placement of
reinforcing fibers in the mushy zone of the alloy during the solidification
simulation. Combined analytical and experimental techniques are employed to
study the deformation and toughening mechanism in ceramic matrix composites. The
results of the limited experimental investigations are used in the two
dimensional finite element model of the crack intersecting a single fiber in the
composite. In the third category during the application of friction, the
materials experience local hot spots which themselves cause changes in the
structure of the materials. The characterization of these changes and their
effect on the production of noise during braking are being studied using semimet
materials.