* 9023848
* Materials Research Laboratory in Polymers at the University of Massachusetts
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1991,02/28/1995
* David Tirrell, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Cooperative Agreement
* W. Lance Haworth
* 02/28/1995
* USD 4,291,000.00

The Materials Research Laboratory (MRL) at the University of Massachusetts -
Amherst supports interactive, interdisciplinary research in polymer science and
engineering organized into three major thrust areas. Thrust research on pattern
formation in polymer systems has evolved from earlier work in the MRL on polymer
blends. It focusses on structure and pattern formation in multiphase polymer
systems, including both blends and liquid crystals. Researchers in the thrust
area on polymers in restricted geometries are synthesizing and characterizing
novel polymeric films and surfaces, investigating their corresponding
properties, and studying polymer adsorption processes. A new thrust on ordered
polymeric solids is devoted to novel approaches to polymer synthesis,
characterization of new periodic polymer morphologies, processing and property
prediction. A major emphasis is placed on novel polymers of precisely defined
structure produced by incorporating biochemical techniques into the synthetic
procedures. The MRL also supports the development, maintenance and operation of
central research facilities for characterization, morphology and rheology
determination, spectroscopy, and computation. It also provides seed funding for
exploratory research and new initiatives in materials research, and supports
programs to foster increased participation by minorities and to provide
experience in polymer research for undergraduates. The research program
currently involves 19 faculty members from four departments, 3 postdoctoral
research associates, 19 graduate students and 15 undergraduates, and supporting
technical and clerical staff. The MRL at the University of Massachusetts,
Amherst is directed by Professor David A. Tirrell.