* 9023513
* FAW:  Specification and Analysis Methodology for Safety-          Critical Software
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1991,10/31/1993
* Nancy Leveson, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 10/31/1993
* USD 100,000.00

The research goal is to build a specification and analysis methodology for
safety-critical software. Although past research included techniques to enhance
safety throughout the software development process, the recognition that most
accidents can be traced back to inadequate requirements and design foresight has
led to concentration on the early parts the software life cycle. This work will
build an integrated set of software requirements and design methods and
techniques to increase confidence in the safety of software requirements and
design methods and techniques to increase confidence in the safety of software
that is controlling critical systems such as aircraft and other transportation
systems, medical devices, and nuclear power plants. It will lead to better
understanding what is required to provide a "safety analyst's workbench" that
would allow software and systems engineers to build models and perform a variety
of analyses on the software requirements and design in order to predict and
verify a wide range of software properties during development. The above goals
will be pursued within the context of a real, safety- critical avionics
(Collision Avoidance of TCAS) system in order to provide a testbed to validate
practicality, effectiveness, and feasibility as the hypotheses and ideas are
generated and to keep the research on a track toward realistic and usable
results. The testbed approach will allow evaluation of alternatives in a
realistic setting, altering directions when necessary, and validating and
demonstrating results on a real system.