* 9023467
* A New n-CuInSe Based Photovoltaic Cell With an              Electrochemically Formed p-(CuIn2S3I)-CuISe3 Window
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1994
* Shalini Menezes, InterPhases Solar, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 01/31/1994
* USD 224,983.00

CuInSe2 has been targeted as the major photovoltaic material, but the efforts at
utilizing its optimum properties have not been extended to n-CuInSe2 due to lack
of an appropriate p-type window material. In Phase I, we established the
feasibility of fabricating a new n-CuInSe2-based thin film solar cell by using a
novel concept of electrochemical surface conversion to p-(CuIn2Se3I)-CuISe3 to
form of a n/p heterojunction. The cell performance was primarily determined by
the quality of the n-CuInSe2 films and to a lesser extent by the window layer
growth parameters. The window layer composition and morphology can be controlled
with electrolyte composition. The Phase II effort is aimed at in- depth
investigation of the properties n-CuInSe2 and the window layer, the surface
conversion mechanism and the opto-electronic properties of the n/p junction.
These studies are essential for the development and optimization of the cell
components, processing and operation. In addition to processing, cost and
environmental advantages, inherent in this simple electrochemical approach to
heterojunction formation, several other benefits are anticipated for the title
cell over the present p-CuInSe2/n-CdS cell. Optimum lattice match between
CuInSe2 and CuIn2Se3I transition layer, low interface state density, higher
electron mobility in n-type absorber, improved adhesion to ITO/Glass substrate,
greater stability due to similar components (except I) on both sides of the
junction should lead to a more efficient and stable solar cell.