* 9024880
* CRB:  Potential Effects of Ultraviolet Radiation on         Amphibian Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1995
* Andrew Blaustein, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 06/30/1995
* USD 272,000.00

An unprecedented loss of the variety and numbers of plant and animals species
around the world is occurring. Habitat destruction, over-harvesting, chemical
pollution, introduced exotic species, and climatic change are among the major
threats to living species. In particular, many species of amphibians are
undergoing drastic population declines and range reductions. The amphibian
declines are especially perplexing because many species are disappearing in
pristine habitats. Atmospheric factors, perhaps acting with other agents, may be
contributing to the declines. Using amphibians, Dr. Blaustein and his colleagues
propose to investigate one potential atmospheric source of biological trauma,
ultraviolet radiation (UV), that may have significant biological effects
ultimately contributing to population declines. Amphibians are excellent
"bioindicators" of environmental change, due in part to their relatively thin,
permeable and unprotected skin. The decline in amphibians may be an early
warning signal and ultimately, other organisms, including humans, may be in
peril. Results should yield information with broad implications regarding the
potential for atmospheric effects on other organisms. The investigation will be
focused at several levels of biological organization including molecular,
individual, and population levels. Laboratory and field experiments will examine
the effects of natural levels of UV on developing tadpoles and on the
reproductive physiology of adult frogs. How UV-damaged DNA is repaired will also
be examined. An ecological survey of declining species will be conducted to
document their overall population status. This is one of the first studies to
incorporate field experiments to investigate the effects of UV on development in
wild vertebrates. Since conditions likely to promote increased UV are becoming
manifest, it is important to examine whether natural levels of UV have begun to
affect the more sensitive animals, like amphibians, so that steps can be taken
to reduce a potentially serious environmental threat.