* 9024557
* Collaborative Research: Solving Chess with Probabilistic    Planning and Control
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1992
* Stuart Russell, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Su-Shing Chen
* 08/31/1992
* USD 9,496.00

This is collaborative research with Hans Berliner at Carnegie Mellon University
(IRI-9105202). Game-playing is an important domain for two reasons: first, it
exhibits in a clean form two of the major problems facing AI systems, namely how
to pay attention to only a small fraction of the possibilities in complex
domains, and how to use a large quantity of evidential information to make
decisions; second, it has long been considered a litmus test for ideas about
problem solving and for the quality of AI ideas in general, particularly in
comparison to human intelligence. Recent work on control of search by Russell
and Wefald and on probabilistic inference in problem solving domains by Hansson
and Mayer, suggests that the PI's will be able to break the grip of brute-force
methods on high-performance systems. The object of the proposed research is to
test out these ideas, with a view to demonstrating feasibility of an intelligent
chess program with the potential to perform at a high level. Should the effort
succeed, the PI's will continue with a concerted attempt to defeat the human
world champion. The purely scientific benefits should be significant, in terms
of demonstrating the feasibility of large-scale probabilistic inference and
metalevel control; the benefits to the field of AI in the larger national
context will be immeasurable, since several influential critics will be
disarmed, and success will avoid the extremely deleterious conclusion the "all
your need for AI is faster chips".