* 9024634
* CCD-Scanning for Comets and Asteroids, U.S.-India           Cooperative Research
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1995
* Tom Gehrels, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/28/1995
* USD 7,450.00

Technical Description: This proposal seeks funding for a small portion of an
Indo-U.S. collaborative effort that has begun building a capability of
astronomical observation of comets and asteroids at the Kavalur Observatory,
Indian Institute of Astrophysics in Bangalore. This program has been undertaken
in consultation with Dr. Tom Gehrels and staff at the University of Arizona,
Tucson. The proposed Indian system will emulate the Spacewatch system for
astroid exploration that Dr. Gehrels has pioneered at the Steward observatory.
This proposal will allow for closer collaboration with the Indian participants
and in addition to their annual visits to Tuscon will provide them with the
necessary computer software, hardware, and procedures for for their own
Spacewatch System. The system requires continuous updates and immediate
communication with India particularly for discoveries of near-Earth asteroids.
The study of asteroids has become a well established discipline, important for
the understanding of our origins as well as for the dynamical evolution of near-
Earth objects. The relationship between asteroids, comets and meteorites is an
area of major scientific interest that has become enhanced through the use of
charge- coupled devices (CCD) for scanning rather than photographic scanning.
Scope: A program of asteroid exploration is important not only for the
interesting scientific information but also as a base of knowledge to begin the
exploitation of non-terrestrial resources. These may provide sources of water
and metals or even such economically important resources such as cobalt and
platinum. An increase in the number of telescopes in the world that can do this
kind of work can lead to important discoveries. The facility in India will be
world-class and the capability will be there for making a significant
contribution. This program will facilitate the transfer of knowledge from other
countries to India, because the India Institute for Astrophysics (IIA) will have
very capable hardware and software, which will attract scientists throughout the
world.