* 9024980
* CRB:  Experimental Tests of Genetic Management Programs for Captive Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1995
* Edwin Bryant, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 08/31/1995
* USD 260,000.00

Many threatened and endangered species are being maintained in captive breeding
populations, as a method for preserving them for later reintroduction to native
habitats. Most captive populations have not only been initiated but also
maintained in relatively small numbers, so a major concern of captive breeders
has been to reduce further erosion of evolutionary adaptability by maintaining
maximal genetic variation in the populations. The effects of various breeding
programs or even small population size per se on maintenance of genetic
variation and/or evolutionary adaptability has not been adequately tested, so we
really do not know which breeding programs are best to maintain evolutionarly
viable populations. Evidence has accumulated, for example, that traits important
to survival and reproduction in a species may be affected by reduced population
size in markedly different ways than traits currently being assessed in captive
populations. Specifically, using an experimental organism Dr. Bryant will
investigate the impact of diverse breeding protocols on the genetic variation,
current health, and future adaptability of captive populations. Decisions
regarding breeding programs are currently being made that will irreversibly
affect the future of endangered species, and this study will provide critical
information to make appropriate decisions concerning the welfare of these
species.