* 9024876
* Systematic Studies of Grain Boundaries and Properties in    Polymer Bicrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1991,07/30/1994
* David Martin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 07/30/1994
* USD 180,000.00

They propose a scheme to construct and characterize the structure and properties
of polymer grain boundaries in a controlled manner. The essential idea is to
carefully and systematically establish the influence of well-defined, specific
grain boundary defects on the physical properties of polymers. Conventionally
processed crystalline polymers have small crystallites (10-20 nm), which implies
a large defect density in the solid state. Although this means that structural
defects play an important or even dominant role in polymer systems, it also
makes it difficult to isolate the effect of a particular devect on a
macroscopically observed property. However, the development of solid-state and
thin-film polymerization mechanisms have facilitated the synthesis of highly
organized and ordered polymers. These systems provide a unique opportunity to
isolate and investigate in detail the structure of covalently bonded solids near
defects and the effect of these defects on the properties of the material. They
will examine structure-property relationships in poly(diacetylene) thin films
and crystals. They describe procedures for growing crystals of diacetylene
monomers, joining these together to make a grain boundary, and then polymerizing
through the grain boundary by exposure to Co60 radiation. With this approach it
will be possible to prepare "polymer bicrystals". A simple scheme for measuring
the photoconductive response of these bicrystals will be used, a transport
property which should depend on the structure of the boundary. Structural
characterization involving X-ray scattering and Transmission Electron Microscopy
(TEM) will be also carried out.