* 9024579
* 1991 Meeting of CODATA Task Group on Biological Macro-      molecules, Georgetown University, Washington, D.C., March   13-16, 1991
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1991,02/29/1992
* Winona Barker, National Biomedical Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Peter Arzberger
* 02/29/1992
* USD 24,000.00

The Committee on Data for Science and Technology (CODATA) was established in
1966 by the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU). Working on an
interdisciplinary basis, CODATA seeks to improve the quality, reliability,
processing, management, and accessibility of data of importance to science and
technology. The CODATA Task Group on Coordination of Protein Sequence Data Banks
was established in 1984 to provide a forum to gather information on existing
protein databases and to further stimulate international cooperation in the
development and operation of such databases. In 1988 the scope of the task group
was expanded to include other macromolecular databases and the group was
reconstituted as the CODATA Task Group on Biological Macromolecules. Its mission
is to promote cooperation among biomolecular databases. To this end, the Task
Group meets annually. The 1991 meeting, to be held at Georgetown University,
will allow an international gathering of experts to exchange ideas on the
meeting's general theme: a rational approach towards the development of
infrastructures for the accumulation, integration, and dissemination of
biological information. In additional to the general theme, sessions will be
dedicated to discussions of NMR databases, structural databases, sequence
databases, and emergent databases. A session will also be devoted to planning
the continuing activities of the task group.