* 9024198
* Documenting Multi-Institutional Collaborations, Phase II: A Case Study in Space Science and Geophysics
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1991,08/31/1994
* Spencer Weart, American Institute of Physics
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 08/31/1994
* USD 140,000.00

The process of large-scale collaborative research is not well understood by
historians, sociologists and other scholars. Nor do scientists, research
administrators and the public possess any of the systematic analysis of this
centrally important activity. Under this grant, Ms. Warnow is continuing her
study of the problems of documenting the history of large collaborations in
physics and allied sciences. Currently their administrative and intellectual
records are widely dispersed and often discarded. Until the documentation has
been secured it will be impossible for scholars to study the collaborative
research project. Under her prior grants, Ms. Warnow has studied the patterns of
team formation, funding, communication, delegation of responsibility, and
publication, as well as the creation and retention of records in the area of
high energy physics. Under this grant, Ms. Warnow is trying to determine how far
insights from high energy physics extend to other fields of science.
Specifically, she is undertaking a two year study of space science and
geophysics. She is directing a group of researchers who will (1) conduct a
computerized statistical census of a large number of collaborations, (2)
interview some 150-200 members of a selected sample of collaborations involving
satellites, planetary spacecraft, oceanographic expeditions, and other system
for data-gathering (drill holes and seismic networks and arrays), and (3)
conduct detailed historical probes of a few especially important cases. The aim
is to identify patterns of collaboration, define the documentation problems,
field-test possible solutions to these problems, and recommend actions to
facilitate future scholarly study. The PI and other AIP staff will be joined by
archivists, historians, and sociologists; distinguished scientists,
administrators, and other specialists are serving as advisors on the project.