* 9024845
* Photochemical and Photophysical Mechanisms of Transition    Metal Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/1991,03/31/1995
* Peter Ford, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 03/31/1995
* USD 408,000.00

Dr. Peter C. Ford of the Chemistry Department, University of California at Santa
Barbara, is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program
for studies of the photochemical properties of some organometallic and
coordination compounds of transition metals. The first study will explore
physical and chemical excited state deactivation pathways of luminescent
compounds, including rhodium amines, chromium acetylacetonate derivatives,
copper amines and thiocarbamates, and some inclusion compounds. Accompanying
theoretical models will be developed. The second study is concerned with
determining the chemical reactivities of short-lived organometallic
intermediates produced as the primary photoproducts of excited stae reactions.
The cluster fragmentation of triangulo-dodecacarbonyltriruthenium(0) and a
related alkylidyne cluster will be investigated in detail. The third project is
an initial photochemical study of nitroprusside, focused especially on the
release of nitrosyl. Laser flash photolysis and luminescence spectroscopy are
among the techniques which will be used. %%% These studies will provide
fundamental information on mechanism and dynamics of excited state processes
that will be useful in inorganic photochemistry and more generally in molecular
engineering. Quantitative information regarding excited states of metal
complexes will be obtained. The work is relevant to nonlinear optics, optical
memory devices, photocatalysis, and biomedical problems.