* 9024674
* U.S.-Western Europe Cooperative Research on Single-Nucleon  Wave Functions and Reaction Mechanisms for Single-Nucleon   Knockouts
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1994
* R Hicks, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 01/31/1994
* USD 10,850.00

This award supports Dr. R. S. Hicks and others of the Medium Energy Nuclear
Physics Group of the University of Massachusetts to collaborate with physicists
from Sweden, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom in an experiment to be
carried out using the continuous photon beam produced by the University of Lund
accelerator facility. Comparable beams of known-energy photons are currently not
available in the United States. The main European collaborators are Dr. G. van
der Steenhoven, principal spokesperson of a Dutch group primarily from the
National Institute for Nuclear and High Energy Physics, D. Branford and D.G.
Ireland of Edinburgh University, and B. Schroeder of the Photonuclear Reactions
Group, University of Lund. The primary objective of this nuclear physics
experiment is to improve the understanding of mechanisms by which nucleons are
ejected from the nucleus as a result of an electromagnetic interaction with an
incident electron or gamma ray. Specifically, the cooperating scientists will
measure the momentum vectors of protons ejected from the nucleus as a result of
the absorption by the nucleus of photons of known energy. This study should give
fresh insights into reaction mechanisms for single-nucleon knockout in the
kinematic region where meson exchange currents and short-range interactions are
important. Such an understanding is required in order to correctly interpret
certain reactions to obtain comprehensive and detailed information on the
distributions of single nucleons inside nuclei.