* 9024695
* Upper Ocean Current and Temperature Measurements in the     Western Weddell Sea
* O/D,OPP
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1994
* Laurence Padman, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 12/31/1994
* USD 338,782.00

This project is part of an integrated research program into the oceanographic
structure of the western Weddell Sea. It is to be carried out from an ice camp
jointly occupied by U.S. and USSR scientists from February to June 1992. The
work proposed here is an effort to measure vertical profiles of velocity and
temperature using an acoustic doppler current profiler (ADCP) and a string of
twelve internally recording temperature sensors, as well as a Rapid Sampling
Vertical Profiler, a tethered sensor system that free falls through the upper
250 meters of the ocean. The upper ocean is a relatively active zone where
turbulent motion is produced both by shear flow and by the movement of sea ice
through the water. The objective is to study how turbulent energy is created and
destroyed by the exchange of momentum and energy across density surfaces in the
upper mixed layer, by shear induced mixing, and by the differential diffusion of
heat and salt. The frequent and quasi-continuous current profiles produced by
the ADCP will be used to define the internal gravity wave field, and how gravity
waves are affected by the bottom topography. When supplemented by information on
the regional temperature structure of the upper ocean, the observations will
allow a separation of the barotropic and baroclinic component of the surface
currents.