* 9024381
* Jhe Role of Mesozooplankton in the Biological Pump of the   Central Equatorial Pacific Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/1991,03/31/1995
* Michael Roman, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/1995
* USD 466,331.00

This project constitutes a part of the United States Joint Global Ocean Flux
Study to be conducted in the Central Equatorial Pacific in 1992. Metazoan
zooplankton have been identified as the most likely agents for particle
transformation and subsequent export of organic matter to deeper ocean layers.
thus, understanding the functioning and assessing the efficiency of the
biological pump, that is the downward fluxes of carbon and nitrogen resulting
from the balance of production and consumption of biological material by the
pelagic community, requires knowledge of the rates at which zooplankton consume
and transform suspended particles. This project will examine in detail the role
of metazoa zooplankton in the biological pump of the central equatorial Pacific
Ocean. Sophisticated techniques will be used to assess the variability in the
upper 200 m of mesozooplankton biomass, grazing rates and fecal matter
production rates. Size specific and community based rates of phytoplankton
consumption will be compared with phytoplankton production and fecal matter
production will be related to particulate organic carbon and nitrogen flux to
establish what percentage of the photosynthetically fixed carbon is ingested and
potentially exported to deeper zones. this project will provide critical
information necessary to quantify the flow of carbon and nitrogen in the upper
layers of the central equatorial Pacific.