* 9024670
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research in Ceramics and Holography
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1996
* Ray Carpenter, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 01/31/1996
* USD 11,485.00

This award supports Dr. R. W. Carpenter, Director of the Center for Solid State
Science, Arizona State University (ASU), to link the work of his research group
in two related lines of materials science with two outstanding German research
groups, the ceramics research laboratory of the German Aerospace Research
Establishment (DFVLR), headed by Dr. Wolfgang Braue, and a group headed by Dr.
Hannes Lichte of the University of Tubingen. With DFVLR, the ASU group will
investigate the relationships among structures and properties and processing in
structural ceramics. With Dr. Lichte, they will pursue a direct experimental
investigation of conventional and holographic high resolution electron imaging
of crystal lattice defects in specimens important for materials science. In both
projects common specimens will be used for particular parts of each project. It
is well known and central to materials science that the microstructure of all
material objects such as structural ceramics or solid state electronic materials
is quite dependent on the synthesis process. Arizona State University has novel
and uncommon capabilities for analyzing the geometry of microstructures. DFVLR
has unusual capabilities for processing and analyzing and measuring the
properties of ceramics from starting materials through finished structural
materials. This unique array of capabilities at the two cooperating laboratories
enables detailed and controlled study of microstructural properties and their
relationship to processing in this important class of structural materials.
Collaboration with the group at the University of Tubingen focuses on the need
to obtain better spatial resolution in the imaging of defects in crystal
lattices to advance the frontiers of materials science research. Lattice
defects, or interruptions in the periodicity of crystals, such as grain
boundaries and interfaces, have major influences on the properties of materials.
These are not easily predicted from theory, and experimental data are badly
needed. The University of Tubingen possesses capability for electron holographic
high resolution imaging. However, the apparently greatly enhanced data on
lattice defects obtained by this new experimental method must be interpreted and
compared to the most closely related data obtainable by existing and reliable
methods. ASU possesses state of the art conventional high resolution electron
microscopes that can be used for this purpose.