* 9024116
* The Political Economy of the Local Market for Public Goods: The Role of Entrepreneurs
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1994
* Mark Schneider, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 03/31/1994
* USD 127,776.00

Standard theories of the provision of municipal services hold that market
forces operate to ensure the efficient provision of these public goods. The
argument is that a market is created as citizens "shop around" among different
municipalities deciding to settle down and live in the municipality that
provides the best combination of high services/low taxes for the individual
citizen. Underlying this theory, however, are contrary to evidence assumptions
that most citizens are well informed about municipal services and taxes and that
it is relatively easy for individuals to move from one community to another in
search of the optimal combination. This award supports an ambitious program of
research to test and refine the standard Tiebout model of urban political
economy and the assumptions underlying it. The investigators will conduct a
series of surveys to determine the role of individuals, businesses, and
governments in the creation of efficient local markets for public goods. In
particular, they will examine the possibility that a subsample of the public
exists which is much better informed and more mobile than the norm and whose
members serve, in effect, as mobility entrepreneurs, creating markets by their
actions which benefit automatically other residents of the community. The
project also considers the possibility that politicians play active roles in
creating markets by competing both for certain kinds of business and certain
kinds of citizens as well. When completed this research should provide a better
understanding of the dynamics that underlie the provision of municipal services
in the United States. It should thereby establish a more rigorous, empirical
basis for judging the efficiency and effectiveness of the provision of public
goods by local governments.