* 9024580
* Dissertation Research: Complementary Approaches to          Subsistence Studies in Northwest India
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1991,12/31/1992
* NONE NONE, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1992
* USD 11,920.00

Under the direction of Dr. J.M. Kenoyer, Professor of Anthropology at the
University of Wisconsin, Ms Seetha Reddy will collect data for her doctoral
dissertation. She will conduct a range of analyses to explain a change in
settlement pattern which took place during Harrapan times, between 2500 and 1700
B.C. Archaeological evidence indicates that over this interval a shift occurred
and many settlements were established in arid areas in Northern India which had
been avoided up to that point. Ms Reddy postulates that changes in agricultural
practices allowed this to occur. She believes that farmers began to plant
drought resistant millet crops as a supplement to the species already employed
and that these millets were used not primarily for human consumption but rather
as livestock fodder. To evaluate this hypothesis, she plans to collect three
types of data. First, isotopic analysis will be conducted on animal bones from
sites which span this period. Changes in carbon isotopes can be used to infer
dietary changes. Secondly, Ms Reddy will conduct ethnographic research to look
at livestock management practices in the region today. Finally, she will study
botanical remains recovered from relevant archaeological sites to determine both
species present and methods of processing. This research is important for
several reasons. Archaeologists want to know how complex societies develop and
decline. The Harrapan culture reached the level of a "civilization" before it
disappeared and it is unclear what accounted for this phenomenon. Ms Reddy's
work should provide insight. Secondly, the project will provide very useful data
on human adaptation at a technologically simple level to semiarid environments.
Harrapan peoples developed efficient ways to subsist in this situation and
increased understanding of these may produce practical benefits. Finally ,this
research will assist in the training of an extremely promising young scientist.