* 9024726
* U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research:  Hydrogen Evolution by    Actinorhizal Root Nodules
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1991,10/31/1992
* Lawrence Winship, Hampshire College
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 10/31/1992
* USD 16,050.00

This award will support collaborative research in cellular biochemistry between
Dr. Lawrence Winship, Hampshire College and Dr. Kerstin Huss-Danell, Department
of Plant Physiology, University of Umea, Sweden. The objective of the proposed
research is to examine hydrogen evolution by actinorhizal root nodules. Nitrogen
fixation (acetylene reduction) by actinorhizal root nodules is sensitive to
changes in temperature, oxygen concentration and photosynthate supply. Each of
these parameters alters the balance between oxygen diffusion into and
consumption by nodules. A mechanism to protect nitrogenase from inactivation by
excess oxygen as the environment changes must exist, so that the supply of fixed
nitrogen to the plant can continue. Adaptive mechanisms include a variable
nodule diffusion barrier and conforma- tional protection of nitrogenase. The
investigators will use a unique HUP- alder symbiosis and a continuous-flow, open
gas exchange system to follow in vivo nitrogenase activity and respiration. The
environmental variables to be tested include oxygen concentration and
temperature; measurements will include estimations of nodule gas diffusion
properties, assays of nitrogenase in vitro, and immunoassays of the levels of
the protein components of the nitrogenase systems. The project will benefit from
the mutual expertise of the two investigators: Dr. Winship has extensive
experience in conducting measurements of environmental effects on nitrogenase
activity in intact plants, while Dr. Huss-Danell is well known for her studies
on the physio- logical factors that affect reduction in root nodules. The
results of this research will contribute to the understanding of the physiology
of nitrogen-fixing actinorhizal plants.