* 9024946
* Strategies for Using Advanced Computer Architectures in     Designing Complex Chemical Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1994
* Mark Stadtherr, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 12/31/1994
* USD 150,000.00

The design, simulation, and optimization of complex chemical processes, whether
steady-state or unsteady-state, can be made much more effective by the
exploitation of machines that use advanced- computer architectures, such as
those using vector and parallel processing. However, to take full advantage of
such architectures, the formulation of the process flowsheeting problem, and,
more importantly, the solution algorithms used to solve these problems, must be
totally reworked. This is an important challenge and opportunity in the area of
chemical process design. By using techniques developed for these architectures
truly interactive design capabilities can be achieved that will greatly enhance
the productivity of the design engineer and thus produce designs that are safer,
more efficient and less costly. Strategies are developed for most effectively
taking advantage of advanced computer architectures for the steady-state and
unsteady state design, simulation and optimization of complex chemical processes
using the equation-based approach. The techniques involve new, and sophisticated
reordering methods for the sparse matrix problem that underlies chemical process
simulation, as well as many other new ideas for the solution of these problems.
Such techniques are being implemented on a wide variety of advanced-architecture
machines.