* 9024235
* Three-Dimensional Nonlinear Adaptive Finite Element Studies:Applications To The Behavior Of Soft Hydrated Tissues And   Diarthrodial Joints
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1991,06/30/1993
* Mark Shephard, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* George K. Lea
* 06/30/1993
* USD 160,000.00

This project is an interdisciplinary effort on the study of diarthrodial joint
biomechanics utilizing automated and adaptive nonlinear three-dimensional finite
element analysis (FEA) to describe the actual anatomic geometries and biphasic
properties of articular cartilage on the joint surface. Significant recent
advances have been made in the development of: 1) mixture constitutive equations
to describe the behaviors of hydrated soft tissues; 2) finite element
formulations for these mixture equations; 3) the boundary conditions between the
synovial fluid and the articular surface; and 4) the determination of three-
dimensional anatomic geometry of joints. What is now required is a comprehensive
undertaking for the development of computational mechanics methods leading to an
automated and adaptive finite element numerical model for the deformational
response of diarthrodial joints. Thus the fundamental studies will focus on the
development of the 1) FEA of three-dimensional problems utilizing the nonlinear
finite deformation biphasic laws for articular cartilage; 2) automated and
adaptive methods for the generation of two-dimensional and three-dimensional
meshes required for the FEA to account for known singular boundary layer
effects; and 3) interface for the ditigal stereophotogrammetric (SPG) anatomic
data with the automatic mesh generation in our 3-D FEA meshes. These studies
will provide significant advances toward a precise 3-D simulation of
biomechanical problems related to diarthrodial joints, with realistic loading
conditions, joint geometries, loads, and constituent material properties.
Ultimately, these fundamental studies can provide an understanding of the
complex biomechanical behaviors of normal and pathological human joints, as well
as the possibility of the development of new interactive computer programs for
imaging and diagnostic techniques to develop new clinical treatment modalities.