* 9024100
* The East Greenland Fjord-Shelf-Slope Continuum: Late        Quaternary Variations in Sediment Flux and Accumulation     with Time and Space
* O/D,OPP
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1994
* Kerstin Williams, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 06/30/1994
* USD 287,863.00

This award supports marine geologic research to document sediment flux and
accumulation on the proximal (fjord/shelf) environments off Kangerdlugssuaq
Fjord, East Greenland, and to compare these with similar shelf/fjord
environments along the Eastern Canadian Arctic margin and with margins of the
Nordic Seas (as part of the international PONAM Project). This research will
emphasize the study of present-day sediment processes and fluxes within this
fjord and will develop a model of variations in sediment fluxes and physical and
biological composition since the late glacial. This work will also emphasize the
paleoceanographic and paleoclimatic variations with time. The research will
target opal and diatom flux as well as benthic foraminifera as indicators of
change in surface water productivity and bottom water conditions. A
reconnaissance cruise to the fjord and inner shelf in the autumn 1991, on an
Icelandic research vessel, will provide preliminary data regarding the sea floor
morphology, shallow seismic structure, surface sediment characteristics, bio-
and lithostratigraphy, sedimentology, stratigraphy, hydrology and suspended
matter. A second cruise, on the Canadian research vessel Hudson, in 1992 will
obtain side- scan sonar data, additional high-resolution Huntec DTS stratigraphy
of the fjord basin, and long cores that will allow further delineation of the
relationships between the seismic and core stratigraphy.