* 9024541
* US-UK Cooperative Research:  Investigation of Hydrolytic    Enzyme Production by Ectomycorrhizae Collected in Different Age Forest Stands
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1991,11/30/1993
* Robert Antibus, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 11/30/1993
* USD 12,340.00

This award will support collaborative research in ecology between Dr. Robert
Antibus, Clarkson University and Dr. John Dighton, Merlewood Research Station,
Institute of Terrestrial Ecology, Cumbria, England. The objective of the project
is to investigate hydrolytic enzyme production by ectomycorrhizae collected in
different age forest stands. Mycorrhizae are mutualistic associations formed
between roots of higher plants and fungi. Most commercially important temperate
zone trees form ectomycorrhizae. Numerous species of fungi are capable of
forming ectomycor- rhizae with a particular tree species. However, little is
known about factors that affect fungal distribution and how different fungi
influence tree growth. The concept of ectomycorrhizal fungal succession has
recently been studied by researchers in England. They have shown that as trees
age, the species of ectomycorrhizal fungi fruiting in a stand change. The
proposed studies will be conducted in different age class stands of Sitka spruce
in England. Dr. Dighton at the Merlewood Research Station has collected
background data on these stands for several years. During this project, Dr.
Antibus will spend two field seasons at Merlewood. The proposed work will bring
together Dr. Antibus' expertise in ectomycorrhizal enzyme research with Dr.
Dighton's work on fungal succession and phosphorus uptake in relation to tree
nutrition. Valuable information will be gained from this study relative to the
function of ectomycorrhizae in forest nutrient cycles. The information obtained
and methods applied will be important to forest ecologists and managers in many
parts of the world.