* 9024434
* Numerical Studies of the Interaction of Mesoscale           Convective Systems With the Tropical Ocean-Atmosphere       Environment
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1991,08/31/1996
* Thomas Warner, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 08/31/1996
* USD 778,000.00

This project is a model-based scientific investigation with several tasks that
directly support TOGA/COARE objectives. Mesoscale model development and testing
will be focussed in two areas. First, the convective parameterization in the
Penn State/NCAR mesoscale model will be tested for the equatorial maritime
region of the TOGA COARE IOP, and modified appropriately to allow it to
accurately simulate tropical convection. Secondly, an existing four-dimensional
data assimilation scheme will be modified for use in the tropics so that the
special field program data can be used to more effectively initialize the
mesoscale model. In addition, this data-assimilation program will be evaluated
as a tool for generation of gridded model- assimilated mesoscale data sets based
on the TOGA COARE observations. Sensitivity studies with the mesoscale model,
and analysis of the model-assimilated data sets, will then be performed to
determine how tropical deep convection interacts with its large scale oceanic
and atmospheric environment. This research is important because it serves as one
of the studies of TOGA/COARE that links convective scale physical processes to
the larger scales that impact climate variability in an especially climate
sensitive region of the world, the western Pacific Ocean, the field site of TOGA
COARE.