* 9024699
* U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research on the Design of          Earthquake Resistant Structures
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1993
* Phillip Gould, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 02/28/1993
* USD 7,000.00

This award supports Professor Phillip L. Gould and a graduate student at
Washington University, St. Louis, to collaborate in civil engineering research
with Professor Gerhart I. Schueller of the Institute of Mechanics, University of
Innsbruck, Austria. They share an interest in the response of structures to the
strong ground motions of earthquakes. Professor Gould is currently supported by
the Earthquake Engineering Section of NSF for a study of the interaction effects
on pile-supported structures subject to severe ground motion during the Loma
Prieta earthquake of 1989. One particular structure near San Francisco is the
main focus of that study. Through collaboration with Professor Schueller and his
colleagues, it will be possible to introduce probabilistic and simulation
techniques to extend this research and generalize the results. This will
significantly increase the interpretation and application of the anticipated
results of the ongoing study. The structure under study by Professor Gould and
colleagues is located in a region that sustained locally heavy damage during the
1989 earthquake; however, it survived with only minor cracking. It is suspected
that the flexible pile foundation interacting with the surrounding soft soil
played a major role in this outcome. The contribution of the Austrian
investigators, who are expert in statistical methods, will enable the results to
be applied to the effects of other earthquakes which may take place at many
places in the world. This generalization would facilitate the design of
structures to take advantage of the energy dissipation provided by soil-pile-
structure interaction, and thereby improve the survivability of the structure
and the safety of the occupants.