* 9024823
* Dissertation Research: A Study of Middle Paleolithic        Denticulated Tool Variability
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/1991,06/30/1992
* NONE NONE, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 06/30/1992
* USD 5,870.00

Under the direction of Dr. Anthony Marks, Ms Amy Campbell will conduct research
for her doctoral dissertation. She will analyze stone tool assemblages from a
number of Middle Paleolithic sites from Nubia, the Negev, the Near East and
Western Europe to understand the manufacturing process which produced
"denticulate" types of tools. These collections are housed in museums both in
Europe and the United States. Middle Paleolithic cultures were widespread in the
Old World and date to periods greater than 40,000 years ago. While
archaeologists have focussed their analytic efforts on some types of stone tools
which are included in such lithic assemblages, denticulate pieces have received
little attention. A denticulate is defined by closely spaced notches along the
edge of a stone flake which create a saw tooth effect. The Middle Paleolithic
period is of great interest to archaeologists because it is during this time
that anatomically modern humans first appeared. Scientists want to understand
what cultural adaptations are associated with this emergence and the main body
of data available consists of stone tools. Through classification of these into
different types and the study of variation within types they are able to make
inferences about both the cognitive abilities and the social organization of
their makers. It is surprising that so little attention has been focussed on
denticulate because they are widely distributed and are common in most
assemblages. Ms Campbell's work will increase our understanding of how they were
manufactured and what functions they served. This research is important for
several reasons. It will provide insight on the factors which led to the
emergence of modern humans. It will provide data of interest to Old World
archaeologists and will assist in the training of an extremely promising young
scientist.