* 9024194
* Purchase of an Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1994
* Gary Klinkhammer, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 01/31/1994
* USD 160,000.00

Oregon State University will receive partial funding for acquisition of an
inductively-coupled plasma mass spectrometer(ICP-MS). This new analytical
capability will be established within the Dept, of Oceanography for broad use
within the University. ICP-MS is a relatively new technology that is useful in
the analysis of many types of geophysical fluid and solid samples and greatly
facilitates the detection of certain elements such as barium, cobalt, and noble
metals. Samples are introduced into an argon plasma after vaporiza- tion by one
of several processes including laser excitation. The plasma is then subsampled
by the mass spectrometer, separated into discrete mass regions, and focused onto
an electromultiplier detector. The instrument can detect more than 70 elements
in the sub-part-per-billion concentration range and is able to measure major and
trace elements simultaneously, thereby reducing analysis time. ICP-MS generates
a mass spectrum and its sensitivity and versatility lends itself to a wide range
of scientific applications ranging from geochemistry, to paleooceanography to
ceramic chemistry. The new instrument will serve a number of NSF- sponsored
investigators at OSU. The University and the U.S. Dept. of Energy are providing
substantial cost-sharing for the establishment of this capability.