* 9024300
* U.S.-Switzerland Cooperative Research in Polyhedral         Combinatorics (Mathematics)
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1992
* Leslie Trotter, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/1992
* USD 10,975.00

This award provides partial support for Professor Leslie E. Trotter to
collaborate in mathematics with Professors Thomas M. Liebling and Dominique de
Werra of the Department of Mathematics, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology,
Lausanne. They share an interest in polyhedral combinatorics, and will
collaborate on three specific lines of research in that general area. These
current research topics are partially ordered sets, perfect graphs, and
stability critical graphs. The Swiss research group is very active and has an
excellent international reputation in the areas of combinatorial optimization
and operations research. The lead Swiss collaborators have particularly notable
research accomplishments on topics directly related to the proposed work.
Professor Trotter is deeply involved in a substantial group effort at Cornell
that will be significantly enhanced by collaboration with the group in
Switzerland. Previous collaboration among these investigators was extremely
productive. Polyhedral combinatorics is the study of the interplay between
algebraic and geometric structure of polyhedra, on the one hand, and algorithmic
aspects of linear objective optimization over polyhedra on the other. This
approach has yielded effective optimization algorithms for computationally
difficult models in broadly diverse fields such as inventory control,
statistical mechanics, VLSI, econometrics and parallel machine scheduling. For
example, the graph theory and algorithmic nature of stability critical graphs
produce models with direct applications to forestry harvesting strategies and
the allocation of computer memory.