* 9024862
* Annular-Mist Flow Transport With Phase Change in Complex    Fin-Matrix Passages
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1995
* Van Carey, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 06/30/1995
* USD 274,939.00

The present capability to understand and predict two-phase transport for annular
flow in complex fin-matrix passages is clearly limited by the current lack of
information regarding the shedding, entrainment and deposition mechanisms in
such flows. These studies address this problem specifically by examining the
manner in which liquid is shed from fin structures and the way in which the
liquid breaks-up into droplets and is dispersed into the core flow. Microprobe
instrumentation is being developed to obtain quantitative information about
local droplet density and size distribution downstream of fin structures, and
this instrumentation will also augment the general capabilities of researchers
working on multiphase flow transport. Detailed quantitative measurements of the
entrainment downstream of fin-type structures and lateral transport of liquid
between fins and prime surface areas, as well as in situ measurements in
vaporizing and condensing flows in fin matrix passages are being made. These
experiments include simultaneous measurement of entrainment characteristics and
overall heat transfer for convective vaporization and condensation of pure
coolants and binary mixtures over wide ranges of flow conditions. The final
stage of the study will use data obtained in the experiments to assess and
improve existing models of shedding, deposition and lateral film transport.
These improved models will be incorporated into improved computational schemes
for predicting the overall transport to evaluate the impact of these mechanisms
on heat and mass transfer in the matrix. The information regarding liquid
transport mechanisms obtained in the proposed research will serve to enhance the
capabilities for predicting two-phase transport in compact evaporators and
condensers, cooling towers, and other equipment in which the flow passages are
complex and/or contain interrupted surfaces.