* 9024735
* Infrastructure for Computer Science
* CSE,EIA
* 06/01/1991,05/31/1997
* Zvi Galil, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 05/31/1997
* USD 3,278,966.00

This is an infrastructure award to support the acquisition of a high speed
network of data servers, computation servers, parallel processors, and
workstations for the support of research in software, artificial intelligence,
and parallel algorithms. The software research is in operating systems, wireless
distributed systems, parallel processing, and software engineering. The
artificial intelligence research is in intelligent multimedia interfaces and
vision and robotics. The parallel algorithms research is in parallel string
matching with applications to genome matching. New networking technologies make
it possible to support computation intensive activities distributed across
networks. This support requires new software tools that will support distributed
and parallel computing. This award is for the infrastructure necessary to test
this new software and also for the infrastructure necessary for research in
robotics and parallel algorithms for large information system searches. The
operating system research concentrates on a high performance operating system
for distributed and parallel computers. The distributed systems research is for
research in wireless distributed computing in which the transmission medium
consists of radio waves. This research promises the true portable workstation in
which no wires whatsoever are needed in order to access the network. Both the
parallel processing and the software engineering research involve rule based
systems. The parallel processing research uses rule based systems to distribute
computational tasks while the software engineering research uses rule based
systems to coordinate cooperative work amongst multiple software developers. The
multimedia research involves the construction of virtual realities for the
manipulation of multi-dimensional data. The example application area is
financial data. The vision and robotics research is aimed at processing multiple
sources of spatial data in order to navigate a robot in a natural environment
and to control robot manipulators. Finally, the parallel algorithms research is
concentrated on string matching algorithms applicable to data arising from
genome databases. This research is important for actually using large databases
that will arise from the human genome project.