* 9024683
* Ironworking And Culture Change Among the Swahili of Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1991,08/31/1993
* NONE NONE, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1993
* USD 11,950.00

Under the direction of Dr. Richard Davis, Mr. Chapurukha Kusimba, a graduate
student at Bryn Mawr, will collect archaeological data for his doctoral
dissertation. His research will focus on the Swahili speaking region of the
Kenya coast and he will attempt both to reconstruct the Iron Age prehistory of
the region and to set this into an ethnographic context. In particular, he will
examine the role of iron technology in culture development and change. Although
traditional iron working is no longer practiced in this area, elderly men still
have knowledge of the techniques. Therefore, in the ethnographic phase of this
project, Mr. Kusimba will conduct extensive interviews. He will also observe
iron smelts conducted for his benefit and collect samples of raw materials, slag
and finished products. These, as well as similar remains collected by
archaeological excavation, will undergo laboratory analysis. In a second phase
of the project, he will conduct a regional archaeological survey and excavate at
the site of Mtwapa which is located near Mombasa. The site consists of
approximately twenty acres of mud brick ruins and dates to the Iron Age. Data
from Mtwapa will serve not only to examine prehistoric iron working techniques,
but also to show how this major site developed and then declined over time. The
Swahili peoples are distributed along the East African coast and they were
transformed in less than a millennia from small scale fishing and agricultural
groups into an urban, literate, Islamic and maritime trade oriented
civilization. While a central aim of archaeological research is to understand
the development of social complexity, relatively little attention has been
devoted to this case. Mr. Kusimba wishes to determine the role which technology
played in this transformation. Because iron was crucial to sub-Saharan peoples
and because it was locally produced, it provides an excellent focus for Mr.
Kusimba's study. This research is important for several reasons. On an empirical
level it will collect data on traditional metalworking techniques which (given
the age of remaining practitioners) would otherwise soon be lost. It will
increase scientific knowledge of East African prehistory and assist in the
training of an extremely promising young scientist