* 9024077
* Scaling Dynamics in Biological Signals and Systems Analysis-Faculty Awards for Women
* EHR,HRD
* 11/01/1991,04/30/1998
* Banu Onaral, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 04/30/1998
* USD 261,000.00

The research goal is to mount a concerted effort to facilitate the introduction
of scaling concepts into amenable topics in system theory in general and
biological signals and systems in particular. The research is an extension of
the fractal systems concept which originated in our efforts to model the
dynamics of the polarized metal-solution interfaces using methods of system
theory enhanced by notions of scaling. The research will explore resonant
systems with complex singularities arranged in scaling patterns in the s-plane
and uncover their link to continuous but non-differentiable functions of the
Weierstrass kind. The rich dynamics displayed by such systems demand further
theoretical elaboration and simulations. A natural extension is the study the
non-minimum phase and non- positive real systems with an eye for modelling
l/F-type noises ubiquitous in physiological systems. Recent evidence concerning
the genesis of such noises by certain categories of chaotic difference equations
will be explored. The design of the new-generation data acquisition,
manipulation, and processing schemes aimed at general classes of scaling systems
and signals is long overdue. The objective will be to adapt, whenever feasible,
existing methods of digital signal processing such that scaling data over broad
dynamic ranges can be analyzed effectively and economically. Multifractal
theories have been promoted in recent years to account for structural
heterogeneities in complex scaling objects. The research will attempt to
validate the suitability of multifractals in non-destructive evaluation of
biological tissue.