* 9024575
* Negotiating the Institutions of Democracy:  Contingent      Choices and Strategic Interactions in the Hungarian and     Polish Transitions
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1991,02/28/1994
* David Stark, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 02/28/1994
* USD 79,984.00

The fall of communist regimes throughout eastern europe and the transition to
democracy and private enterprise, there, rank among the most dramatic and
important political and economic developments of recent decades. In addition to
their obvious international significance, these efforts at developing democratic
institutions and market mechanisms offer unique opportunities to better
understand how democracies and markets arise, how they survive or why they fail,
and how they are related. This award supports innovative research designed to
better understand the transition from authoritarian and socialist regimes to
democracy and private enterprise through controlled comparisons of the ongoing
transitions in Hungary and Poland. Specifically, this project tests two theories
of the development of democracy. The traditional or structural determinist
theory holds that the development of democracy invariably requires the existence
of a variety of social and economic preconditions such as relatively high levels
of economic development and an established middle class. An alternative and more
recent theory holds that there are many different types of democracy and many
different paths to their achievement. This social interactionist view agrees
that social structure is important but believes that the effects of social
structure are contingent upon the types of political institutions that develop
and the types of strategic choices which political actors make during the period
of transition. To test these alternatives, the transitions to democracy in
Hungary and Poland will be compared. Hungary and Poland represent two nations
with very different social structures which have followed similar processes of
negotiated rather than revolutionary change but producing very different
institutional and policy outcomes. Thus they provide an unusual opportunity to
assess the effects of social structure on the development of democratic
institutions and market mechanisms. The Principal Investigator for this project
is a highly talented young scholar whose previous work in Hungary has provided a
rich data set that will greatly facilitate completion of this important
research.