* 9024606
* U.S.-Germany Workshop on Postionization Techniques in       Surface Analysis:  University Park, Pennsylvania, May 15-17,1991
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1991,11/30/1992
* Nicholas Winograd, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 11/30/1992
* USD 9,450.00

This award supports the participation of twelve U.S. chemists in a U.S.-German
workshop in analytical chemistry to be held in mid-May, 1991, at The
Pennsylvania State University. The meeting is organized jointly by Professor
Nicholas Winograd of Penn State and Professor Hans Oechsner of the University of
Kaiserslautern. It is supported jointly by NSF and its German counterpart, the
Deutsche Forschungs- gemeinschaft; participants are primarily from the U.S. and
Germany. The workshop will address postionization techniques in surface
analysis. The revolution in materials science has made this new field a vital
approach for characterizing surfaces, thin films and solids. These methods have
applications in such diverse fields as microelectronics, superconductivity,
environmental assessment, geology, and biomedical materials characterization.
The techniques generally involve the use of a high energy probe such as a laser,
electron or ion beam to desorb a portion of the sample into the gas phase. Now,
new techniques to ionize these species are promising to yield improved
sensitivity limits and novel approaches for composi- tional studies. These
techniques include electron impact, plasma and glow discharge sources, and
single and multiphoton excitation using lasers. The proposed workshop will bring
together experts in these areas to assess the status and future development of
postionization methodologies. Issues such as depth profiling, quantitation and
imaging will receive special attention.