* 9024977
* CRB:  Mutation Load and the Viability of Small Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1991,02/29/1996
* Michael Lynch, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 02/29/1996
* USD 250,000.00

Small population sizes characteristic of endangered species have several
genetic consequences that can magnify the probability of extinction. This
proposal is concerned primarily with the loss of fitness due to the accumulation
of mildly deleterious mutations. The effectiveness of natural selection in
eliminating such genes is reduced when a population declines in size, and the
consequent build-up of mutation load can cause a further reduction in population
size. This synergistic effect between chance effects of small population size
and deleterious mutation leads to an extinction process called a mutational
melt- down. Preliminary theoretical results demonstrate clearly that such a
process can greatly increase the vulnerability to extinction within a fairly
narrow time frame. Dr. Lynch proposes to pursue the theory further in a number
of directions: the influence of the mode of density-dependent regulation of
population size, the form of the fitness function, the consequences of fertility
vs. viability mutations, melt-downs in organelle genomes, and the additional
contribution of mutation load in the base population. This work should greatly
enhance understanding of processes at the interface of population dynamics and
population genetics, an area of special relevance to conservation biology that
has scarcely been touched in previous studies. Application of the theory to
specific problems will require quantitative information on the recurrent
mutation load, which to date is only available for Drosophila. Such data are
difficult to acquire, but are obtainable from self-fertilized lines maintained
by single-seed descent. Dr. Lynch will perform a series of very large, long-term
experiments to acquire data on the input of mutations for fitness characters,
using the rapid- cycling plant Arabidopsis as a model system. The statistical
theory for the analysis of data and for the optimal design of experiments has
been developed.