* 9024918
* RUI: Comparative Cytology of Spermathecae in Salamanders    (Amphibia:  Caudata)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1994
* David Sever, St Mary's College
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1994
* USD 107,074.00

After mating, female salamanders of many species can store spermatozoa for long
periods of time before fertilizing their eggs. The spermatozoa are stored in
glands in the cloaca called spermathecae. Little is known about the cytology of
the processes by which spermatozoa remain viable at ambient temperatures in
these glands. In this research, the PI proposes to use transmission electron
microscopy to study sperm storage in three species of salamanders. Students from
Saint Mary's College, an undergraduate women's college, will be research
assistants. Female Ambystoma tigrinum fertilize eggs soon after mating, so sperm
storage is brief. Female Eurycea cirrigera may store sperm for 6 months, but not
between breeding seasons. Female Notophthalmus viridescens may store sperm from
one breeding season to the next (10 months). Topics to be addressed include:
whether the spemathecae secrete a substance during mating that attracts sperm to
the glands; how the sperms are nourished during storage in the spermathecae;
whether the spermathecae secrete a substance that activates spermatozoa prior to
fertilization; and the fate of spermatozoa left in the spermathecae after
fertilization of an egg clutch. Knowledge of sperm storage mechanisms in
salamanders may be useful in studies of fertility in other vertebrates,
including man.