* 9024721
* Computer Aided Prototyping
* CSE,EIA
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1997
* Gary Lindstrom, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Tse-yun Feng
* 06/30/1997
* USD 1,880,280.00

This Institutional Infrastructure award is to support research in the general
area of Computer Aided Manufacturing Engineering. The approach taken by the Utah
group is computer aided prototyping of objects to be manufactured. The process
is broken down into three separate areas of research: design, prototyping, and
validation. The design aspect of the research involves enhancing the Alpha 1
computer aided geometric design system. This system is able to mathematically
describe objects to be manufactured. It is enhanced by incorporating some
commonly occurring manufacturing steps into the model as special elements (e.g.,
this hole is to be counterbored). The proto-typing aspect is to take the
mathematical description of the object (say a gear) and generate the NC codes
and the tooling sequences necessary to actually produce the item on a machine
center. The University of Utah already possesses a five axis machine center, a
CNC turning center, 3-D polymer equipment, and robotics equipment and so can
experimentally validate their research. A long term goal is to optimize the
tooling sequences and other necessary manufacturing activities in order to have
the factory operate without human supervision. This prototyping facility would
also be used in collaborative work with Dr. Jacobsen's Center for Engineering
Design. This center designs and manufactures many prototype items. The use of
computers to aid and guide manufacturing is more common in Japan and the
European countries than in the United States. This Institutional Infrastructure
award is for the support of an automated manufacturing laboratory that will
allow the quick design and prototyping of manufactured items. Once the prototype
is deemed acceptable, methods of improving the manufacturing of the item,
particularly in small batch numbers, can be explored. The University of Utah has
a long history of successful industrial collaborations and it is expected that
the results of this research will be widely disseminated to the United States
manufacturing industry.