* 9024282
* U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research:  Fluid Flow, Mass Transfer, and Cooling History of the Cuillin Complex, Isle of Skye, NWScotland
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1994
* Emi Ito, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 02/28/1994
* USD 3,075.00

This two-year award in petrology and geochemistry will support collaborative
research between Dr. Emi Ito of the University of Minnesota and Dr. Brian Bell
of the University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland. The objective of the proposed
project is to generate a new set of stable isotopic, structural, petrochemical,
and petro- graphic data on the Cuillin Complex, a classic, volcanic region
located on the Isle of Skye, Northwest Scotland. The data will be used to
quantitatively characterize the hydrothermal fluid flow and mass transfer in
relation to the cooling history of the region. The Cuillin Complex consists of
multiple concentric igneous intrusions separated by significant geological time
gaps. Recent isotopic studies suggest two or more phases of fluid flow. Ito's
previous research in this area suggest that a channelized flow through fractures
may have been important and in this project she and Bell propose to investigate
this question further. The investigation will describe the fluid flow and mass
transfer by detailed mapping of the geometry, the distribution of the veins,
abundance of minerals, changes in rock compositions. Fieldwork and sampling will
be conducted jointly. The laboratory analysis will be handled in both Scotland
and the U.S. Dr. Bell's group in Glasgow will generate the petrochemical data,
determine the mineral composition of the samples using electron microprobe
analyzer. Dr. Ito will perform the stable isotope analysis of the separated
mineral samples and whole rocks. This research combines the complementary
expertise of Ito and Bell and is expected to advance understanding of the
interactions of thermal, mechanical and chemical processes during the cooling of
magmas (molten materials) in the earth's crust.