* 9024748
* Biosynthesis of Secondary Metabolites from Blue-Green Algae
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1991,09/30/1996
* Richard Moore, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 09/30/1996
* USD 611,100.00

This research will address several specific areas of secondary metabolite
biosynthesis in blue-green algae. The first group of compounds to be
investigated includes the potent anticholinesterase anatoxin-a(s) from Anabaena
flos-aquae, the hepatotoxic cyclic peptides microcystin-LR from Microcytis
aeruginosa and nodularin from Nodularia spumigena, the neurotoxic alkaloids
anatoxin-a and homoanatoxin-a from Oscillatoria agardhii, and the inflammatory
agents lyngbyatoxin A and debromoaplysiatoxin from Lyngbya majuscula. Studies
also will be carried out on the isolation, structure determination and
biosynthesis of new toxins from cyanophytes. The second major area will focus on
a continuation of studies on the biosynthesis of hapalindole A, a fungicidal
indole alkaloid from Hapalosiphon fontinalis, and tolytoxin, mirabilene A
isonitrile, mirabimide E, and tantazole B, representatives of four classes of
structurally unique and diverse natural products from Scytonema mirabile.
Studies in a third area will involve the biosynthesis of cylindrocyclophane A
from Cylindrospermum licheniforme, the first ım,n!paracyclophane to be found in
Nature, and an extracellular substance which stimulates sporulation in C.
licheniforme. Finally studies will be carried out on the isolation, structure
determination, and biosynthesis of other unusual natural products from blue-
green algae, e.g. synechocin, an antiviral compound from the marine cyanophyte
Synechococcus elongatus, and new alkaloids from cyanophytes belonging to the
Stigonematales. %%% With this award the Synthetic Organic Program of the
Chemistry Division will support the research of Dr. Richard E. Moore of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Hawaii, Manoa. The major goal of
the research is to understand the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites in blue-
green algae, especially freshwater, brackish-water, and marine cyanophytes which
produce toxins implicated in wildlife, domestic animal, and human poisonings.