* 9024143
* FAW: Activity-Regulated Trophic Factor Expression
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1991,10/31/1997
* Christine Gall, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 10/31/1997
* USD 255,000.00

With a Faculty Award for Women Scientists and Engineers from the National
Science Foundation, Dr. Christine Gall will continue to elucidate the role of
activity-dependent neuronal gene expression in shaping the functional properties
of neuronal circuities in response to experience. By using a combination of
sophisticated neuroanatomical and molecular biological techniques, Dr. Gall
discovered that high frequency electrical stimulation in defined neuronal
pathways alter the expression of genes encoding specific neuropeptides and
neurotransmitters. For example, she has found that this activity induces changes
in the genomic expression of a major subclass of glutamate receptors within the
hippocampus, an area critical for the formation of memories. She is now
beginning to unravel the clues about the mechanisms of neuropeptide regulation
by examining more rapid, transcriptional events. With this award, she will
concentrate on understanding how this physiological activity alters the
regulation of immediate-early genes which then encode the proteins that mediate
neuropeptide regulation. Moreover, she extend the anatomical work by developing
electrophysiological approaches which enable her to examine the functional
consequences of the change in gene expression within specific neuronal circuitry
for neuropeptides, neurotransmitters and, more recently, neurotropic factors.
Indeed this Award will permit her to explore the significance of her seminal
finding that nerve growth factor is modulated in adult mammalian brain. This
work leads to a more thorough understanding of the functional organization and
the plasticity of the nervous system.