* 9024488
* The Origins of Structure in the American Industrial Labor   Market
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1994
* Richard Sutch, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1994
* USD 146,483.00

Today's industrial labor market is characterized by a good deal of "structure."
Long-term labor contracts, collective bargaining arrangements, seniority rules,
internal promotion ladders, pension plans, and other forms of employee vesting
are thought to limit the flexibility of wages, raise the natural rate of
unemployment and exacerbate macroeconomic fluctuations. The same structures have
been implicated in the creation of a "dual labor market" that some feel has
worked to the disadvantage of an underclass of workers. Spurred by intriguing
new theoretical insights on the microeconomic foundations of macroeconomic
theory, a great deal of attention has recently been focused on the origins and
implications of these aspects of labor market structure. This project undertakes
research on the origins of the modern American labor market. Its focus will be
on the critical period between 1880 and 1914. A detailed study of this period
will provide an insightful contrast with recent experience and would sharpen
further our understanding of macroeconomic phenomena both then and now. Data are
collected from over 150 separate investigations undertaken between 1874 and 1920
by 29 state Bureaus of Labor Statistics. These bureaus published surveys of
working-class families containing data on wages, hours of work, time lost to
unemployment and illness, family expenditures, and a long list of other economic
and social characteristics. They also published surveys of firms and other
Special Reports dealing with conditions in the labor markets. Using these data
from the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, the project will examine
such issues as changes in labor input, the degree of wage flexibility, the
heterogeneity and duration of unemployment; the pattern of age-earning profiles;
changes in job tenure; the presence and importance of inter-industry wage
differentials; labor productivity and short-term increasing returns to labor;
and the opportunities for self-employment.