* 9024032
* Faculty Awards for Women: An Integrated Approach to Seismic Hazard and Vulnerability Assessment
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1991,10/31/1997
* Anne Kiremidjian, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 10/31/1997
* USD 250,000.00

The overall objective of the proposed research is to develop a unified approach
to seismic hazard and risk evaluation. This objective will be achieved through
the following tasks: 1) Advances on segmentation models of faults will provide
the basis for developing spatially dependent earthquake occurrence models which
have not been previously considered. Additional information of the state of
stress and strain release rates along faults will aid in the development of key
parameters for such a model. 2) A geophysical ground motion simulation model
will be combined with the earthquake occurrence model for site hazard estimates.
The normal mode method was successfully used in a previous NSF- supported
research project. Other methods such the ray tracing, elasto-dynamic Green's
functions, and empirical Green's functions will be reviewed to determine their
suitability for implementation. 3) Ground motions simulated under task 2 will be
for firm ground conditions. To reflect the effect of local soil conditions on
the simulated ground motions, a one-dimensional linear soil will be sued to
predict motions at the ground surface. 4) The damage potential of structures
will be represented through a global damage index which reflects the overall
structural behavior. However, a damage index for structural components or
subassemblies will be developed in terms of the ratio of the maximum response
parameter to a cumulative response parameter. A measure of the energy
dissipation of the structure through stiffness degradation will be used to
define this index.