* 9024577
* U.S.-Switzerland Cooperative Research on the Physics and    Mechanics of Dehydration Embrittlement in Gypsum
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1994
* Teng-fong Wong, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/1994
* USD 15,350.00

This award supports Professor Teng-fong Wong and a graduate student and post-
doctoral associate to collaborate in experi- mental and theoretical geophysics
research with Professors Kenneth Hsu and David Olgaard of the Geological
Institute of the ETH, Zurich, Switzerland. These investigators share an interest
in the fundamental physics and mechanics of the process of dehydration
embrittlement in gypsum. They propose to perform a systematic study of the
dehydration rate, permeability and porosity change in gypsum under controlled
conditions of temperature, pore pressure, stress and strain rate. They will
quantitatively characterize the evolution of the decomposition reaction and pore
structure using x-ray and electron microscopy techniques. Also, they will
analyze theoretically the relation among the dehydration reaction, the porosity
and the permeability. Ultimately, this experimental and theoretical work will
enable them to compute numerically the degree of weakening and embrittle- ment
at the bottom of an overthrust formation such as the Jura mountains in
Switzerland. The results of such modelling will of course be compared with
actual geological observations in the field. The collaborators bring
complementary expertise and facilities to this work that guide the division of
labor. The high temperature, high pressure deformation experiments and the x-ray
analysis will be conducted at ETH. The microstructural observations will be done
at ETH and SUNY at Stony Brook. The permeability measurements and theoretical
analysis will be performed at Stony Brook. It has been recognized from field and
laboratory observations that the deformation and metamorphism of rocks are
closely linked. However, most of this work has been done on low porosity
crystalline rocks for which the inelasticity and failure behavior are
sensitively linked to temperature, pressure and strain rate. These factors are
insufficient to explain the behavior of porous rocks, such as gypsum, or rocks
that have undergone metamorphism. The decomposition or compaction of water-
bearing (hydrous) phases during prograde metamorphism may lead to embrittlement
and weakening. There are further differences in behavior as the porous rock is
dehydrated. The proposed research will investigate these changes in both
"drained" and "undrained" configurations of gypsum. The results will contribute
substantially to understanding the tectonics of sedimentary rock formations.