* 9024762
* U.S.-Netherlands Cooperative Research:  Evaluation of Mixed Mode Crack Propagation in Concrete Using Acoustic Emission
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1991,09/30/1992
* Wimal Suaris, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 09/30/1992
* USD 12,700.00

This award provides partial support for Professor Wimal Suaris of the University
of Miami to collaborate during a long term visit with Professor Jan G. M. van
Mier of the Faculty of Civil Engineering of Delft University of Technology, The
Netherlands. These investigators share an interest in mixed- mode crack
propagation of concrete. They will conduct shear fracture tests on concrete,
with acoustic emission monitoring, using the biaxial test rig available at the
Dutch University. The Dutch group offers world class laboratory facilities that
place it at the forefront of experimental civil engineering research. They have
developed the mixed-mode loading technique that is crucial for the proposed
research. Its use will be combined with a novel acoustic monitoring technique
currently being developed by Professor Suaris. He has a strong analytical
background and experience in non-destructive testing technology. These
complementary skills and their mutual interest in the fracture of concrete
should result in a very fruitful collabo- ration. The failure of concrete
structures involves a substantial amount of cracking. It is natural to use a
fracture mechanics approach to characterize the behavior of concrete. However,
it is generally accepted today that classical fracture mechanics, which was
developed for homogeneous purely brittle materials, is inapplicable for
concrete. This is because a relatively large fracture process zone develops
which undergoes softening damage. Therefore, during the last decade, substantial
research has been conducted on developing a form of fracture mechanics
applicable for concrete. The proposed collaboration will contribute to that
effort and lead to improved understanding of the behavior of concrete under
stress.