* 9024431
* Airborne Doppler Radar Investigation of Atmospheric         Convection in TOGA COARE
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1991,02/28/1994
* Robert Houze, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 02/28/1994
* USD 205,027.00

This grant supports a program of airborne Doppler-radar measurements to study
the atmospheric sensible heat and momentum budgets in the Tropical Ocean Global
Atmosphere Program's Coupled Ocean Atmosphere Response Experiment (TOGA COARE).
The primary objective of the research is to obtain better estimates of the
magnitudes and vertical profiles of all the terms in the atmospheric sensible
heat budget in convectively disturbed regions over the western Pacific warm
pool. To achieve this objective, the PIs will take advantage of the fact that
the two NOAA P3 aircraft and the NCAR Electra aircraft will be instrumented to
obtain dual-doppler radar measurements by means of dual-beam antennas. The
aircraft will also be equipped with boundary-layer instruments, cloud
microphysical sensors, and radiometers. The PI will use the three aircraft, in
conjunction with a ship/island network of sounding systems and surface-based
radars, to obtain key information for calculating the terms in the heat and
momentum budgets. Terms associated with the synopticscale flow can be estimated
from the sounding-system data. Radiation measurements aboard the aircraft will
be used to estimate the terms associated with radiative transfer in and out of
cloud. Precipitation and boundary-layer measurements made both by the aircraft
and by the surface network will provide important constraints and boundary
conditions for the calculations. The airborne dual-Doppler radar data will
provide key information for calculating the terms in the budgets associated with
in-cloud air motions. This research is important because it has the potential to
increase understanding of how convection and clouds influence climate on
interannual time scales. This project is part of the interagency TOGA COARE
program.