* 9024618
* PRISM:  A Laboratory for Research in Future                 High-Performance Parallel Computing
* CSE,EIA
* 06/15/1991,12/31/1997
* Michael Carey, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 12/31/1997
* USD 2,007,232.00

This infrastructure award is for the acquisition of a SIMD and a MIMD parallel
computer for the support of research in the areas of parallel programming tools,
programming languages, databases, parallel optimization algorithms, scientific
computing, computer architecture, artificial intelligence, and models of
parallel computation. The research will involve both the development of
algorithms specific to the SIMD and MIMD architectures and the use of these
computers as compute servers over the departmental network. The next development
in high performance computing will be high speed parallel processors. There are
currently two main classifications of these processors-Single Instruction
Multiple Data (SIMD) and Multiple Instruction Multiple Data (MIMD) processors.
SIMD computers execute a single sequence of instructions on all of its
processing elements. Each processing element may have different data that it is
processing. A MIMD computer may have a different program running on each of its
processing elements that may have their own data. In order to develop the
software necessary to utilize these computers it is necessary to have in place
software tools that support instrumentation, program development, and resource
allocation. The development of such tools is supported by this infrastructure.
It is also important to determine which problems run best on which type of
processor. Thus these computers will be used in research in artificial
intelligence, databases, and computer architecture in determining efficient
algorithms for these problem domains. Finally, these computers are efficient
numeric processors and will be used for both scientific computing and numeric
optimization problems.