* 9024266
* Neuro-Controllers for Motion Control Systems with MechanicalDistributed Flexibility (SGER)
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1991,12/31/1992
* Sabri Cetinkunt, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Elbert L. Marsh
* 12/31/1992
* USD 47,739.00

This research examines the use of neural networks in the motion control of
systems involving distributed mechanical flexibility, a characteristic of large
space structures systems and of high speed, high precision, light weight
manipulation devices. The major problems encountered in controlling such systems
are associated with dynamic nonlinearities and coupling between degrees of
freedom, and with the large dynamic order of the system due to mechanical
flexibility. Current control techniques, i.e., model reference adaptive control
and self tuning adaptive control are based on linear systems theory. An
advantage of neural networks is their ability to directly identify nonlinear
dynamics and use it in the determination of the control action. A second
advantage is that they are particularly suitable for systems of large dynamic
order. Other useful characteristics include their learning ability and fault
tolerance. In this project, the mechanical system to be controlled will be
modeled in sufficient detail to provide a reasonable representation of its
dynamics. The neuro-controller for the system will be trained off line to an
acceptable level. It will then be installed on the actual mechanical system
whose characteristics may not perfectly match those of the system on which it
was trained. The control performance is expected to continuously improve by
learning more and more about the system on line. The relative merits of neuro-
controllers, model reference controllers, and self tuning controllers will be
compared.