* 9024600
* A Distributed Computing Facility
* CSE,EIA
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1997
* Kenneth Birman, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 12/31/1997
* USD 1,817,598.00

This infrastructure award is for the construction of a distributed computing
facility. The network consists of desktop workstations connected over a medium
speed network to back-end computation and data-storage servers on a high-speed
network. The back-end resources consist of mid-speed compute servers, shared
memory parallel multiprocessors, and massively parallel machines. The research
supported by this infrastructure includes work in applied logic using the
constructive type theory supported by Nuprl; in scientific computing in
developing algorithms that effectively utilize distributed and massively
parallel computing resources; in modeling and simulation for robotics
applications; and in software for distributed computing. Many problems in
experimental computer science require peak resources not available on a single
workstation. These resources could be computation cycles or memory. An emerging
solution to this problem is to utilize idle processors in a network of
workstations and compute servers. The realization of this solution still
requires much research into mechanisms for breaking problems into pieces so as
to minimize communication overhead while distributing the computation to make
best use of the available processors. The distributed computing researchers at
Cornell University will use their distributed computing facility as a testbed
for distributed algorithms. Three active areas of research at Cornell will
especially benefit from this facility. The applied logic group uses a system
called Nuprl developed at Cornell to support constructive reasoning. With the
use of this tool, open questions in combinatorics and programming language have
already been answered. The scientific computing group is already involved in the
construction of a software package called LAPACK for linear algebra routines
that involves constructing new algorithms for parallel and distributed machine
architectures. Finally the modeling and simulation group requires substantial
computational resources to enable them to use the computing resources as an
experimental testbed allowing designs to be tested without the expense of
constructing a robot.