* 9024498
* International Commercial Arbitration in the Emerging        Global Economy
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1991,04/30/1994
* Yves Dezalay, American Bar Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 04/30/1994
* USD 112,751.00

International commercial arbitration has become a vital institution in the
emerging global economy and has displaced litigation in many instances. Business
entities and governments for various reasons have turned increasingly to
international commercial arbitration in order to process the transnational
disputes that inevitably arise with increased trade and commerce. The disputes
are part of a competitive process which involves arbitration centers, legal
professionals, and sets of governing norms. Understanding the patterns of this
disputing is crucial to understanding how business transactions will be
regulated within the new global order. This project explores the development of
and variations in international commercial arbitration. The research draws
generally on four bodies of theoretical literature: private governance, the role
of multinational enterprises in the global economy, disputing processes, and the
internationalization of the legal profession. Approximately 100-150 lawyers and
arbitrators in six international cities will be identified and interviewed to
create the primary data set. Additional data will include historical,
descriptive data and statistical data from several arbitration centers in order
to document changes in this practice in recent years. This study of
international commercial arbitration provides a unique opportunity to bring a
rich body of research to a neglected aspect of business disputing and therefore
to explore the emerging system of private and public governance in the field of
international commerce. The research promises to add substantially to our
understanding of the development of private sector dispute resolution and its
relationship both to the public courts and the private agendas of professional
groups and corporations. In addition, private governance and global business
will be related to the question of what lawyers have to offer in a regime beyond
nation states.