* 9024832
* Internal Generation of Low and Ultra-Low Frequency          Variability in the Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1993
* Walter Robinson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 08/31/1993
* USD 120,000.00

This project will study the dynamical mechanisms by which the atmosphere can
internally generate variability on timescales of months, seasons, and years. The
focus will be on locating and understanding the feedbacks between the low
frequencies and the shorter timescales at which the available energy of the
atmosphere is released. These investigations will be carried out in the context
of simple two-level primitive equation model and existing long runs of the NCAR
Community Climate Model. The proposed work comprises the following specific
studies: 1) Studies of the "index cycle in the two-level model to determine its
dynamics and its effects on stationary eddies. 2) Studies of the interactions
between internal variability and externally generated (by tropical heating)
variability in the two-level model 3) Diagnostic analyses of extended
simulations of the CCM to see if the dynamical mechanisms that generate low-
frequency variability in the two-level model are relevant in a more realistic
model. 4) Analysis of the low-frequency variability of the Rossby wave source in
the CCM and its interaction with synoptic forcign of low-frequency features. 5)
Studies of the dynamics of the inter-seasonal and longer timescale variability
that is found at planetary spatial scales in the two-level model. This research
is important because its seeks to improve understanding of the processes
responsible for climate variations on time scales of great importance to human
activities.