* 9024571
* Experimental and Computational Studies of Singlet Biradicals
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1991,01/31/1995
* Charles Doubleday, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard A. Caldwell
* 01/31/1995
* USD 234,938.00

This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the research of Dr.
Doubleday at Columbia University. The results of this research will provide new
information about the reactions and properties of carbon-centered singlet
biradical intermediates. These intermediates are produced in certain photolysis
reactions and have unbonded electrons on carbon atoms that are separated by
carbon chains of varying lengths. Singlet biradicals have the unbonded electrons
paired, the spin array found in bonds between atoms. These intermediates have
generated considerable interest recently. Comparisons will be made between
experimental results and theory derived from molecular orbital calculations.
Singlet biradicals will be generated by picosecond flash laser photolysis
techniques from a variety of precursors, including cyclic and bicyclic azo
compounds, cyclic and bicyclic hydrocarbons, cyclic sulfides, and acyclic
difunctional precursors. Properties and reactions of these biradicals will be
studied. The results of molecular orbital calculations will be used with
canonical variational transition state theory to determine the reaction path in
the decomposition of biradicals. A goal in these calculations is to explore the
unusual role of entropy in the dynamics of singlet biradicals.