* 9024694
* U.S.-UK Cooperative Research:  Accurate Semiclassical       Methods for Redistribution of Polarized Radiation
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1992
* Ronald Bieniek, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 11/30/1992
* USD 19,062.00

This award will support collaborative research in theoretical physics between
Dr. Ronald Bieniek, University of Missouri at Rolla, and two British scientists:
Dr. Keith Burnett, Clarendon Laboratory, Oxford University and Dr. Mark Child,
Theoretical Chemistry Department, Oxford University. The proposed study is aimed
at developing accurate semiclassical models and methods of describing and
analyzing collisional and half-collisional redistribution of polarized
radiation. When polarized light is absorbed during a close atomic/molec- ular
full- or half-collision, the fragments will flouresce light after they separate.
The degree of polarization remaining in the light, as a function of laser
detuning, contains much information about intermolecular potentials and the
fundamental transition from molecular to atomic domains. The analysis of
experimental information about properties is greatly facilitated if accurate and
tractable theoretical tools are available with which investigators can visualize
the phenomena and describe the underlying physics. Semiclassi- cal techniques,
which treat some aspects in a classical way and others in a quantum mechanical
manner, can offer considerable insight. However, current semiclassical methods
for redistribution are, in many ways, unsatisfactory. This project is designed
to improve this situation by enhancing the popular locking/decoupling model, and
developing new techniques to deal with phase interference effects between
excitation events, Coriolis braking of orbital rotation, and the vagaries of the
boundary between the atomic and the molecular coupling of angular momenta. The
British collabora- tors involved are at the forefront of redistribution research
and the US investigator Dr. Bieniek will benefit greatly from the opportunity to
carry out this long term research visit.