* 9024797
* An Inter-Institutional Database of Fish Biodiversity in the Neotropics
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1991,02/29/1996
* Scott Schaefer, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Continuing Grant
* Leonard Krishtalka
* 02/29/1996
* USD 263,882.00

Research and conservation efforts in the Neotropics (South and Central America)
are dependent upon access to information on the organisms inhabiting this
particular region. Many areas within the Neotropics are undergoing rapid
environmental deterioration, eliminating biological diversity and ultimately
affecting our ability to understand the biology and history of the natural
resources of this part of the world. Research programs in diverse fields such as
population and community ecology, biogeography, systematics and evolution, and
conservation efforts to protect and manage these resources are often hampered by
our inability to obtain access to the kind of information already available on
these organisms in the research collections of universities and major museums.
Recent achievements in computer-aided collection information management have
reached a level of sophistication which permit efforts to inventory and enhance
this biodiversity information and make these resources more available to the
research and conservation community. This project will produce an international,
inter-institutional inventory database of collections information on the
freshwater fishes of South and Central America. Three major research
institutions will cooperate to build a centralized database of biodiversity
information on fishes now held in several widely-scattered institutions. Such
information includes species identification and taxonomic information,
geographic locality and associated collection, habitat and environmental data.
Data from several North American and Latin American institutions will be
combined into a single database. The project will enhance access to and provide
additional research tools for this centralized database. The Academy of Natural
Sciences of Philadelphia will coordinate building of the database and
development of new research tools. The University of Michigan will serve as the
liaison to the Latin American participants, providing technical support and
remote access to the database. Cornell University will provide support for
developing the interface between the central database and MUSE, the NSF-
sponsored collection management system. The results of this project will greatly
improve the ability of researchers to gain access to Neotropical fish
biodiversity information for use in ecological, biogeographic, evolutionary, and
conservation initiatives. This work will also stimulate new lines of research on
the fish fauna that otherwise would not be possible nor feasible. Access to the
information facilitated by this project will likely stimulate local economies by
means of new economic initiatives on the commercial exploitation and management
of renewable fisheries resources. Finally, this project will directly assist
cooperative research land efforts to stimulate continued interchange between
North American scientists and their Latin American counterparts.