* 9024592
* U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research:  Genetic Diversity of     Endangered Populations of Mysticete Whales:  Mitol          Historical Demographic Studies
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Richard Lambertsen, Ecosystems Technology Transfer, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 12/31/1995
* USD 18,870.00

This one-year award will support collaborative research in mysticete whale
systematics and conservation between Richard Lambertsen of the University of
Pennsylvania's Ecosystems, Inc., Ulfur Arnason of the University of Lund in
Sweden. Stephen Palumbi of the University of Hawaii will also participate in the
project. Lambertsen and Arnason will photoidentify and sample by biopsy free-
ranging humpback whales in the offshore waters between Iceland and Greenland.
The tissues will be analyzed for mitrochondrial DNA variation and sequencing at
the University of Hawaii and the University of Lund. These data will be
correlated and compared to corresponding estimates of mitochondrial DNA
nucleotides of other whale species in the Atlantic and Pacific. The project will
extend ongoing investigations into the worldwide population genetics and
evolution of mysticete whales supported under NSF grant BSR-900006 with Stephen
Palumbi and Richard Lambertsen as consultant. This project is part of the NSF's
Conservation Biology Initiative. Results will allow an initial assessment of the
genetic consequences of commercially exploited whales, provide a greater
understanding of mitochondrial DNA variation among whales worldwide and
ultimately help promote the whale conservation. The project will benefit from
the complementary expertise of Lambertsen in skin biopsy sampling and Arnason in
DNA analysis and marine mammals.