* 9024995
* Mathematical Sciences: Applications of Topology to Biology  and Chemistry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1995
* De Witt Sumners, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/1995
* USD 142,240.00

This project continues earlier studies of applications of topology to problems
in biology and chemistry. There are three main areas of effort. The first is the
application of classification and quantification techniques in knot theory to
the analysis of enzyme-DNA three-dimensional structure and enzyme mechanism.
Mathematical models, such as the tangle model, will be developed and perfected,
the aim being to produce a mathematical tool of use to the experimental
molecular biologist. The mathematics used here is recent work in the theory of
3-manifolds, and the biological input is experimental results obtained from the
topological approach to enzymology. The second area is the study of the
topological entanglement of random chains in 3-space. Random chain entanglement
statistics are related to the conformational entropy of a polymer system in
dilute solution. Asymptotic entanglement (as the length goes to infinity) is
reasonably well understood; the fundamental problem of scientific interest is
the description and computation of entanglement at finite lengths. Both rigorous
mathematics and simulation techniques will be employed. The third area is the
topological description of spiral wave patterns in excitable media. The methods
of differential topology and obstruction theory will be used to provide
necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence and time evolution of
patterns on bounded orientable 3-manifolds. A central problem in molecular
biology is to deal with long-chain DNA molecules. The way they fold, replicate,
and recombine is intimately bound up with their functions. The behavior of long-
chain polymers in solution is a more general form of the same questions.
Important applications arise in genetic engineering, the design of drugs, and
the development of long-chain polymers for industrial and technological uses.
Knot theory is a part of topology that studies exactly these kinds of questions:
how structures fold and recombine and replicate.