* 9025103
* Mathematical Sciences: Markov Models for the Time           Development of DNA Damage Repair
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1993
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/1993
* USD 34,800.00

Time-dependent problems of interest in radiation biology will be investigated
mathematically. Emphasis will be on using analytic solutions, bounds or
approximations to understand numerical results and vice-versa. Detailed
comparisons of the mathematical results with current published experiments will
be made. The main project is to use continuous time Markov chains for modeling
ionizing radiation damage to mammalian cells. The specific generators used will
be modifications of those introduced in recent papers (Albright 1989; Tobias et
al. 1989; Curtis 1989; Sachs et al. 1990; Hlatky et al. 1990; Hahnfeldt et al.
1991). The following biological endpoints will be considered: (A) the yield of
DNA double strand breaks and other chromosome damage during irradiation; (B) the
yield and variance of chromosome aberrations evolving from DNA double strand
breaks via enzymatic cellular repair and misrepair processes during and after
irradiation; (C) the fraction of cells clonogenically viable after irradiation.
In (B) and (C) the main mathematical technique will be to use the embedded
discrete time Markov chain to work out the long time asymptotic behavior in a
form suitable for numerical evaluation and comparison to experiments, especially
experiments on human lymphocytes. (A) mainly involves use of perturbation theory
and of Perron-Frobenius theory for the eigenvalues of the generator. Many older
models applicable to one of these endpoints can be regarded as deterministic
approximations to the Markov models and the domain of validity of such
approximations will be systematically studied. A secondary project will be to
use the full, time-dependent reaction-diffusion equations with realistic
reaction terms for analyzing spheroid tumor models. Mathematical modeling of
ionizing radiation damage to DNA is particularly important in relating
experimental results for moderate radiation doses to results at the very low
doses and dose rates which are most relevant in public health concerns. Unlike
most older models, the models to be used here systematically take into account
fluctuations in dose and response from cell to cell. The results will contribute
to a basic understanding of how chromosome aberrations such as dicentrics
develop following ionizing radiation. Such understanding in turn should improve
methods of biological dosimetry, of risk assessment for exposures to
radioactivity, and of radiotherapy.