* 9025030
* Science in Developing Countries Program: The Systematics andEvolution of the Genus Coreopsis (Asteraceae) in South      America
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1992,01/31/1995
* Daniel Crawford, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Emily B. Rudin
* 01/31/1995
* USD 19,900.00

This project will support collaborative studies in systematic biology by Dr.
Daniel J. Crawford of Ohio State University, Dr. Edwin B. Smith of the
University of Arkansas and Dr. Aundio Sagastegui of the Universidad Antenor
Orrego de Trujillo, Peru. The project will initiate studies of the systematics
and evolution of South American representatives of the Genus Coreopsis
(Asteraceae). Thirty four species are described from South America with the vast
majority occurring in the northern Andes of Peru and all assigned to the sect.
Pseudoagarista. Little is known about the species beyond the alpha-level, with
most of the taxa described primarily on leaf morphology. The collaborative
effort will involve the following methods: field studies to assess morphological
variation within and among the described species, specimen collection to
document this variation, gathering of floral buds and collecting seeds and dried
leaf material; determination of chromosome numbers for each species; the use of
enzyme electrophoresis to estimate genetic variation within and divergence among
species; and the use of morphology and chloroplast DNA restriction site
variation to construct phylogenic hypotheses for South American Coreopsis and
for all of Coreopsis. The project will provide insight into systematic-
evolutionary aspects of the genus Coreopsis and will allow a synergistic
relationship to develop among the three well- qualified investigators. The
project will present resources and research opportunities currently unavailable
to the Peruvian principal investigator and will involve Peruvian students. Since
this type of research also provides for the rapid exchange and dissemination of
knowledge, the project will fulfill the goals of the Science in Developing
Countries Program.