* 9025113
* Stereoelectronic Effects and Reactivity: Lone Pairs,        Hydrogen Bonding, and Proton Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1995
* Charles Perrin, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 03/31/1995
* USD 387,500.00

With support from the Organic Dynamics Program, Dr. Perrin will utilize nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy to investigate five separate problems: (i)
The stereochemistry of amidinate anions will be studied to complete previous
investigations of proton exchange in amides and amidines. (ii) Stereoelectronic
control phenomena will be studied by evaluating the effect on reactivity of
having one or two lone electron pairs antiperiplanar to a leaving group or
incoming nucleophile. (iii) The Method of Isotopic Perturbation of Equilibrium
will be utilized as a means to investigate the symmetry of the hydrogen bond.
(iv) The extent of solvation of ions in aqueous media will be probed by
measuring the effect that these ions have upon bond rotation rates. (v) The
phenomenon of large secondary kinetic isotope effects will be studied via
examination of bond rotations in amides. %%% Applications of modern nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) techniques have led to increased understanding of
molecular structure and reactivity. Dr. Perrin's research program is designed to
take advantage of these new techniques in order to study two of the simplest
structural elements in organic molecules, i.e., protons and electron pairs. Five
projects will be undertaken in an effort to elucidate the nature of such
fundamental phenomena as hydrogen bonding and stuructural/conformational effects
on reactivity. The results are likely to be of interest to physical-organic
chemists, biochemists, and theoretical chemists.