* 9025024
* Arthropod Diversity in a Lowland Tropical Rainforest
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1995
* Henry Hespenheide, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/1995
* USD 380,909.00

As a collaborative project between the Organization for Tropical Studies (a
consortium of 45 U.S. Costa Rican universities and museums) and the National
Biodiversity Institute (INBio, a Costa Rican nongovernmental organization), a
biodiversity inventory of tropical rainforest insects, spiders, and mites will
initiated for La Selva, a biotically rich and scientifically active biological
station situated in the Atlantic lowlands of Costa Rica. This stage of the
project aims to produce full, species-level inventories for several focal groups
of insects, spiders, and mites, including some of the most important groups in
rainforest habitats. These inventories will be based on ecologically structured,
repeatable sampling methods, as well as on less- structure supplemental
collecting. A must broader range of survey groups, each including a focal group,
will be inventoried using the structured sampling techniques alone. Statistical
methods will be explored for estimating the total number of insect, spider, and
mite species in the study areas, using the full inventory data for the groups to
evaluate these methods and to calibrate estimates of species number for the
broader survey groups. The sampling design will permit evaluation of the
contributions of habitat would type vegetation structure species, and season to
overall species richness. These estimated promise to provide the most realistic
and comprehensive data yet available on the diversity of insect and spider
species of tropical rainforests, and diversity estimates for any rainforest mite
fauna. These groups or organisms, while representing well overall the species on
earth, are still among the most poorly known. Specimens will be integrated into
the national biodiversity inventory already underway at INBio, thus placing the
La Selva survey material in a larger geographical and biological context,
promoting further study of this material by INBio's growing international
network of specialists, and ensuring permanent accessibility of the specimens.
The project is structured to promote extensive new avenues of collaboration
between North American and Costa Rican scientists.