* 9025007
* Modeling, Design, and Analysis of Control Algorithms For    Scheduling Manufacturing Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1995
* Panganamala Kumar, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/1995
* USD 195,000.00

Manufacturing systems are comprised of a complex interaction of many entities.
There are several service centers, each consisting of several machines, and
several part-types with possibly different routes. The machines may incur set-up
times whenever they switch between part-types. The yield of an operation may be
random, and moreover machines fail from time to time. Nevertheless it is
important to run the entire system in such a way as to satisfy prescribed
production levels for all the part types, and to meet the due-dates for all
parts as closely as possible, while simultaneously keeping work-in-process small
and cycle times short. To achieve these goals, the PI will need to schedule the
entire system, i.e., decide the numbers of various parts to be released into the
system, as well as their release times, and to determine the times of all
operations by machines on parts already in the system. How does the PI
incorporate these myriad details coherently in such a way that he will be able
to design good scheduling policies? In this proposal the PI will detail the
beginnings of an integrated system theoretic approach which views manufacturing
systems as inherently dynamic entities for which the objectives of control are
stability and performance. He will design and analyze scheduling algorithms
which can be implemented in real-time. The ultimate objective is to also have an
impact on scheduling practice, with special attention given to the problem of
developing good scheduling algorithms for semiconductor manufacturing systems.
In the final analysis, what the PI seeks is the beginning of the development of
a useful and coherent system theory and practice for manufacturing systems.