* 9025087
* Dynamics of Rotating Stratified Fluids
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1998
* John Hart, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 02/28/1998
* USD 379,089.00

Experimental and numerical studies of ordered and chaotic dynamics in rotating
stratified fluids are proposed. Numerical computations and laboratory
experiments will further clarify the role of sidewall boundaries and boundary
layer separation in observations of two-layer baroclinic chaos. Direct retrieval
of Poincare sections of fluid column motions will allow a comparison of
LaGrangian mixing in the laboratory with that predicted by models. For example,
mixed wave states, or vacillatory states may generate localized (in space)
chaotic particle dynamics that can be predicted by applying Melnikov's method to
the governing Hamiltonian dynamical system for parcel motion. The effects of
weak to moderate "seasonal" forcing will be studied both in laboratory and in
fully resolved two-layer models, with the goal of verifying the robustness of
previous results which showed a dramatic destabilization and loss of
predictability in low order models that include such forcing. A focus of the
proposed research is the application of recent ideas from dynamical systems to
both experimental and numerical data on baroclinic flows. These techniques
include singular value decomposition, linear and nonlinear prediction, and
principle orthogonal decomposition. We hope to generate cleaner pictures (e.g.
Poincare sections and return maps) of the deterministic part of the data, along
with better estimates of dimension, Lyapunov exponents, and other qualitative
signatures of nonlinear baroclinic flow. Low-order descriptions of the fractal
dynamics observed in high resolution numerical solutions of the quasi-
geostrophic partial differential equations will be sought.