* 9025112
* U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research:  Ecology and Physiology ofAlnus-Frankia Symbiosis
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1991,10/31/1992
* David Myrold, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 10/31/1992
* USD 17,450.00

This award will support collaborative research in ecology between Dr. David
Myrold, Oregon State University and Dr. Kerstin Huss-Danell, Department of Plant
Physiology, University of Umea, Sweden. The project will examine two important
questions concerning Alnus-Frankia symbiosis, namely the effect of several
factors on the biomass and diversity of Frankia in the soil and the amount of
fixed N released to the soil by nodulated Alnus. In particular, soil will be
sampled from an established research site that has been treated by liming, NPK
fertilization and the introduction of alder. This soil will be assayed for
Frankia biomass by plant bioassay and DNA probe methods. The results of these
experiments will not only provide important new information in understanding
Alnus-Frankia symbiosis, but will by extension provide new insight into
actinorhizal plants in general. These plants are ecologically important, because
they can alter ecosystem level processes by rapidly altering the nitrogen
content of the systems in which they occur. They also have importance in
forestry, land reclamation and horticulture. This project will benefit from the
compleme- ntary expertise of Dr. Myrold in microbiology and of Dr. Huss-Danell
in plant physiology. Dr. Myrold will also be able to take advantage of a field
site in Sweden which has been extensively studied and is exceptionally well
suited to the proposed research.