* 9050586
* GC-FTIR in the Undergraduate Laboratory:   Phase 3 (Comple- tion of the Plan)
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/1990,08/31/1992
* Dennis Strommen, Carthage College
* Standard Grant
* Bonnee Groover
* 08/31/1992
* USD 24,122.00

The goal of this project is the improvement of the chemistry program through
the utilization of a gas chromatograph-Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer
system. Hyphenated techniques such as the GC-FTIR are commonly used in graduate
school and industry; the chemistry department is providing an example of coupled
equipment for their students as well as giving them the opportunity for hands on
experience. The faculty have approached the task in a three-phase plan developed
a few years back: the purchase of the FTIR, the subsequent purchase of the GC,
followed by the interfacing of the two pieces of equipment. Although the GC and
FTIR are coupled, through the use of computer controlled swing-away mirror, they
can be used independently. The combined system is allowing the investigation of
complex mixtures that would otherwise be difficult or impossible to undertake at
the undergraduate level. The GC-FTIR also lends itself readily to the techniques
of the newly-established micro- organic chemistry program. The courses most
directly affected by the acquisition of the GC-FTIR are the two-semester Organic
Chemistry sequence, Advanced Organic Chemistry, Instrumental Analysis, and
Senior Research. The institution contributed to this project in an amount equal
to the NSF funds.