* 9050317
* Watershed Worlds:  Global Views/Regional Perspectives
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1995
* Jane Holdsworth, Thames Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Stewart
* 02/28/1995
* USD 695,598.00

This three-year project, entitled Watershed Worlds:Global Views/Regional
Perspectives, uses the study of a watershed as a way to look at the global
environment. Using science and mathematics as information gathering tools,
teachers and students in several watersheds throughout the country will be
investigating the human impact on their regional environment. The program uses
hands-on experiments utilizing state of-the-art computer, scientific
instrumentation and multimedia technologies. This project is sponsored by the
Thames Science Center in New London, Connecticut where staff scientists,
engineers and computer specialists will work with elementary, middle and high
school teachers from throughout the country in a five week summer workshop each
year involving 15 teachers. The project will be developed and disseminated over
the three year period and will involve 495 teachers and their students in grade
6-10 at 65 pilot sites throughout the nation. By the third year of the project
more that 1500 teachers will have been involved. The first section of the
Watershed Worlds' curriculum, Earth, Air and Water, examines chemical and
physical phenomena including empirical studies on the relationships between air
movements, precipitation volume and water chemistry. The three subsequent
sections, In the Current, Still Waters and Changing Tides, focus on the
applications of this knowledge through the study of specific habitats within a
watershed. These sections cover identification, distribution and physiology of
flora and fauna in these regions and show how they are influenced by the
physical and chemical environment. The curriculum is enhanced by investigatory
kits which include sampling equipment supported by a data base and a multimedia
program which help to analyze the water quality and biodiversity of the
watershed. The National Science Foundation is supporting the project in the
amount of $615,736 which is being matched by $39,824 or about a 6% match.