* 9050028
* Project to Improve Methods Courses in Elementary Science
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1990,03/31/1995
* William Ritz, California State University-Long Beach
* Continuing grant
* Tina H. Straley
* 03/31/1995
* USD 396,407.00

California State University, Long Beach, will carry out a project to improve
methods courses in elementary science by conducting summer workshops for college
and university instructors who teach the elementary science methods course. The
project seeks to improve science education for elementary school children by
strengthening the elementary science methods courses which enroll large numbers
of elementary preservice teachers each semester. Exemplary instructors and
science teacher education specialists will conduct these summer workshops, and
the participants will learn about recent research findings and new science
teaching methods while exchanging ideas and forging new connections with
colleagues. It is anticipated that these methods instructors will return to
their home institutions to stimulate change in teacher education and help create
links between the science and education faculties at their institutions.
Systematic communication and continuing follow-up will take place after the
summer workshops through electronic networking, newsletters, and annual
meetings. As a result of the follow- up activities, an array of resource
materials for elementary science methods courses will be developed for
dissemination. A pilot workshop will be conducted during the summer of 1990, and
three additional workshops will take place during the summer of 1991. The
workshops will be held at various geographical locations throughout the U.S.,
and one of the workshops will take place at an institution that educates large
numbers of minority students. The total cost sharing for the project is 24% of
NSF's contribution.