* 9050515
* Structures Demonstration and Teaching Laboratory for        Architectural Engineering Instruction
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/1991,09/30/1992
* Antonio Nanni, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Draper
* 09/30/1992
* USD 29,940.00

Architectural Engineering and Architecture students are presently taught
introductory, intermediate and advanced courses in analysis and design of
structures without any experimental type of activity. Students have great
difficulty in visualizing and thoroughly understanding fundamentals of
structural element/system performance. In the case of Architecture students, a
special effort has to be made to overcome aversion to the subject. Lack of
experimental activities also deprives students of the knowledge on how to
interface high-technology devices and structural analysis/theory. The Department
of Architectural Engineering at The Pennsylvania State University is committed
to revise the approach to the teaching of structural courses to both its
students and Architecture majors by complementing traditional class-room
teaching with experimental and computer modelling laboratory activities. The
acquisition of the equipment in this project will allow the implementation of a
Structures Demonstration and Teaching Laboratory (SDT Lab). The laboratory will
feature experimental testing, data acquisition and simulation systems to conduct
planned tests as well as students will improve both their creativity and
synthetic thinking. Initially, three courses will be affected by the
implementation of the laboratory in addition to individual students working on
their senior project.