* 9050312
* A Model Program for Physical Science Enhancement for K-6    Teachers in Rural, Remote Eastern Oregon
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1990,09/30/1994
* Richard Hermens, Eastern Oregon University
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 09/30/1994
* USD 396,009.00

This two-year project will enhance participant's content background and
laboratory skills by incorporating the theories of physics and chemistry with
applications. Teachers will be involved in hands-on activities which can easily
be implemented in their classes. The project design includes both a summer
workshop at Eastern Oregon State University and an academic year component
delivered at different sites in eastern Oregon using a mobile classroom. The
summer workshop will have the following format. Twenty teachers, (K-3 grades
will be accepted in a three-week workshop. Following this, there will be an
additional three- week workshop with twenty teachers (4-6 grades). In each
workshop, one or two principals will be involved. The format of the workshops
will be a session of physics theory and another session of chemistry theory in
the morning. These sessions will be fundamental in nature and the participants
will be furnished textbooks of similar level. Each session will be 1 1/2 hours
in length with a short break between them. Next is a break for lunch, after
which, a three hour session of hands-on activities or experiments for the
teachers. The design of these activities will closely follow the theory lectures
presented in the morning sessions. Only on Wednesday afternoon will the
participants have an unstructured schedule to create their own activity, work in
the curriculum library, or read. An unusual feature of this project is the
mobile classroom. A science specialist will coordinate a meeting schedule with
the school districts. She will travel with the mobile classroom to provide
inservice, during the academic year to teacher located at selected locations in
eastern Oregon. Fully equipped for science instruction, this unit will arrive
ready for teachers to participate in hands-on science activities during
inservice sessions. These sites will be visited six times a year. The inservice
will keep the teachers current, resolve problems stemming from unanswered
questions from inquisitive students, and confront the teacher with a constant
reminder of using science activities in the classroom. Mobile classroom science
activities are plannedfor immediate implementation at the appropriate grade
level as the teacher's school. Theory will be presented inconjunction with the
hands-on segment in each case. Six credits will be offered for the summer
workshop and one credit will be offered for the mobile classroom inservice
sessions. Cost sharing in the amount of $127,924 equals 33%of the NSF award.