* 9050009
* Grant for a Conference to Plan Directions for Improving     Physical Science Instruction in the Elementary Classroom
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1990,02/29/1992
* Arlyne Sarquis, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 02/29/1992
* USD 58,765.00

Improving Physical Science Instruction in the Elementary Classroom is the theme
of this conference organized by the Division of Chemical Education of the
American Chemical Society, through its committee of Pre-High School science and
by the American Association of Physics Teachers. The conference will take a
critical look at the physical science content and activities presently used at
the elementary level. The conference's two-part design will allow participants
to review the key aspects of learning theory as it applies to the teaching of
scientific concepts at the elementary levels, formulate an effective model for
obtaining physical science content and activities currently in use, reviewing
these materials, and formulating directions for future development. Participants
have been chosen based on their knowledge of physical science education at the
elementary level. The conference will consist of a one-day pre-conference
meeting, in January, l990; a four- day session in May, l990; and a three-day
session in February, l991. To achieve the specific conference goals and
objectives, conference participants will be organized into Task Groups that will
work independently between the conferences. When these task groups have finished
their work and have coordinated their individual reports with the work of the
larger group, the conference will issue a conference report which will include:
the original goals and objectives, procedures, findings and recommendations. At
a time when so many school districts are considering changing their elementary
science curriculum it is critical for them to have this type of advice from the
scientific community. The cost sharing for the conference will be three hundred
percent of the National Science Foundation portion.