* 9050866
* Undergraduate Laboratory for Control Systems Design
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1993
* John Fleming, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Draper
* 03/31/1993
* USD 25,717.00

Undergraduate students studying control theory have difficulty connecting the
abstract and fundamental notions presented in the classroom with the practical
reality of what processor system their design is to control. Although students
gain facility in mathematical analysis, they lack the physical intuition on how
to pose a control problem, how to model the system, how to determine which types
of measurements are necessary and available. An undergraduate control systems
laboratory consisting of six experimental stations will address this deficiency.
Each station will include a microcomputer with analog interface boards for data
acquisition and for implementation of control. The computer will be used first
in the identification of a suitable model for the system, then as a design,
simulation and display device using the Matlab CAD package and finally as the
actual implementation of the control law when interfaced with the physical
system. Experiments include DC motor control, coupled tanks, and the inherently
unstable system of balancing a ball on a tiltable beam. The lab will be used in
two senior level courses and by students who wish to work on control systems for
their senior design projects. The wide range of physical phenomena afforded by
the experiments will give students experience in handling different types of
problems, from a point that precedes the typical textbook setting, through the
actual implementation and performance. By requiring the student to model and
control a physical system, students should gain a better understanding of the
underlying theory; through there use of the CAD tools, they should be able to
design better control systems, and be better prepared to face the demands of new
technologies.