* 9050652
* Incorporating Thermal Analysis and Polymeric Principles     into the Undergraduate Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/1990,04/30/1992
* James Bowser, SUNY College at Fredonia
* Standard Grant
* Bonnee Groover
* 04/30/1992
* USD 27,337.00

Through this project, the institution acquired thermal analysis equipment
including a differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) module, a thermogravimetric
analysis (TGA) module, a module controller which operates either device, a
mechanical cooling accessory to allow programmed cooling, and various
accessories. The acquisition greatly strengthened the undergraduate research
component of the chemistry curriculum by providing the means for three faculty,
with demonstrated interest and skill in thermal analysis, to involve students in
such research projects. As part of the development plan, students were allowed
to participate in undergraduate research as early as the summer of their first
year. DSC and TGA experiments utilizing polymeric materials have been
incorporated into both analytical and physical laboratories. This allows
training in both thermal analysis and polymeric principles in the curriculum. A
thermal analysis experiment based on food, beverage, or pharmaceutical products
is included in an analytical laboratory for health science majors, thus exposing
this group to widely used thermal analytical methods. Longer term goals of the
project include potential offering of a polymer chemistry laboratory to augment
the existing lecture course in polymers and heightened awareness/interest in
polymer science from the rest of the departmental faculty. The institution
contributed to this project in an amount equal to the NSF funds.