* 9050032
* The Construction of Elementary Mathematics Project (CEM)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1990,12/31/1993
* Martin Simon, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David E. Jones
* 12/31/1993
* USD 490,961.00

The Construction of Elementary Mathematics Project (CEM) Penn State University
will develop, implement, and evaluate a model program to prepare elementary
mathematics teachers based on a constructivist view of learning. The program
will consist of a coordinated, four-course sequance, three mathematics content
courses and one course on mathematics learning and teaching. The mathematics
courses will be based on the NCTM Standards (1989) and the instruction in these
courses will provide the prospective elementary teachers with the constructivist
model of teaching. The coordinated course sequence will make the connection
between the development of subject matter knowledge and the development of
pedagogical knowledge in mathematics. In addition, CEM will study the nature of
prospective teachers' learning, development, and attitudes as they participate
in the new program. A new instrument to assess the subject matter knowledge of
elementary teachers in mathematics will be developed for the project. The
research component of the project will evaluate and document the new model and
contribute to the knowledge base for future teacher preparation efforts. Faculty
from the mathematics department and from the mathematics education department
will work jointly in developing the program. Consultants who are leaders in
mathematics, mathematics education, and teacher education will advise the
project. Classroom teachers will participate in planning courses and in
providing classroom expertise to the preservice teachers during the methods
course. The instructional model developed by the project and the research
findings will be disseminated to the statewide network of Commonwealth campuses
and teacher centers in Pennsylvania. The University's cost sharing will be 17%
of NSF's contribution.