* 9050268
* Habitat Ecology Training Program, A Project to Train        Elementary School Teachers in the Use of Zoological         Collections to Enhance Science Education
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/1990,10/31/1995
* Annette Berkovits, Wildlife Conservation Society
* Standard Grant
* James D. Ellis
* 10/31/1995
* USD 593,587.00

The purpose of this program enhance the ability of elementary school teachers
to use the collections of zoos as living laboratories for their students.
Teachers from New York City as well as teams of teachers from across the United
States will take part in the project. To support such widespread activity,
fifteen additional zoos will participate directly sending a team of zoo
educators and local teachers. Ecology will be the overarching theme of the
inservice activity and the participants will learn to use the zoo as an outdoor
classroom for teaching about the earth's biomes and animal adaptations to
habitats. Specifically, the workshop series will highlight problems associated
with endangered species, and will target the study of rain forests, deserts,
wetlands, deciduous forests and grasslands. As a result of the inservice a
teachers' manual will be produced which will support the participants as they
work with others to improve the teaching of life science at the elementary
level. The manual will also have many suggestions about inquiry activities that
can be done at zoos or before or after visits. It will be a valuable resource to
teachers as well as others who are responsible introducing children to wealth of
ideas, concepts and process that can be learned by studying animals in the zoo
environment. The cost sharing for the project will be thirty percent of the NSF
portion.