* 9050020
* Consolidated Math-Science Curriculum for Elementary Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1994
* William Walters, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Tina H. Straley
* 12/31/1994
* USD 310,989.00

The University of Wisconsin--Milwaukee will develop an innovative program for
the science and mathematics preparation of elementary teachers entitled
"Consolidated Math-Science Curriculum for Elementary Teachers." The science
content core will consist of a series of twelve one- credit minicourses which
will cover the basic science needed for elementary teaching and a one-
credit/Science/Technology Society capstone course. The mathematics core will
consist of a new two-semester sequence guided by the NCTM standards. Both the
mathematics and science courses will utilize manipulatives and laboratory work
and will emphasize inquiry oriented and activity based learning. The mathematics
and science methods courses will be coordinated with the content courses.
Faculty from mathematics and the sciences will collaborate with faculty from the
school of education in establishing and evaluating the program. The University
of Wisconsin--Milwaukee is one of the Project 30 institutions, a three-year
project to redesign teacher education curricula. The Center for Teacher
Education at UWM has been designated as a Center for Excellence in the UW
system, and the Center has forged strong ties with the Milwaukee business and
education community for the recruitment of minorities and the promotion of
science and math education and literacy in the Milwaukee public schools. The
university's cost sharing will be 39% of NSF's contribution.