* 9050407
* Concurrency Experiments in a UNIX Environment
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/1990,10/31/1992
* Steven Robbins, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 10/31/1992
* USD 91,000.00

Distributed computing is an important aspect of many fields of computer science
including architecture, operating systems, programming languages, data base
management, algorithms, and artificial intelligence. Undergraduates are usually
introduced to this subject in an operating systems course during a study of
process control and concurrency. There is, however, a lack of programming
assignments which give students practical experience with these concepts within
a single semester course. This project establishes a laboratory and develops an
innovative laboratory curriculum which can serve as a model for undergraduate
operating systems courses in other programs. The laboratory is workstation-based
and uses the UNIX operating system in a windowing environment. Fourteen
workstations and a server have been purchased and networked. A series of
experiments and student projects based on virtual rings are being implemented,
and a laboratory manual is being produced which describes student assignments
covering most of the topics contained in a standard operating systems course. In
addition, debugging tools are being integrated with the windows to allow
students to monitor concurrent computations. The award is being matched by an
equal amount from the principal investigator's institution.