* 9050487
* Laser Theory, Spectroscopy, and Kinetics Equipment for      Undergraduate Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/1990,09/30/1992
* William Polik, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Bonnee Groover
* 09/30/1992
* USD 44,037.00

Laser applications impact virtually every branch of science. In chemistry, the
laser has revolutionized the fields of high resolution spectroscopy and
molecular reaction dynamics. However, relatively few institutions offer
laboratory instruction using lasers at the undergraduate level. A sequence of
laser experiments is being taught in the Physical Chemistry curriculum for
chemistry majors at this institution. The experimental sequence has been
carefully devised to teach students the underlying principles of laser operation
and to introduce them to useful and exciting applications of lasers in
chemistry. In one experiment, students develop a basic understanding of the
essential components in a laser by "building" a helium-neon laser and
characterizing the emitted laser beam. In a subsequent experiment, students
obtain a laser induced fluorescence (LIF) spectrum of iodine with a pulsed dye
laser. This experiment introduces students to a tunable laser and demonstrates
the advantage of frequency resolution when using a laser for spectroscopy. In
another experiment, students use the same pulsed dye laser system to measure
electronic energy transfer rates from pyrimidine to various buffer gases. This
experiment vividly demonstrates the temporal resolution afforded by laser
measurement of dynamic processes. The results of this project are being
communicated to the general scientific educational community through
presentations at professional meetings, and in teaching journal articles. The
institution contributed to this project in an amount equal to the NSF funds.