* 9050234
* A Nationally Distributed Planetarium Star Program and Chart on Cosmic Catastrophes
* EHR,DRL
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1992
* Von Del Chamberlain, Hansen Planetarium
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 12/31/1992
* USD 225,496.00

The Hansen Planetarium proposes the creation, writing, and production of a
50-minute star theatre program, Cosmic Catastrophes: A Planet At Risk?, aimed at
informally educating over a million individuals regarding the vulnerability of
our Earth. The further production of four interactive exhibits is planned to
accompany the program. This program will be marketed and distributed at a
nominal charge to 250 national planetariums, with 50 additional production
packets planned for loan. In this fashion, top-quality, accurate, and timely
science education can be guaranteed to a large selection of audiences.
Scientific research tells us that catastrophes of global and interplanetary
proportions have happened in the past, there is evidence that they could occur
in the present, and they pose an imminent danger in the future. The utilization
of expert consultants, in conjunction with Hansen Planetarium staff, will insure
this program presents the most current information available about these cosmic
catastrophes. Its interactive format is designed to stimulate a proactive
approach to problem solution on the part of the audience, especially in
reference to ecological or environmental issues. The star show format, with its
dynamic special effects, will make scientific theories surrounding cosmic
catastrophes accessible and excitiong.