* 9050610
* Optical Instrumentation Upgrade and Purchase of a Laser     Laboratory for Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1993
* Jerry Jasinski, Keene State College
* Standard Grant
* Bonnee Groover
* 01/31/1993
* USD 42,905.00

The institution modernized two major instruments in the areas of absorption and
luminescence spectroscopy and created a central multi-functional laser
laboratory for use in upper division teaching and student research. Both
instruments and the output from two laser light sources will be interfaced to
the same central microcomputer. Capabilities in each of these spectroscopic
techniques have been expanded to allow for computerized data acquisition and
analysis for use in laboratory courses in physical chemistry, instrumental
analysis, polymers, special topics and independent/directed study as well as in
departmental undergraduate research projects. The laser laboratory allows
students to realize and work with the unique capabilities of laser light
sources. These include a He-Ne laser, a He-Cd laser and a nitrogen-pumped dye
laser in addition to associated optics, a monochrometer, a detection system and
a microcomputer for experiment control and data analysis. In the teaching labs
novel absorption and luminescence measurements are made from continuous broad
band sources and monochromated laser sources. These are focused on physical and
chemical properties in ways which more clearly elucidate optical effects in
materials as well as illustrate the power of modern optical techniques.
Independent study and research projects involve experiment dealing with the
spectroscopic illumination of laser dye materials in the solid state, as
spectroscopic probes in surfactant and micelle based systems, and in the pH
dependent polymeric behavior of bioorganic ligand bonded to lanthanides in
association with EDTA. The institution contributed to this project in an amount
equal to the NSF funds.