* 9050255
* MASTERS II:  Math and Science Teachers for Reservation      Schools Two
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/1991,09/30/1995
* Lelon Capps, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Debbie Jones
* 09/30/1995
* USD 1,096,931.00

This project, Masters II: Math and Science Teachers for Reservations Schools
II, is a renewal of a previously funded program which will serve 117 teachers of
Native American children in grades K-9. Teachers will be selected from the
entire United States, but especially from the sixteen states with schools
serving predominantly Native American students. Each year, thirty five teachers
from public and Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) schools will participate in
intensive eight-week workshops to improve their mathematics and science content
and pedagogy. Six of these teachers will be selected to participate for a second
and third year eight-week workshop during the two subsequent summers. These
selected teachers will mentor new participants, develop their leadership skills
and work closely with agency and education personnel to effect change in their
own local school districts. This project design of building leaders through
their three-year involvement holds real promise for effecting change. Curriculum
materials, especially adapted for their effectiveness with Native American
students, will be used extensively. An existing BIA funded electronic network,
ENAN, will facilitate the networking so important for teachers who are spread
across the country. The University of Kansas, Haskell Indian Junior College and
participating school districts as well as the BIA are cost- sharing this
program. The bulk of the cost-share is coming from the Bureau of Indian Affairs
in an amount twice that of the NSF request. This funding supports programs that
are integrated with the MASTERS project as well as those that precede it and
support it.