* 9050016
* Integrating Pedagogy and Content in Pre-Service Mathematics Teacher Education
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1990,12/31/1993
* Thomas Cooney, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* William E. Haver
* 12/31/1993
* USD 585,551.00

The project's focus is the development and evaluation of five units that
integrate mathematical content and pedagogical strategies in mathematics. The
units are designed to illustrate topics in mathematics (distributivity,
functions, Pythagorean theorem, basic combinatorics, and applications of
modeling) that are central to the current secondary school mathematics
curriculum, while offering excellent vehicles for illustrating new thrusts
outlined by NCTM Standards. These units will provide preservice teachers with
opportunities to see connections between a variety of mathematical topics and
their applications; to experience the learning of mathematics with an eye toward
structuring that mathematics for teaching; and to construct a vision of
mathematics as a human activity built from reflection, activity, and
modification of perceptions. The activities of the project will involve
developing the units taking into consideration significant content at the
secondary school level and elements of problem posing, problem solving, various
mathematical representations and pedagogical approaches, and available
technology where appropriate. The units will be field tested at three American
universities and will be reviewed by outstanding teachers, teacher educators,
and mathematicians. Reports will be written on the impact of the units on the
preservice teachers' conceptions of mathematics and the teaching of mathematics
as they engage the units. The units will be developed by an international team
of mathematics educators and mathematicians, all experienced in writing
materials for perservice teachers. The cost sharing has been negotiated to the
level of 26.7% of the funds requested from NSF.