* 9050015
* The Development of an Innovative Model for the Preservice   Preparation of Elementary Teachers for Enhanced Science,    Mathematics, and Technology Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1996
* Willard Parker, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 07/31/1996
* USD 1,671,994.00

The purpose of this five-year project is to develop, field test, revise,
institutionalize, and disseminate a model research-based preservice program to
prepare elementary teachers for enhanced science, mathematics, and technology
teaching. A team of eight scientist and ten science educators will work in
conjunction with 25 experienced elementary teachers and four principals to
totally restructure the courses in content and pedagogy and the field
experiences for preservice teachers in the preparatory program. One major goal
of the work is to coordinate the set of experiences so that there is a
consistency in the environment and epistomological underpinnings for the content
and the methods courses and the classes in the schools where these students will
have extensive field experiences. The students will take 27 semester hours of
mathematics and science content. Eight hours of methods will be distributed so
that the students will be engaged in thinking about teaching elementary school
science and mathematics as it relates to the particular science or mathematics
area being emphasized in the content courses. Each of the methods courses will
have an accompanying field experience with teachers that are knowledgeable about
what the students are studying at the university. The program will have students
engaged in studying science and mathematics and working in schools over a three
year time span. Another important aspect of the work is the careful attention
that the P.I. and the project staff will pay to evaluating the impact of the
intervention and its component parts on all of those involved--preservice
teachers, experienced teachers, scientists, science educators, and, most
importantly, the students of the new elementary teachers in their early years of
teaching. The project recognizes that many new teachers leave teaching in the
first one to three years. This project will provide support for the graduates
during the first year in an attempt to network these new teachers in such a way
that more of them will stay in teaching. Kansas State University will cost share
in excess of 56% of the amount requested from NSF.