* 9050491
* Microcomputer Interfaced Experiments in Introductory        Undergraduate Physics Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/1990,10/31/1992
* Steven Mellema, Gustavus Adolphus College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 10/31/1992
* USD 43,985.00

The physics department is equipping introductory physics laboratories with
microcomputer data acquisition and analysis equipment at each lab station. The
goal is to enhance the experimental component of the introductory courses by
increasing the diversity of phenomena which can be studied, improving the
efficiency with which data can be taken, and allowing the instructor to tailor
the teaching of a particular experiment to the level of the students involved.
At the lowest level, software written by the instructor guides the students'
interaction with the experiment. At a higher level, students write portions of
the software needed to control the experiment. This exposure to computer
interfacing prepares the students for their advanced laboratory experiences in
which similar equipment and techniques are used. The equipment includes sixteen
digital mulitmeters with IEEE-488 interfaces and sixteen MS-DOS compatible
personal computers with IEEE-488 digital input/output, analog-to- digital input
and digital-to-analog output interfaces. All computers are connected in a Local
Area Network, run by a single file server equipped with a fast, high-capacity
hard drive. Software is being written in standard, high-level programming
languages. The college is matching the award with an equal amount of funds.