* 9050712
* Incorporation of a Diode Array UV-Visible Spectrophotometer in the Undergraduate Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/1990,08/31/1992
* Leslie Lyons, Grinnell College
* Standard Grant
* Bonnee Groover
* 08/31/1992
* USD 11,166.00

A Diode Array (DA) UV-Visible spectrophotometer has greatly enhanced the
undergraduate laboratory experience. The instrument is used in three primary
laboratory environments: general chemistry laboratory, instrumental analysis,
and independent student research. In the general laboratory, students use the DA
UV-Vis. spectrophotometer in the analysis of the manganese content of steel.
This allows students the opportunity to use modern, computer based
instrumentation in the first chemistry course. This helps to demonstrate to the
students the role, pervasiveness and power of instrumentation in chemistry. In
the Instrumental Analysis course, a laboratory block of "tandem techniques" is
integrated to demonstrate the additional information one can obtain from a
tandem technique as compared to the component techniques used independently. In
order to develop a cohesive laboratory, it is necessary to include a combined
spectroscopy-electrochemistry technique. An ideal example is ultraviolet-visible
spectroelectrochemistry which requires a DA UV-Vis. instrument. The block of
laboratories involving the student and comparison of tandem techniques with each
other and with their individual component techniques provides broad exposure to,
and appreciation for the advantages of tandem techniques. Finally, undergraduate
research is one of the best educational experiences for students, and the time
they have for it is limited. Therefore, this project is to providing the most
effective instrumentation possible to ensure a productive, positive research
experiences; the UV-Visible diode array spectrophotometer is used extensively in
the summer research program as well as by student researchers during the
academic year. The institution has contributed to this project in an amount
equal to the NSF funds.