* 9050033
* A Collaborative Approach to Science and Mathematics         Education for Urban Students, Especially Black and Hispanic,Grades 7-12
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1990,06/30/1991
* David Doherty, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert E. Wylen
* 06/30/1991
* USD 150,000.00

The GMI Management & Engineering Institute has developed a human network based
in Michigan which includes major employers, university professors and
administrators, associations of professional engineers, five city school
districts (in primarily minority dominated areas), organized labor, and
community organizations. The network is dedicated to the task of improving
science and mathematics education in inner-city schools grades 7-12 by focussing
on three related strategies. The first strategy is directed to affecting culture
changes within the participating inner-city school communities. The second
strategy is to assemble a team of outstanding instructors to deliver four
innovative courses via live, interactive satellite transmission. Three of the
courses are based on NSF sponsored projects: MSU Middle Grades Mathematics
Project, Lawrence Hall-Foss Physical Science for Middle School, and High School
Algebra. The fourth course, high school physical science, was developed by a
science committee of the University of Michigan faculty. The third strategy is
to establish a mentoring system between scientists and mathematicians and
students and school teachers to enhance the course content and the teacher's
knowledge and to provide professional development opportunities for them. The
Detroit-based pilot project, which will run for six months, includes ten schools
(five high school, five middle schools) in five school districts and involves 24
teachers and 1040 students. Cost sharing in the amount of $466,500 is 300% of
the NSF contribution.