* 9050359
* Project "SEED":  Science Education through Experiments and  Demonstrations
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1990,11/30/1993
* Christos Zahopoulos, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Stewart
* 11/30/1993
* USD 356,691.00

Project SEED is a 33 month program sponsored by Northeastern University to
enhance middle level science teachers' use of experiments, demonstrations and
projects in their classes. It is based on the well-established notion that an
understanding of the basic concepts requires extensive prior experience with
concrete examples of these projects. Working with an advisory group of science
supervisors and coordinators from both urban and suburban Boston-area schools, a
comprehensive program has been developed to train teachers to incorporate
demonstrations and experiments into their individual teaching styles. The
principal component of Project SEED is a four-week summer program, held for two
summers, which involve workshop sessions, seminars and field experiences. Twelve
day-long workshop sessions will focus on demonstrations and experiments that
will give middle-school students concrete experience with the basic concepts and
physical laws that underlie all of science. Topics covered include: length and
time; area and volume; mass and density; pressure and weather; force, work and
energy; motion; earth and the solar system; elements and compounds; optics; heat
and temperature; and electricity and magnetism. Each workshop session will
involve a variety of activities that can be adapted to a diversity of teaching
situations and curricula. Participants will also help build museum-style
exhibits. These exhibits will be designed to give the students a joyful
interaction with science, spark their interest and curiosity and to provide them
with some hands-on experiences which may not otherwise be available. Aiding the
participants in the workshop activities and the museum projects will be two
teacher interns who have been selected from previous summer workshop programs.
Arrangements have been made with public utilities, private corporations and
government laboratories for special seminars and tours aimed at connecting
curricular material to everyday industrial and scientific practice. There will
also be seminars and visits to research laboratories at Northeastern University.
Prior to the summer program, two seminars and site visits will be held with the
participants to assess their individual needs, interests and strengths, and the
facilities available to them. After the summer program, the participating
teachers will meet individually with members of the Project staff to develop a
set of goals for implementing workshop ideas in their classes. Follow-up
seminars and site visits will be conducted to help the teachers meet their
specific goals. A formative evaluation procedure will be used to help the
teachers assess how much their teaching benefited from the program. The NSF
share of the project is $326,169 which is being matched by $206,952 from the
institution. This constitutes a match of more than 63%.