* 9050499
* Undergraduate Lasers, Fiber Optics, and Photonics Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/1990,03/31/1993
* Keith Wanser, California State University-Fullerton
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 03/31/1993
* USD 47,451.00

The Physics Department is developing a new undergraduate instructional
laboratory Lasers, Fiber Optics and Photonics Laboratory. This laboratory is
giving the student a practical working knowledge of state of the art devices,
methods, and techniques used in these new and emerging technologies. This
laboratory course complements two lecture courses that have recently been added
to the curriculum, Fiber Optics and Photonics, and Laser Physics and
Optoelectronic Devices. These fields are central to the development of several
optical technologies and instrumentation techniques of the future, and there is
a shortage of trained scientists and engineers in these rapidly developing
disciplines. Fiber optic sensors and communication/data links, magneto-optic
storage media, semiconductor optoelectronics, optics and electronics on the same
chip (integrated), and optical computing will have major impacts on the future
economy and science and technology base of the U.S. The equipment, in
conjunction with equipment already on hand, allows a broad variety of student
experiments to be performed. Novel features of the laboratory include work with
several types of photonic equipment, experiments with gas and semiconductor
laser, beam, spectral, modal, coherence, and noise properties, high speed fiber
optical data communication techniques, acousto-optic beam deflection and
frequency shifting, experiments in fiber optic interferometric and distributed
sensors, measurements of magneto-optic and polarization properties of optical
fibers and other media, experiments with integrated optic phase modulators and
electric field sensors, and computer interfacing and control of laboratory
instrumentation and equipment. Major equipment items purchased include an
optical spectrometer, Fabry Perot interferometer, RF spectrum analyzer, high
speed pulse generator, stepper motor controlled precision translation and
rotation stages, an optical vibration isolation table, an integrated optic Mach
Zehnder modulator, and laboratory computer with data acquisition hardware and
software. The university is matching the award with an equal amount of funds.