* 9050370
* Adsorption Equilibria and Adsorptive Separations
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/1991,02/28/1993
* Venkat Bhethanabotla, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Draper
* 02/28/1993
* USD 11,118.00

Separation processes based upon the scientific principles of adsorption are
becoming increasingly important in the chemical industry. On the other hand,
current treatment of the thermodynamic fundamentals and process principles of
adsorption is inadequate or non-existent in many core chemical engineering
undergraduate curricula and textbooks. The specific aims of this project are to
introduce these topics into our core undergraduate courses, and to establish
associated laboratories. Such introduction is particularly facilitated by our
core curricular structure, wherein one full course considers the fundamentals of
phase equilibria and another the principles of separation processes. Each of
these classes has a laboratory course integrated with it, which the students
take during the same semester they register for the lecture classes. A
volumetric adsorption apparatus and a pressure swing adsorption apparatus (PSA)
will be constructed to be included in these laboratories. No major pieces of
equipment are requested. The nature of the experiments requires that the
apparatuses by constructed rather than purchased. The students will be exposed
to several new concepts peculiar to this subject, which must be learnt for the
successful industrial practice of adsorption related phenomena.