* 9050710
* Processing and Computer Vision: A New Dimension for Under-  graduate Electrical and Computer Engineering Programs
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1993
* Barry Farbrother, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/1993
* USD 49,352.00

This project concerns a new Computer Vision and Image Processing Laboratory, to
support three senior-level courses in Electrical and Computer Engineering.
Traditionally such courses have been available only to graduate students at
major universities where the expense of sophisticated workstations and support
equipment can be borne by externally-funded research projects. The new
laboratory will occupy dedicated space in the recently renovated Moench Hall
that will be known as the Image Processing and Computer Vision Laboratory. An
introductory course entitled "Principles of Image Processing" is already
offereed, but without the benefit of a laboratory class students are deprived of
essential hands-on experience. The equipment will allow students to capture real
images and to learn some of the operations associated with image processing
(image capture, sampling and quantization, gradient- based edge detection, image
averaging, and statistical image analysis). They will also be able to appreciate
some of the difficulties and limitations of computer vision systems at the
present state of development. The provision of funds to put this advanced
laboratory in place will add a new dimension to the Electrical and Computer
Engineering program at Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology. The institution is
contributing an amount equal to the award.***//