* 9051382
* Interferometry and Laser Spectroscopy in Undergraduate      Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1992
* Richard Brundage, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 12/31/1992
* USD 22,706.00

Macalester College is introducing interferometry into the undergraduate physics
program through an advanced laboratory course on laser spectroscopy and
faculty/student collaborative research. This is accomplished through the use of
three different interferometers: a Michelson interferometer, a high finesse
spherical interferometer, and a large aperture plane-parallel Fabry-Perot
interferometer. All of these instruments are used to illustrate the concepts of
free spectral range, finesse, and instrument profile introduced in the Laser
Spectroscopy course. The Michelson interferometer is used to investigate optical
Fourier transform spectroscopy as an example of the power and limitations of the
transform techniques that have become so widespread in modern science. The
spherical interferometer is used to study the cavity modes of different laser
systems, such as He-Ne, dye, and diode lasers. The plane-parallel interferometer
is used as a high resolution spectrometer to study laser, atomic vapor, and
solid state light sources. The latter two instruments illustrate the hierarchy
of optical bandwidths, from the inhomogeneous Doppler profile of a gas to the
gain limited bandwidth of a single mode laser. Two general purpose computers
control and analyze the data from the new instruments. A graphic programming
language allows students to program these computers quickly and efficiently. The
instruments support faculty/student research in solid state spectroscopy, fiber
optics, and astronomy when the Laser Spectroscopy course is not in session. The
College is matching the award with an equal amount of funds.4