* 9051226
* Undergraduate Construction Materials Laboratory             Computer-Based Instrumentation
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1993
* David Richardson, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Draper
* 03/31/1993
* USD 4,175.00

The aim of the project is to teach microcomputer-based laboratory
instrumentation and data analysis techniques to civil engineering
undergraduates. This includes the selection of the type and characteristics of
instrumentation, and the use of statistical data analysis methods. The major
instruments to be utilized are measurement devices such as LVDT's, a pressure
transducer, an extensometer, signal conditioners, an analog-to-digital
converter, an IBM 286 computer with hard drive, a plotter, printer and
associated software. The applications of the equipment will occur in a required
junior level undergraduate civil engineering course in construction materials.
The students will be involved in monitoring load and deformation electronically,
observing real time date display, using the microcomputer to manipulate and
analyze the data, and to produce hardcopy reports and plots. The project is
significant because it will familiarize civil engineering students with modern
electronic microcomputer-based instrumentation and microcomputers. This
instructional block is a logical extension of the sophomore level Introduction
to Computational Techniques for Civil Engineering Course where students are
introduced to various software tools and numerical analysis techniques. In this
way the student will acquired both software and hardware computer skills
necessary in today's civil engineering profession. Further, this equipment
furthers to stated departmental goal of "replacing obsolete equipment with
state-of- the-art electronic date acquisition systems...?and! to stress
communication skills, computer skills and statistical skills."