* 9051391
* Revitalized Undergraduate Chemistry with High Performance   Liquid Chromatography
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1992
* Howard McLean, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bonnee Groover
* 09/30/1992
* USD 19,759.00

This undergraduate project implemented a versatile and reliable analytical
technique that has become the method of choice for many of today's more
difficult chemical analysis problems. A Shimadzu LC-6A High Performance Liquid
Chromatographic system (HPLC), with refractive index, fluorescence, uv/visible
absorption, and electrochemical detection systems, provided flexibility high
sensitivity, and low detection limits. Trace metal and organic analysis of
various matrices are very important in fully evaluating the quality of an
industrial process and in determining safe consumable projects. Realistic and
"real world" opportunities are available to undergraduate chemistry and chemical
engineering students interested in industrial and government careers that
emphasize quality control and environmental investigations. Practical
applications of HPLC involve the analysis of aqueous industrial effluents,
natural products, polymers, forensic samples, and a host of commercial products
including cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, and pesticides. Chemistry and chemical
engineering majors are able to vigorously pursue undergraduate research projects
by designing and developing separation and detection methods. They utilize
various detection systems, columns, solvent matrices, and chromatographic
techniques like normal reverse phase, ion- exchange, and ion pair
chromatography. The institution contributed to this project in an amount equal
to the NSF funds.