* 9051602
* U.S.M. Computer-Integrated-Electronics Instruction          Laboratory Seeding Project
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/1990,09/30/1992
* Mustafa Guvench, University of Southern Maine
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 09/30/1992
* USD 63,500.00

This project establishes a Computer-Integrated Electronics laboratory for
undergraduate instruction. The laboratory is composed of ten workstations, each
containing an IEEE-488 networked digital oscilloscope, arbitrary waveform
generator, digital multimeter, and a 386-based PC equipped with math co-
processor, VGA graphics, 80 MB hard disk hardware and SPICE simulation,
scientific graphing, schematic and printed circuit layout design, data
management and wordprocessor software. This laboratory provides the medium for
the integration of computers and computer technology into the instruction of
Electronics. The measurement equipment, computers, and software constitute a
complete workstation environment allowing computer controlled automatic testing
and measurement of electronic circuits and systems, data/signal acquisition,
data/signal processing, circuit design, schematics drawing, printed circuit
design and layout, and electronic circuit simulation. This laboratory
simultaneously meets the needs of introductory and advanced electronics courses,
exposes the student to modern computer interfaced instrumentation and computer
aided circuit design, and provides on-site simulation and data/signal processing
tools. It also provides an integrated environment for undergraduate research and
design projects. The award is being matched with a greater, 158%, amount by the
principal investigator's institution.