* 9051044
* Development of an Instrument-Based Environmental            Laboratory Course
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1992
* John Keenan, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Draper
* 09/30/1992
* USD 21,656.00

An instrument-based environmental laboratory course entitled: ENVIRONMENTAL
SYSTEMS ANALYSIS will be developed in this project. It is a core course to be
offered by the newly established Bachelor of Applied Science (BAS) program in
Environmental Systems. This new BAS program provided the students with an
understanding of the techniques for quantitative description on environmental
phenomena, the technologies for environmental control, and the laboratory skill
for environmental analysis. The proposed course will achieve the last objective
of the program. It will be offered to upper level undergraduates. A key element
in the course is the experiments to be performed by students that directly
relate to the topics covered in two other core courses: one deals with treatment
technologies for environmental control, and the other deals with mathematical
modeling of environmental systems. Meanwhile, students will learn to operate
modern laboratory instruments/equipment through classroom lectures (2 hrs/week)
and hand-on laboratory exercises (3 hrs/week). This represents a significant
departure from traditional environmental laboratory courses, which tend to only
emphasize laboratory skills, Student will perform eight experiments in this
course. In addition, a laboratory safety session will be offered prior to
laboratory experiments to equip students with necessary knowledge for safety
precaution and hazard prevention. The materials covered will be suitable for a
one-semester course. The instruments/equipment requested will be suitable to
accommodate for up to 20 students in a class. The instrument/equipment requested
will allow student to perform reliable and accurate experiments thereby
maximizing the benefits offered by such a course. Results and experience
obtained through development of this course will be disseminated via
publications of journal articles and presentations at conferences. Ultimately, a
monograph on the subject will be published.