* 9051641
* Nuclear Physics Experiments for an Undergraduate Modern     Physics Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1992
* Guy Emery, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 12/31/1992
* USD 30,332.00

The goal in restructuring Bowdoin's Modern Physics laboratory is to increase
active and thoughtful participation of students in the laboratory experience
through involvement in the design, construction, and execution of lab
experiments. The new lab experiments are designed to achieve this goal for a
broad range of students with differing career goals, at the level appropriate to
each student. This constraint has led to the choice of a lab structure with
three levels of experiments, varying their degree of sophistication and
instrumentation. For more efficient use of resources these experiments have been
created using some common equipment where possible. The major instruments used
are PC-based plug-in multichannel analyzers, scintillators and scintillation
counters, X-ray diffractometers, photomultipliers, time-to-amplitude converters,
as well as germanium, silicon, and sodium-iodide detectors. These are being used
in various experiments involving nuclear decay machanisms, gamma-rays, X-rays,
and other decay products such as positrons or muons. This project is a necessary
step in achieving the goal of providing excellent preparation for those
considering further graduate study, as well as cultivating and encouraging
students to major in physics who may follow other career paths. The college is
matching the award with an equal amount of funds.