* 9051707
* Geophysical Equipment for an Undergraduate Laboratory in    Shallow Subsurface Exploration
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/1990,11/30/1992
* Arthur Goldstein, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 11/30/1992
* USD 27,817.00

Colgate University is teaching a "hands-on" laboratory in the course in
geophysics which focuses on the shallow subsurface environment. Such
investigations are becoming more crucial as groundwater shortages and
groundwater pollution become more common. The course is a modification of the
senior-level geophysics course which is being changed so that the lab focuses on
those techniques which are most applicable to the shallow subsurface: gravity,
seismology, and earth resistivity. The labs are structured in 3 modules, each
dealing with with one of the techniques. The first week of each segment is
devoted to measurement techniques and data reduction. The following 2 weeks are
devoted to data collection within a segment of the Chenango River Valley, a
glacially buried valley containing approximately 500 feet of sand and gravel.
The final week of each segment is devoted to modelling the subsurface using two-
dimensional techniques and personal computers. Each year, the course will
investigate a segment of the valley using all three techniques. Over the years,
a larger picture of the valley will be acquired as one group of students merges
their results with those of years past. Students are also encouraged to utilize
the equipment in senior research projects. The university is matching the award
with an equal amount of funds.