* 9051857
* Fluid Mechanics Modular Laboratory and Exhibit
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1994
* Donald Richards, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/1994
* USD 16,630.00

The purpose of this project is to introduce a laboratory component into an
introductory fluid mechanics course. This is accomplished by the purchase of a
specially designed and fabricated modular fluid mechanics laboratory and
exhibit. The modular laboratory will consist of a series of experiments which
depict various fluid dynamic and hydrostatic principles. In a museum exhibit
fashion, water is pumped to an overhead reservoir and sent cascading through the
various experimental stations which are interconnected by siphons, open
channels, and weirs. The experimental stations, fabricated using clear acrylic
pipes and tanks, display principles ranging from buoyancy to momentum in
visually appealing settings. Questions accompany each experimental station to
promote student interest ant to test their intuition. While serving as a
stimulating course introduction, the key feature of the laboratory exhibit is
the modularization. Each break-away experiment is self- contained and easily
understood, allowing for data acquisition and analysis by students in an open-
lab format during the quarter. The lab exercises, which can be accomplished
quickly, will serve to verify or dispel the student's original intuitive
predictions. To conclude the course, the individual experiments are reattached
to the exhibit. The principles which have now been solidified in the student's
minds are once again depicted in the fascinating, museum- like exhibit. The
institution is contributing an amount equal to the award.***//