* 9051795
* Cell Fractionation: Introduction of Research Techniques intothe Biology Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1992
* Thomas Koppenheffer, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 12/31/1992
* USD 49,312.00

Trinity University provides many opportunities for undergraduates to become
involved with faculty research projects. They are encouraging students to take
advantage of these opportunities to learn research by modifying laboratory
exercises in a manner that will increase the students' familiarity with modern
research instruments and techniques. They are purchasing a high speed centrifuge
and ultracentrifuge for cell fractionation procedures, and two UV-vis
spectrophotometers and a scanning spectrofluorimeter for fraction analysis.
These instruments are being used to upgrade laboratory courses in cellular and
molecular biology, including a sophomore level cell and molecular course, and
advanced courses in developmemtal biology, endocrinology and plant physiology.
The centrifuges are being used for cell fractionation experiments and
competitive binding assays such as immunoassay. The UV-vis spectrophotometers
are being used for marker enzyme assays, protein and DNA measurement. The
spectrofluorimeter is being used to introduce students to recently developed
techniques using targeted fluorescence probes. The incorporation of such
procedures into the curriculum should enhance the students' competence to enter
graduate programs and careers in biological research. The university is
contributing an amount equal to the award.