* 9051668
* Equipment to Improve the Teaching of Behavioral Neurosciencein an Undergraduate Psychology Program
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1990,09/30/1992
* Larry Goldman, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 09/30/1992
* USD 47,735.00

The laboratory section of the course in physiological psychology is being
upgraded so that students will experience the research methods of modern
behavioral neuroscience. The focus is on behavioral testing and biopotential
recording systems. The behavioral testing equipment consists of a 4 station
operant conditioning system, a figure-8 activity device with photoelectric
sensing, a radial arm maze, a water maze with photoelectric sensing and video
monitoring, a rota-rod treadmill, and a rotometer. The human biopotential
recording equipment consists of a 24 channel "Neurosearch" system for acquiring
and processing human biopotentials, and an AST 390C computer. The animal
biopotential equipment consists of a remote telemetry system for EEG, EKG, and
temperature, and interfaces with the computer for data collection. The
laboratory experiments using this equipment are designed to enable students to
explore the behavioral consequences of biological manipulations, and directly
observe the physiological activity that accompanies ongoing behavior. Students
thus gain a better understanding and appreciation of the biological bases of all
behavior, and are better prepared for graduate work in areas related to
neuroscience. The equipment is also used in independent student research
projects. The university will contribute an amount equal to the award.