* 9051430
* Introduction to Experimental Physiology
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1990,08/31/1993
* Marvin Bernstein, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 08/31/1993
* USD 82,929.00

This award provides funds to the Department of Biology at New Mexico State
university to help purchase equipment to be used in a new, independent, year-
long physiology laboratory course. It will replace existing laboratories in
animal and cell physiology, will initiate laboratory teaching of microbial and
plant physiology, and will supplement existing lecture courses in animal, plant,
microbial, and cellular physiology, and in endocrinology and neurophysiology.
The course will, however, be neither subsidiary to nor dependent on lecture
courses. Instead, students will hold a 75-minute Tutorial and Planning workshop
where they will: (1) present briefings on principles, using abbreviated written
material; (2) confront live material or published information that poses a
problem; (3) formulate testable hypothesis that use representative methods and
instruments on hand; (4) review previous results in preparation for formal
report writing. Later that week students will convene in an open-ended
laboratory where teams will learn necessary techniques and test their own
hypothesis. Students will not "cookbook" nor know expected results. The unity of
experimental approaches across disciplines and the similarity of problems faced
by organisms across levels of organization and phylogenetic disciplines will be
stressed. Digital data acquisition and logging will be used throughout. The
grantee is matching this award with non-Federal sources.