* 9051309
* Laboratory Studies of Aggregated Systems:                   An Instrumentation and Curriculum Development Project
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1993
* James Sturm, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 02/28/1993
* USD 30,798.00

This award to Dr. James E. Strum, Department of Chemistry, Lehigh University, is
for enhancement of the physical chemistry laboratory course offered for students
majoring in chemistry, biochemistry, and chemical engineering. The project
involves both curriculum development and Instrumentation for Laboratory
Improvement and is supported by the Chemistry Division. The physical chemistry
laboratory curriculum would be modified to emphasize "aggregated systems", which
are characterized by collective behavior of molecules or ions. Such systems
range from complex ions to macroscopic crystals and include micelles, vesicles,
colloids, particle suspensions, liquid crystals, and membranes. Studies of such
systems have increased considerably in the past decade and inclusion of these
experiments will update this course and, by extension, laboratories in physical
chemistry at other universities. Five new experiments will be developed: X-ray
diffraction by molecular crystals, phase transitions in liquid crystals, surface
area determination, pulse photolysis, and helix-coil transition. The instrument
acquisitions supported by this award are a differential scanning calorimeter, a
surface area adsorption instrument, and a pulse photolysis apparatus.