* 9051491
* Undergraduate Research in Behavioral Neurobiology
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1990,02/28/1993
* Harry Sinnamon, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 02/28/1993
* USD 36,190.00

Wesleyan will initiate a new undergraduate program, Neuroscience & Behavior in
1990/91. Two of the three new courses for the program are the focus of this
project. The program is research oriented and a key goal is to have virtually
all of the 20-25 senior majors involved in independent research projects. As
preparation, sophomores will take a laboratory course wither in submammalian
neurophysiology or in mammalian behavioral neurobiology. We propose to obtain
modern data acquisition, storage and analysis equipment for the behavioral
neurobiology laboratory course. The equipment will also provide demonstrations
in the introductory survey course, and make possible independent research for
advanced majors. The equipment includes recording modules, an electrical
stimulator, a video system, a computer workstation for analyzing physiological
and behavioral data, and an optical disk system for mass storage. Experiments
with animals will involve the chemical and electrical initiation of locomotion,
and single neuron activity associated with head movement, spatial cognition, and
memory. Experiments with human subjects will involve the preparation for
locomotion, the generation of eye movements, and EEG and cardiac changes during
learning. Each year the project will directly improve the training of 20
students in the laboratory course and independent projects and benefit another
30 students through the demonstrations in the introductory course.