* 9051763
* The Central Michigan University Geophysics Project: Phase II
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/1990,09/30/1992
* Stephen Stahl, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 09/30/1992
* USD 9,239.00

The acquisition of equipment to conduct seismic surveying and the computing
equipment to archive, refine, and interpret geophysical data are significantly
improving undergraduate laboratory experiences in geophysics courses. Using a
sledge hammer as an energy source, the seismograph records the arrival of
seismic waves that have been reflected and refracted by rock layers. The laptop
computer archives the raw data collected in the field and transfers this data to
the more powerful desktop computer. Undergraduates manipulate the data, which
provide important information on subsurface geologic structure. Apart from heavy
use in geophysics courses, the equipment is used for demonstration and
laboratory exercises in both upper and lower division courses. Additionally the
seismograph and computing equipment are used extensively by undergraduates for
research projects for independent studies or senior theses. The research
projects consist largely of multi-disciplinary studies of pre-Cambrian rocks in
Michigan's western upper peninsula; because of the paucity of rock expsure in
this area and highly irregular bedrock topography beneath glacial drift, seismic
and other geophysical techniques are employed. The university is contributing an
amount equal to 151% of the award.