* 9051549
* "Experiments in Membrane Pervaporation for Undergraduate    Chemical Engineering Laboratories"
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1992
* C. Stewart Slater, Manhattan College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 12/31/1992
* USD 14,250.00

The area of separation and purification has been revolutionized in the past
decade by the development of membrane systems. These have received much notice
for their direct integration into the traditional chemical industry as partial
or total replacement for costly and complex processes such as azeotropic or
extractive distillation. New technologies are rapidly being incorporated into
modern chemical engineering with applications found in the expanding fields of
biological engineering/biotechnology; hazardous waste management; specialty
chemical and biochemical production; food and beverage processing; and, reuse
and recovery systems engineering. This project focuses on the development of
instructional and laboratory experiences in membrane pervaporation processes.
The project goal is to provide students with both theoretical and working
knowledge of the membrane pervaporation process. This is accomplished through a
supplement to a current course, a new course, and the introduction of new
laboratory experiments covering the fundamentals of membrane pervaporation and
the operation and application of this process. Experiments illustrate the
concepts of the driving force for pervaporative mass transport through
membranes, the mechanism for transport as represented by the solution- diffusion
model, the parameters quantifying membrane separation, and basic membrane
material science. The award is being matched by an equal amount from the
principal investigator's institution.