* 9051630
* Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry in Chemistry at        Swarthmore College
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/1990,08/31/1992
* James Hammons, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* Bonnee Groover
* 08/31/1992
* USD 28,658.00

This project has acquired a gas chromatograph/mass spectrometer which is being
used throughout the college's chemistry program, beginning with introductory
Organic Chemistry. The instrument is central to the new junior-level laboratory
course, in which students do several extensive projects, each of which is
instrumentally oriented and modeled on original, published research. The
equipment is also playing an important role in student-faculty research project
in organic synthesis in progress in the Department. More than half of the
students who graduate from Swarthmore College with a major in Chemistry or
Biochemistry go on to careers in scientific research. The principal goal of the
Department of Chemistry is to provide these students with the best possible
experimental training for such a career. A crucial component of this preparation
is the hands-on use of modern instrumentation in the context of chemically
interesting laboratory projects. The addition of experience in gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry is significantly enriching the education of
this very talented group of future scientists. The Department of Chemistry is
publishing a description of their new junior-level lab course with the
expectation that is will be a useful model for the chemistry curricula of other
institutions. The institution has matched the NSF award with an equal amount of
funds.