* 9051175
* Integrated Interactive Electrical Engineering Workstation   for Combining Theoretical Computation, Electrical Measure-  ments and Simulation
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Larry Foster, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 12/31/1992
* USD 76,500.00

This project concerns the development of a standardized workstation to assist
students in the electrical engineering laboratories. Each workstation is
centered around the NeXT computer coupled with automated test equipment and
permits the students to make computations (numerical models), perform automated
electrical measurements, acquire data, perform simulation and test designs from
one integrated workstation. By unifying all of the above activities via one
standard computer interface (taught early in the junior year), the student is
able to concentrate on the engineering concepts being taught throughout the rest
of the laboratory courses. Workstation development concentrates on three
specific applications. Two areas deal with continuous and discrete signals and
systems and makes use of the GPIB equipment and storage oscilloscope and
spectrum analyzer software. Theoretical and simulation results are easily
compared and contrasted with experimental measurements. The third area deals
with development of innovative computer-mentored experimentation with
microprocessor systems using logic analyzers. These applications are intended to
demonstrate the effectiveness of the integrated workstation approach and lay a
foundation for further work. The award is being matched by an equal amount from
the principal investigator's institution.