* 9051901
* Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry in the Undergraduate   Chemistry Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/1990,08/31/1992
* Dana Mayo, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Bonnee Groover
* 08/31/1992
* USD 40,000.00

Through this project, the institution was able to purchase a gas
chromatograph/mass spectrometer with direct insertion probe and positive
chemical ionization capabilities. The students use this instrument in required
introductory level organic and inorganic courses, in upper level instrumental
analysis and molecular structure determination courses, and in independent study
and honors research. Students in the inorganic chemistry and Microscale Organic
chemistry laboratories are introduced to basic principles of mass spectrometry
when they use the direct insertion probe capabilities for the characterization
of synthetic products by electron impact ionization. After the experience with
basic electron impact mass spectrometry, students enrolled in upper level
instrumental analysis and molecular structure and determination courses use
electron impact in conjunction with positive chemical ionization to make
molecular weight and structure determinations. Students use the gas
chromatograph for the analysis of mixtures. All capabilities of the mass
spectrometer are used by students participating in independent study and honors
research in areas of organic chemistry, environmental studies, and analytical
chemistry. The institution contributed to this project in an amount nearly twice
the NSF funds.