* 9051744
* Development of Undergraduate Curriculum in Groundwater Hydrology: Experimental Investigation and Computer Simulation
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1992
* Anthony McAnally, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Draper
* 09/30/1992
* USD 14,665.00

The Groundwater Hydrology project will establish a model laboratory component to
undergraduate hydrology courses in which basic principles of fluid flow and
contaminant transport in porous media are presented. In addition to receiving
classroom instruction, students will quantify and observe fundamental flow and
solute transport processes in both the laboratory and field. Students will also
participate in the numerical simulation of these processes. Flow-through porous
media apparatuses will be constructed for a variety of flow geometries.
Experiments will be instrumented with pressure transducers and specific ion
electrodes. Students will investigate Darcian flow, aquifer field tests and
solute transport in homogeneous and heterogeneous porous media. A computer data
acquisition system will allow for simultaneous readings and data storage. A
high-speed microcomputer will allow rapid graphical representation of data and
numerical simulation experiments. The project is unique in that engineering
hydrology at the undergraduate level has traditionally incorporated analytical-
based laboratory exercises. This state-of-the-art groundwater hydrology course
will serve as a model for engineering programs. Undergraduates seeking degrees
in the areas of water resources, environmental and geotechnical engineering will
have a unique opportunity to experience laboratory and field experimentation
combined with numerical simulation of flow and transport processes in the
subsurface.