* 9051429
* Bipolar/CMOS Device Toolbox and Fabrication Process for a   Freshman Course in Solid State Devices
* CSE,EIA
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1993
* Harry Atwater, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Gerald L. Engel
* 03/31/1993
* USD 26,275.00

New device simulation and layout tools and a new device fabrication process are
being developed for the Caltech freshman course in solid state devices and
integrated circuits, a two-quarter sequence offered annually to approximately 90
majors and non-majors. The unusual goal of this class is to excite interest
among freshman in solid state electronics in particular, and engineering in
general. Hence the underlying curricular strategy is to appropriately simplify
device physics to the level of intuition and simple mathematics, and to simplify
the fabrication process as much as possible so as to make the first
undergraduate laboratory experience very positive. To this end, design of a
software toolbox for device simulation and layout enables freshmen to better
understand device operation at an intuitive level and to avoid design mistakes
in device and circuit layout. A new fabrication process centered around the use
of spin-dopants will allow use of both n-type and p-type dopants with greater
ease, reliability and safety. Device simulation and layout tools and the use of
both dopant types will enable the present curriculum to be expanded to the
design and fabrication of bipolar and CMOS devices while retaining the
simplicity crucial for the process. This will be a significant advance in the
teaching of undergraduate courses in the design and fabrication of
microelectronic devices.