* 9051317
* Use of NMR Spectroscopy to Improve Organic Laboratory       Instruction at Harper College
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1993
* Michael Oester, William Rainey Harper College
* Standard Grant
* Bonnee Groover
* 01/31/1993
* USD 31,202.00

For the past several years, the chemistry department has been engaged in a
program to modernize its facilities and instrumentation. A new organic lab has
been built. New instruments have been purchased including two infrared
spectrometers, a UV-visible spectrophotometer and five computers. The
acquisition, through this project, of a NMR spectrometer was the next logical
step in the modernization program. NMR spectroscopy had been taught entirely as
a classroom subject at the college. Direct laboratory experience with the NMR
added a new dimension to learning this difficult subject, making it vivid and
real. Since most four-year colleges and universities provide laboratory
experiments in NMR for sophomore organic students, having the NMR spectrometer
provides the sophomores with an educational experience equivalent to that of
sophomores at other schools. The plan for using the NMR has three parts. At the
end of the first semester organic course, students are introduced to the
instrument via a demonstration, computer simulation, supervised practice and,
finally recording the spectrum of an unknown. During the second semester
students use NMR spectroscopy to characterize the products of synthetic
reactions. Finally, at the end of the second semester, students use NMR in doing
qualitative organic analysis. The institution has contributed to this project in
an amount equal to the NSF funds.