* 9051797
* Damped, Driven Oscillations on a Linear Air Track - An      Introduction to Resonance for Freshman and Sophomore        Students in Experimental Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/1991,10/31/1993
* Barry Luokkala, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Rolf M. Sinclair
* 10/31/1993
* USD 7,624.00

An experiment will be developed to enable students, especially physics majors,
to be better prepared to study resonance processes at the intermediate and
advanced levels by providing experience with a simple resonance system as part
of an introductory course in experimental physics. The system to be studied is
the classical damped, driven harmonic oscillator: a mass and spring system acted
upon by an external damping force and a periodic driving force. The equipment
required includes a linear air track system, a specially designed loud speaker
and a sine wave generator/amplifier. The air track provides a nearly
frictionless surface upon which the mass-spring system oscillates. The speaker,
driven by the sine wave generator/amplifier, provides a periodic driving force
at frequencies in the 0.10-2.00 Hz range. Damping is introduced by attaching
ceramic magnets to the sides of the air track glider, producing eddy currents in
the track as the glider oscillates. Students will measure the period of free
oscillations of the mass-spring system, the damping time constant, and the
amplitude of forced oscillations as a function of driving frequency for varying
amounts of damping. The experience gained will help students to relate the
theoretical treatment of resonance in our physical mechanics course to a number
of experiments in the advanced laboratory course, where resonance processes are
investigated in depth.