* 9051864
* Computer Data Acquisition, Data Analysis, and Experimental  Simulation in the General Physics Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/1990,09/30/1992
* L.Thomas Dillman, Ohio Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 09/30/1992
* USD 24,892.00

Physics students have a declining interest in the traditional experiments which
have been the mainstay of college general physics laboratory. All too often they
involve use of outdated experimental techniques which students consider mundane
and boring, even though the laws and ideas being considered are still quite
relevant to the modern world. The physics department at Ohio Wesleyan is
addressing this problem by introducing innovative experiments into the
laboratory curriculum which make extensive use of modern sensors, and involve
computer control of scientific equipment in the data gathering process. The
computer is also being used to relieve the student of the tedious tasks of
manual analysis and graphical presentation of the data. Additionally,
microcomputer spreadsheet techniques are being used to simulate complex physical
problems, or problems in areas of physics which are not easily accessible by
direct experimentation. The goal is to show students in an exciting way that the
principles they are studying are universally applicable and transcend the
artificially contrived problems of general physics texts. While the emphasis in
this project is on the general physics courses, the microcomputers and
interfacing equipment purchased are also being used by upperclass pre-
engineering and physics majors for sophisticated data analysis techniques and
for special projects. The university will match the award with an equal amount.