* 9051655
* Undergraduate Oceanography Field Experience
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1990,02/28/1993
* Arthur Nowell, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Marvin E. Kauffman
* 02/28/1993
* USD 38,400.00

Funds are requested to develop an improved instrument-based undergraduate field
course in Oceanography. This is the final course taken by Oceanography
undergraduates and is designed to complement their formal classroom training
with an exposure to state-of-the-art methods for sample collection, analysis,
and data interpretation. Oceanography 460 is an undergraduate field course
designed to develop skills in oceanography research. Course activities include
the establishment of objectives and the planning of a scientific field
experiment, preparation of necessary equipment, collection of data from an
oceanographic research vessel, and data analysis and interpretation techniques.
Scientific results are presented both orally and in written form. Over the past
five years, the numbers of students in our undergraduate program have increased
by more than 25% thus increasing the requirements for equipment, instructional
personnel, and ship time. The course is also interdisciplinary, demanding modern
equipment for concurrent projects in biological, chemical, geological and
physical aspects of oceanography in which students interact and execute a
cooperative field program. State-of-the-art sampling equipment and analytical
instrumentation are critically necessary to make OCEAN 460 a rewarding
educational experience for our undergraduate students. This enclosed request for
equipment would greatly enhance and improve this expanding course and provide
more opportunities for upper division student research.