* 9051268
* Design for Manufacturability and Assemblability             Instructional Studio
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1990,09/30/1992
* B. Lee Tuttle, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 09/30/1992
* USD 43,740.00

The touchstone of a Manufacturing Systems Engineering curriculum is the
synergistic integration of materials design, mechanical design, and
manufacturing processing system design. The function of this project is to
support the development of a Design for Manufacturability and Assemblability
Studio (DFMA) for the practicum sessions in the course, Design for Manufacture.
The DFMA Studio achieves 3 functions: (1) Design for Manufacture and Assembly
Analysis; (2) Evaluation of Handling and Orientation, and (3)
Assembly/Disassembly Evaluation. Six Zenith ZSF-285-25 personal computer
stations equipped with Boothroyd Dewhurst Design for Assembly Toolkit software
and Design for Manufacture Toolkit software comprises the DFMA Analysis Studio.
Four POSI-I mechanically programmable vibratory bowl feeders with Programmable
Silhouette Recognizer evaluate the orientability and feedability of a part as a
function of component form. American Company System R Modular Workstations with
hand tools and pneumatic tools constitute a facility for assembly/disassembly
evaluation. This DFMA Studio provides the undergraduate engineering student with
the practical evaluation of product design for manufacture. The award is being
matched by an equal amount from the principal investigator's institution.