* 9051046
* Strengthening the Preparation of Community College Students in Organic Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/1990,08/31/1992
* Clara Wu, CUNY Laguardia Community College
* Standard Grant
* Bonnee Groover
* 08/31/1992
* USD 26,632.00

The aim of this project is the strengthening of the undergraduate science
students' experience in modern instrumentation. The college has acquired the
equipment necessary to expose students particularly to spectroscopy
(spectrometer, sensitive balance and computers and related software).
Spectroscopy has become the standard technique for determining the structure of
products formed in a chemical reaction; the students are using the equipment in
organic chemistry classes. Through the equipment, the students have gained an
opportunity to combine the theories of spectroscopy with experimental
experience, learning its diverse and powerful applications first hand. This
project is particularly significant because it goes beyond simply modernizing a
laboratory to increasing student awareness of growing critical issues in science
such as pollution generated by waste chemicals, and introducing them to a cost-
effective means of dealing with such issues. Further, the instrumentation is
helping the college provide quality science education to a student body which
consists predominantly of women (66%), educationally and economically
disadvantaged individuals (72%), and members of ethnic minorities (80%). This is
not only enhancing their science education, but is also helping to stimulate and
motivate these students towards further participation in the scientific arena.
The institution has contributed to this project in an amount equal to the NSF
funds.