* 9051790
* The Integration of Computer Aided Engineering - Electronic  Design Automation into Undergraduate Education
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/1990,09/30/1992
* George Zion, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 09/30/1992
* USD 60,747.00

The goal of this project is to integrate leading-edge computer aided engineering
techniques for electronic (/digital) design into undergraduate education. After
being introduced to the basics of design automation including graphics editors,
schematic capture, simulation, and validation tools, students in subsequent
courses are required to perform complete designs in the Electronic Design
Automation environment prior to laboratory prototyping. A new course in the
sophomore year teaches the basics of design automation. Automated design
practice is then required in all junior and senior level hardware oriented
courses. A major result of the design automation process is the amount of design
work that can be required and the advanced levels of sophistication made
possible by design efficiency tools. The utilization of VALID Logic Inc.
software running on SUN workstations puts state of the art, professional quality
design tools in the hands of students, placing them in the forefront of design
automation practices. This directly addresses emerging needs for designers
knowledgeable in the process of application specific integrated circuit design,
and techniques involving VLSI design. The award is being matched by an equal
amount from the principal investigator's institution. //