* 9051153
* Instrumentation Improvement for the Chemistry Laboratory of a Two-Year Private College
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1992
* Arthur Fowler, Hiwassee College
* Standard Grant
* Bonnee Groover
* 09/30/1992
* USD 7,140.00

The acquisition of a gas chromatograph and infrared spectrophotometer has
provided both first and second-year chemistry students with new experiences in
instrumental analysis. Concepts that previously were addressed through computer
laboratory simulation are now incorporated into specific laboratory experiments.
Students in organic chemistry are first introduced to gas chromatography as they
separate a mixture of 2- propanol and cyclohexane mixture; subsequently they
analyze a product mixture after halogenation of an alkylbenzene. Finally both of
the instruments are used in the characterization of a product after its prior
isolation, and in updating the qualitative organic analysis experience as
instrumental methods supplant or complement wet methods. A GC experiment
involving the identification of the transesterified fatty acids derived from
common cooking oils has been added to the laboratory of the Principles of
Chemistry - Organic & Biochemistry sequence to complement experiments that
demonstrate three other major chromatographic techniques. Highly motivated
students in the General Chemistry I-II sequence use the instruments as they
choose a special laboratory experiment to carry out as they complete their final
semester of the sequence. The institution has contributed to the project an
amount equal to the NSF funds.