* 9051603
* Completing the Whately Telescope Upgrade for Undergraduate  Infrared Astronomy
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/1990,10/31/1992
* Michael Skrutskie, Five Colleges Inc
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 10/31/1992
* USD 11,644.00

Observational astronomy is both a science and an art. While the science can be
taught in the classroom, real understanding of telescopes, detectors, and data
acquisition requires hands on experience at an observatory. Most undergraduate
students receive little direct exposure to observational astronomy with
instrumentation and computing facilities comparable to those found at major
observatories. Over the past two years the Five College Astronomy Department has
been supporting an upgrade of a local 40cm Boller and Chivens reflector. The
goal this project is to provide an environment for students which, in as many
was as possible, simulates the key aspects of modern telescopic observing. The
availability of state-of-the-art infrared instrumentation which has been
installed on this small telescope not only provides undergraduates with
invaluable laboratory experience but also enables them to carry out research
projects competitive in both quality and significance to those performed at the
largest telescope facilities. The department is continuing the upgrade by
incorporating a low- light camera for remote source acquisition and guiding,
upgrading the data acquisition computer to accomodate a new high data-rate
detection system, and providing students with access to professional data
reduction and analysis computing facilities. The consortium is matching the
award with an equal amount of funds.//