* 9051169
* Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry in Undergraduate       Chemistry Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/1990,09/30/1992
* Bert Holmes, Lyon College
* Standard Grant
* Bonnee Groover
* 09/30/1992
* USD 31,866.00

Through this project, the institution was able to purchase a gas
chromatograph/mass spectrometer. A central theme is the improvement of students'
understanding of reaction mechanisms and stereochemistry. In the first semester
Organic Chemistry, GC/MS helped to introduce the concept of carbocation
stability. In the second semester, GC/MS was used to analyze the stereochemistry
of addition reactions that form threo- or erythro-bromo- deuteriobutane and the
subsequent base-promoted elimination reactions of these stereoisomers. Such
difficult concepts are seldom addressed in conventional organic laboratory due
to the lack of proper instrumentation. In Physical Chemistry the GC/MS is being
used to determine kinetic isotope effects and stereochemistry for gas-phase syn-
elimination of the previously prepared deuterated bromobutanes. The Instrumental
Chemistry course is emphasizing technique, operation of the instrument, its
capabilities and interpretation of spectra. In Environmental Chemistry GC/MS is
helping demonstrate detection and quantification of organic contaminants in
ground water. Many students find the GC/MS vital to their undergraduate research
projects. Through more sophisticated experiments the GC/MS is improving
instruction in Organic, Physical, Instrumental, and Environmental Chemistry
courses. The institution contributed to this project in an amount equal to the
NSF funds.