* 9051159
* Improvement of an Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum with   Gas Chromotography-Mass Spectrometry
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/1990,09/30/1992
* Ching Woo, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Bonnee Groover
* 09/30/1992
* USD 31,650.00

Recent developments in low cost, benchtop Gas Chromatograph/Mass Spectrometer
systems offer new approaches to undergraduate education in chemistry. The
objective of this project is the enhancement of the undergraduate chemistry
curriculum at the institution through the inclusion of extensive laboratory
experience in concepts and techniques of GC/MS. The addition of GC/MS has
affected a broad range of courses including Instrumental Analysis, Microscale
Organic Laboratories and Environmental Chemistry. In addition, students
participate in laboratory-based studies, involving independent projects and
undergraduate honor's research. The project has been designed to introduce
students to new chemical and technological advances in the component or
hyphenated technique, while making basic concepts of mass spectrometry clear in
a simple, rational and interesting manner. Modern GC/MS methodology, currently
used in industrial chemical laboratories is being utilized to solve a variety of
problems in analytical and organic laboratory courses. Thus, students are
exposed to equipment and techniques that they may reasonably expect to use in
their future professional careers. The project also includes featuring the
equipment in the departmental sponsored workshops and demonstrations for high
school science teachers and senior students. The institution has contributed to
the project in an amount equal to the NSF funds.