* 9052038
* Completion of the Curriculum Revision for Calculus Based Introductory Undergraduate Physics Course
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1992
* Joseph Schaefer, Loras College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 12/31/1992
* USD 22,099.00

Loras College is revising its curriculum for the calculus based introductory
physics course. The model for the calculus-based course has the following
highlighted features: (1) incorporation of MBL components from the Dickinson
College Workshop Physics Project, (2) IEEE-488 based interface experiments in
electricity, magnetism and electronics, (3) ten spreadsheet study modules
emphasizing contemporary and ocmputational topics, and (4) integrated tutorial,
communications and data analysis exercises. The addition of five MAC IIcx
systems with Microsoft Works, six IEEE based Keithley stations, a networked
Laser writer, and five copies of SuperCalc3 spreadsheet complement the Apple IIe
systems on hand and allow implementation of courseware already developed. Using
locally generated funding and personal time, a complete Laboratory Manual,
interface experiments, and ten spreadsheet modules have been developed by the
Loras College Physics Department. The present project permits immediate
implementation, further classs testing, and publication of new materials as
called for in Phase III of the Introductory University Physics Project. One IBM
Ps/2 system will permit the development of transportable versions of the
spreadsheet modules and one copy of Mathematica will permit the development of
the next aspect of the curriculum revision, incorporation of math solvers in the
syllabus of the calculus based course. The college is matching the award with an
equal amount of funds.//