* 9052319
* Upgrading and Integration of Gas Chromatography/Mass        Spectroscopy (GC/MS) in the Undergraduate Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/1990,09/30/1992
* James Leary, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnee Groover
* 09/30/1992
* USD 26,478.00

Throughout this decade our expertise in gas chromatography/mass spectroscopy
(GC/MS) has greatly increased and, as a result, so has interest in, and
anticipated utilization of this powerful instrumentation. This project enabled
the Chemistry Department to purchase a gas chromatograph/mass spectrometer to
replace unreliable instruments that no longer met the department's growing
demands. The acquisition gave the Department a modern, expanded GC/MS capability
and has enabled the faculty to significantly improve the research and basic
laboratory experiences of students in the following courses: Organic Chemistry
Lab, Integrated Organic-Inorganic Lab, Instrumental Analysis, Introduction to
Research, Problems in Chemistry, and Undergraduate Chemical Research. Non-majors
enrolled in the introductory organic laboratory also gain exposure to GC/MS.
Chemistry majors have extensive hands-on experience with state- of-the-art
instrumentation enabling them to investigate, characterize and identify
compounds related to their courses and research. The project also allows the
department to include GC/MS in a new continuing education program which brings
to campus high school chemistry teachers. In summary, all of the capabilities of
the instrument are utilized to provide the best possible educational experience,
on several levels, for students. The institution contributed to the project in
an amount equal to the NSF funds.