* 9052116
* An Introductory Computer Science Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Michael Stinson, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 12/31/1992
* USD 49,543.00

This project establishes a dedicated laboratory for the introductory Computer
Science course sequence for majors, namely CPS 180 and CPS 181. The laboratory
hardware consists of 30 Mcintosh computers that are networked to a file
server/instructor workstation. Laser printers provide hardcopy output and the
software includes a Pascal compiler. In these courses, students are expected to
understand the general concepts of problem solving using computers. They are
also expected to master programming skills with the use of a structured language
for the implementation of algorithms. The laboratory facilities are utilized in
the classroom to give demonstrations and planned in-class assignments to clarify
a concept, to demonstrate an idea and/or to teach a skill. This project is
significant because it adds the most important component that has been missing
in classrooms for teaching computer courses, namely the computer. During the in-
class experiments, problem solving efforts are closely monitored by the faculty
teaching the course. Debugging skills are taught under supervised conditions.
Outside of class hours, students registered in these courses have priority
access to the laboratory facilities to complete the programming assignments.
This laboratory provides excellent facilities through which the instructors
enhance their teaching effectiveness. The award is being matched by an equal
amount from the principal investigator's institution.