* 9052153
* Pre-Engineering Exploratory Program
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1993
* Laurence Lovett, Franklin Institute of Boston
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/1993
* USD 30,193.00

The goal of this project is to increase the number of female and minority inner-
city high school students entering higher educational engineering programs. This
undertaking is the result of concern about the low entry rate of women and
minority members into the study of college science and engineering. Through
previous outreach work 223 high school freshman and sophomores have gained
awareness of engineering career options and strengthened their science and
mathematics skills. This experience has indicated that while participants are
more knowledgeable and enthusiastic about entering engineering, their academic
achievement in the prerequisite science and mathematics falls short in most
cases. This project seeks to improve upon this past experience by matching the
teaching methodology more closely to the program population. Its solution
appears to be in providing the inner city teenagers with an instructional
approach that is interactive, visually oriented and individualized. Having
succeeded in capturing the interest of these students and in making them aware
of their personal potential, this engineering exploratory computer laboratory
enables them to attain the academic levels in science and mathematics necessary
to realize their ambitions. The award is being matched by an equal amount from
the principal investigator's institution.