* 9052076
* Integrated Hardware/Software Digital Signal Processing      Laboratory
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1992
* Keith Hoover, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 12/31/1992
* USD 39,348.00

Digital signal processing chips (DSPs) have recently appeared in many products.
Also, computer-aided design (CAD) workstations are increasing engineering
productivity while, at the same time, altering the way the engineering designs.
Today's electrical engineers should be familiar with DSP hardware, software, and
related CAD tools. A DSP laboratory facility is proposed that will permit
students to practice both software and "chip-level" DSP- based hardware design
using modern CAD tools. This facility will serve students in three ways: (1) It
will support a new DSP project course, (2) it will permit the assignment of
basic DSP simulation homework in the existing DSP theory course, and (3) it will
support DSP-related senior design projects. This facility will consist of ten
DSP workstations. Each workstation includes: (1) a Zenith 80386-based personal
computer, (2) a DSP board that plugs into the PC, (3) associated CAD tools, and
(4) a reusable hardware design prototyping kit. The unique features of our
approach are: (1) the use of CAD tools (2) the emphaise on "chip- level"
hardware design as well as software design, and (3) the interdisciplinary manner
in which we propose to structure the student project teams. The institution is
contributing an amount equal to the award.***//