* 9052346
* Laboratory for Excellence in Undergraduate Research in      Computer Science
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/1990,10/31/1992
* John Kapenga, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 10/31/1992
* USD 37,020.00

This project addresses a very critical problem of declining enrollments faced by
all undergraduate computer science programs across the nation. Many key factors
contributing to this decline have been identified. One important element is the
lack of challenging research and project opportunities for the students.
Undergraduate studies in computer science is perceived by students as long hours
spent in text book reading and doing mundane programming assignments. This is at
a time when exciting discoveries are being made and the discipline is expanding
at an ever increasing rate. It appears that the problem of declining enrollment
is a reflection of the gap which exists between research/development and
undergraduate studies in computer science. This project approaches the declining
enrollment problem by introducing a challenging research/project component to
the under- graduate computer science courses. The laboratory associated with the
project is exclusively for undergraduate research. Principal equipment necessary
for this facility includes 6 SPARC1 workstations, a plotter, a printer, and a
tape drive. The laboratory will be used by students to work on research projects
with faculty in the areas of Computer Chip Design (VLSI), Computer Graphics, and
Parallel/Distributed Processing projects. The award is being matched by an equal
amount from the principal investigator's institution.