* 9052194
* The Discovery Approach to Undergraduate Introductory        Physics Experiments
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1992
* John Gastineau, LAWRENCE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 12/31/1992
* USD 27,455.00

Standard laboratory exercises in introductory physics courses have little in
common with actual research, and are not particularly effective at developing
the students' physical intuition. This project is reshaping the introductory
physics laboratory exercises to allow students the freedom and creativity to
discover physical phenomena and the laws that govern them. When learning occurs
by discovery the development of physical intuition is greatly enhanced when
compared to traditional approaches. Since there are no fixed procedures for
students to follow, students must have general purpose and powerful laboratory
tools. Central to the implementation of discovery experiments is the
introduction of microcomputer based laboratories (MBLs). A network of eleven
Macintosh SE computers served by an SE/30 file server is the central tool. To
acquire data from almost any experiment, each machine has an interface and
sensor assortment. The sensors include photogates, ultrasonic rangers, Geiger
detectors, and force probes. For example, with these tools students may acquire
the position of a moving object (perhaps themselves) as a function of time, and
immediately see a graph of the object's velocity or acceleration. To analyze the
computer acquired data students again use general purpose tools. Computer
spreadsheets, graphing, and communication software are being used to quickly
find final results. These software and hardware tools allow students to
investigate physical phenomena with a minimum of tedium, maximizing the time
spent doing physics. The University is matching the award with an equal amount
of funds.