* 9052320
* Technological Enhancements to Popular Physics Courses for   Non-Science Majors
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1993
* Mary O'Donnell, Rosary College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/1993
* USD 16,353.00

This project is upgrading the laboratory component for introductory physics
classes. Since the faculty of Rosary College revised the curriculum of 1987, a
surprising number of non-science majors are selecting the courses of
Meteorology, the Physics of Music, Energy- Urban Supply and Demand, and even
General Physics to satisfy the one semester science course requirement. To meet
the challenge presented by these students often suffering from mathematics
anxiety and with little previous science background, the faculty of the Natural
Science Department is designing new experiments, including interfacing some
equipment with computers. The students will come to the classes with some
previous computer experience and by improving data gathering, the laboratory
results should be more consistent thereby making science methods more
comprehensible. With the addition of a satellite dish and a digitized
observational weather station, the meteorology and energy classes are using
state- of-the-art methods, and, through study of this information , students
obtain a better understanding of their everyday world. For the students in
Physics of Musics and General Physics, the addition of a musical synthesizer and
wave analyzer capable of interfacing with a computer improves data gathering in
standard experiments and adds new possibilities of synthesizing and analyzing
live music. This computerized instrumentation impact on the lectures with the
capability of better and more pertinent audiovisuals. The college is matching
the award with an equal amount of funds.