* 9052113
* An Undergraduate Parellel Processing Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1992
* Stephen Ben-Avi, Cooper Union
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 12/31/1992
* USD 68,026.00

Computers with traditional architectures suffer from an inherent limitation
known as the "von Neumann bottleneck." Instructions are retrieved from memory
and are then executed sequentially, one-by- one, by the Central Processing Unit
(CPU). However, the CPU is generally capable of higher speeds than the memory
sub-system in which the program resides, so the system as a whole is slowed by
the rate at which instructions can be "fetched." Furthermore, many algorithms
have portions which could be executed at the same time or in "parallel" if
facilities to do this exist. Except for a few expensive special-purpose
machines, computers have been Single Instruction Single Data (SISD) processors,
performing commands one at a time without the possibility of concurrency. There
are applications which cannot be computerized without simultaneous execution of
many instructions involving separate vectors or partitions of the data. A modern
Electrical Engineering curriculum should include the application of parallel
techniques to problems at the frontiers of computing speed, including image and
speech analysis, high speed arithmetic, waveform synthesis and signal
processing. Therefore, this project establishes a laboratory dedicated to
parallel computing using general purpose PCs as hosts to multiprocessor boards.
This provides maximum flexibility in configuring systems, the opportunity for
incremental growth and the immediate ability for undergraduates to take
advantage of new and emerging technology. The award is being matched by an equal
amount from the principal investigator's institution.