* 9052068
* Instructional Laboratory for Civil and Surveying EngineeringData Acquisition, Analysis and Design
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/1991,06/30/1992
* David Mezera, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Draper
* 06/30/1992
* USD 50,499.00

The convergence of infrastructural and environmental crises with a technological
explosion is giving rise to vast expenditures of public and private funds on
land/spatial infrastructure information systems. This in turn is creating a
burgeoning need for professionals trained in the design, implementation, and
management of these systems. These social and technological dynamics exert
enormous pressure on education institutions to respond to change and more
importantly, to help shape positive change. In civil and environmental
engineering, effective course offerings, and curricula, methods of instruction
depend upon state-of-the-art instructional laboratories which keep pace, as best
as practical with technological innovation. This project aims to upgrade
equipment in surveying engineering and land information studies laboratories.
Specifically, the project seeks to acquire electronic angle and distance
measurement systems (total stations) for state-of-the-art three dimensional
field data collection, and computer equipment/software for modern laboratory
data processing, analysis, design and graphics presentations. This equipment
will enable changes to be incorporated into our instructional programs to meet
the challenges of these rapidly changing times. The project not only responds to
the current situation, it attempts to anticipate future requirements for civil
and surveying engineers and the associated land information management problems.
It will have a direct impact upon twelve courses and as many as 1100 students
over the next five years.