* 9053631
* INTERACTIONS
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1993
* Dennis Power, Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 02/28/1993
* USD 278,000.00

The Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History is developing an innovative exhibit
and teaching laboratory called INTERACTIONS. The unique feature of INTERACTIONS
is the combination of an exploratory, interactive natural science exhibit with
an adjacent live-insect-rearing laboratory. The exhibits will give the visitors
some of the exploratory tools and experiences of the scientist and involve them
in the process of scientific discovery. The laboratory will provide visitors
with direct experience with scientists and involve them in the scientific
process. Ecological in scope, INTERACTIONS will communicate environmental
issues. The museum's plant and insect halls, designed over thirty years ago,
will be renovated totally. In their place, a single, large exhibit and teaching
laboratory will be created focusing on the interactions of insects and plants.
The exhibits, videos, computer stations, and adjacent insect rearing laboratory
will invite visitors to participate, question and examine. This combination of
exhibits, hands-on activities, video, and laboratory will increase the retention
of information, stimulate interests in natural science, and give vitality to the
museum experience. The total cost of renovation, modernizing, exhibit
construction and installation is $1,340,000 with $1,000,000 raised by a vigorous
capital campaign. This request is for the balance of $340,000 to complete the
exhibit construction.