* 9053817
* Biotechnology Implementation Partnership:  Biotechnology    "Mini-Courses" for Teacher Training
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/1991,09/30/1994
* Jack Chirikjian, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Lowell J. Bethel
* 09/30/1994
* USD 201,351.00

This project focuses on the learning component by teachers and subsequent
implementation of Biotechnology in the classroom. The commitment of the project
staff, the National Association of Biology Teachers, EDVOTEK Corporation and
school districts toward that end is strong and extends beyond the life of the
grant in order to make this a self-sufficient program educationally and
financially. Four sets of "mini-courses" per year will be offered to secondary
school teachers of biology and chemistry from both public and private schools in
conjunction with national, state and regional meetings (e.g. NABT, ACS) as well
as special courses such as AP biology and chemistry training program. In
addition to the instruction in the concept, the "hands-on" experience in basic
procedures will be integrated. Teachers will leave not only with the experience
of having done the actual experiments, but with sufficient materials to begin
the implementation in their own classrooms. This project builds on previously
funded projects which offered four-week biotechnology workshops in several sites
around the country. These projects selected and worked with biology and
chemistry teachers from secondary schools and colleges who had the potential to
become leaders and mentors in their communities in the implementation and
integration of biotechnology topics in classroom and laboratories. Cost-sharing
equivalent to 80% of the NSF request is provided by NABT, EDVOTEK, Georgetown
University and participating school districts.