* 9053609
* The Conditions for Sense-Making in Science Lessons: Studies of Instructional Interactions and Seasonal Change
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1991,07/31/1995
* Denis Newman, BBN Systems & Technologies Corporation
* Continuing grant
* Barbara Lovitts
* 07/31/1995
* USD 599,785.00

This project will construct a theory of the instructional conditions that foster
sense-making by students learning science. Sense-making in science is the effort
to coordinate data or information about some empirical phenomenon with a
conceptual or concrete model that explains it. We believe this is a critical
aspect of learning science that is missing in most schools. We will study
instructional interactions in sixth grade classrooms concerned with the causes
of seasonal change. The theoretical model to account for the data, in this case,
can be expressed quite concretely--with a model earth and sun. There is
preliminary evidence, however, that many students in our classrooms, especially
those from non-mainstream cultures, tend to answer "why" questions with evidence
rather than with causal mechanisms and thus appear not to have appropriated
model-based modes of explanation. For these students, the apprenticeship into
scientific discourse through sense-making discussions may be particularly
important, yet present a difficult challenge for the teacher. Our research,
therefore, will address three specific questions: 1. Under what instructional
conditions does sense-making occur? 2. Does the student's discourse style or
mode of "science talk" create barriers to their learning science content through
observation of sense-making discourse? 3. Under what instructional conditions
can students learn the expected discourse style? Our hypothesis is that an
interactive process in which students' observations, suggestions, or theories
are unpackaged, elaborated or reformulated is necessary in order to develop in
students an understanding of the scientific task as an activity coordinating
data and theory.