* 9053790
* A Mentoring Team Approach to Increasing Minority            Participation in Technical Disciplines
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1994
* Bernard Gerstein, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* David E. Jones
* 02/28/1994
* USD 400,000.00

This project entails activities aimed at increasing the involvement of minority
students of the Des Moines school system in science and technology. The overall
strategy is one of developing mentoring teams of private-sector professional
scientists and engineers, selected secondary teachers, and Iowa State University
faculty. Each team will work with a group of six minority students who have been
selected on the basis of Iowa Tests of Basic Skills (ITBS) and classroom
teachers' personal evaluation which indicate that they have high ability but are
not performing at the level expected. The teams will work within the school
system to help students acquire and use basic skills and good study habits, to
provide students insights on career possibilities, to promote supportive home
environments in collaboration with parents and families, and see them through to
matriculation at the college or university level. A core group of five
scientists and two educators will coordinate planning and the work of the teams.
This group will include an expert on learning strategies and a specialist on the
relationship of the family to learning, as well as scientist from the university
and the private sector. Program components currently under way in a pilot test
include participating as laboratory associates for their own classes, half-day
field trips to the ISU campus each month, four (4) all-school assemblies
presented by ISU scientist. The mature program will have as many as 30 mentoring
teams operating with 150 students at all grade levels.