* 9053959
* Comprehensive Regional Center for Minorities
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1990,01/31/1997
* Kathleen Church, Maricopa County Community College District
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra King
* 01/31/1997
* USD 3,712,966.00

This project involves a cooperative effort among eleven institutions in the
Maricopa County Community College District, in cooperation with Arizona State
University and 58 public school districts in Maricopa County. The project
consists of a set of coordinating activities, designed to increase significantly
the representation of minorities, blacks, Hispanics, and Native Americans in
science, engineering, and technology. The minority enrollments (1988-89) were
73% Hispanic, 19% Black, and 8% Native American. A total of approximately
$450,000 has been committed for the first year in leveraged funds. There are
several creative characteristics to the program, such as day care facilities,
bilingual materials, and programs for parents. Other program activities include
22 summer camps, precollege motivational and nurturing experiences, after school
tutoring, hands-on laboratory work, and research minigrants. The needs have been
well documented. The management plan is strong. The competence of staff and
documented, relevant experience are outstanding. The District, as a measure of
its commitment and support, will assume, by the fifth year, the full salary of
the project director. In addition, an 8% indirect cost rate is use to maximize
the funds available for the program.