* 9053620
* An International Education Project Related to the IGBP      Global Change Project
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/1990,11/30/1991
* Marjorie Gardner, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara J. Hunter
* 11/30/1991
* USD 47,546.00

The project creates a prototype set of processes and products for an
international team of curriculum developers to work collaboratively with
research scientists in the International Geosphere Biosphere Project (IGBP) of
the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU). This is a high priority
area for research in teaching and learning, science the large investment being
made by the NSF, other U.S. organizations, and other countries in IGBP research
provides an unprecedented opportunity to inform science education. The project
is urgent with regard to availability of data because of a special opportunity
created by the ICSU. The ICSU has initiated a science education project that
will translate research findings of IGBP scientists and disseminate them for use
in the education systems of the world. Developers from the U.S. and U.K. will
draft the first prototype instructional modules in a workshop in 1990, as part
of a two-year formative development process. The project takes advantage of this
opportunity to build knowledge and experience that will establish infrastructure
for such collaborations among the scientific and educational communities. The
project will not only create and test prototype learning materials, but also
document key factors involved in the process, such as roles of scientists in the
project, incentives and mechanisms for their involvement, opportunities and
obstacles to scientist-educator collaboration internationally, multi-country
testing and adaptation of learning materials, mechanisms for teacher and student
involvement in scientific research processes.