* 9053892
* University of South Carolina System Model Project for the   Transformation of Science and Math Teaching to Reach Women  in Varied Campus Settings
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1994
* Mary Crawford, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Larissa Rogers
* 06/30/1994
* USD 118,856.00

This project is developing a model for the teaching of science and mathematics
with the specific objective of recruiting and retaining more women in science
and technological careers. Research findings from Women's Studies are being
utilized in designing, implementing, evaluating and disseminating the model.
Since the project involves collaboration by thescience/math faculty of the nine
campuses of the University of South Carolina System, ranging from two-year
campuses to a major graduate/research campus, the model should be suitable for
adaptation and national dissemination to a wide variety of institutions. Twenty-
five science/math faculty drawn from 5 two-year, 3 four-year and one
graduate/research campus areparticipating in the project. Activities take place
in two settings and formats: two on-site, two-day workshops at each of the nine
campuses for individualized design, and implementation of the model; and, three,
two-day plenary workshops for intercampus exchange, expert consulting,
contrastive analysis, and synthesis of the most successful strategies.
Measurable Objectives to determine project effectiveness include: o Evidence of
positively changed pedagogy and perceptions regarding gender by participating
faculty (as demonstrated on pre- and post-project surveys). o A statistically
significant increase (when compared with baseline figures and the control group)
of the number and proportion of women entering the science and math courses
affected by this transformational project, the number going on to additional
science and math courses, and the number opting for graduate and post-graduate
careers in science or math (as determined by long term tracking). o A net
improvement in faculty perceptions of the value of inter-campus and inter-level
communication (as demonstrated on pre- and post-project surveys).