* 9053902
* Model Project for Women in Mathematics and Physical Science
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/1990,02/29/1992
* Hugo Rossi, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Majorie A. Enneking
* 02/29/1992
* USD 104,304.00

This project involves Westminister College, two local school districts, the Utah
Mathematics/Science Network, and the University of Utah. The Network was formed
by a group of women scientists from Utah schools, universities, and industry to
increase awareness of career opportunities in science, to encourage young women
to enter those fields, and to provide a support structure for them. Beginning in
the fall of 1990, a group of high school teachers will begin developing
supplementary materials, for their classes based on lectures in a seminar series
conducted by the Utah Math/Science Network. The materials will be further
developed, by selected University faculty and students, for a special summer
course. In the spring of 1991, 12 female students who will be entering the
University of Utah and who have expressed an interest in a career in mathematics
or physical science shall be selected for the program. All participating
students will take a course during the summer on the dynamical processes of
chemistry and physics. After 15 months of special instruction and training, the
12 students will become active research participants. It is intended that 12 new
students and 3 new high school teachers will be selected in 1992 to begin a
second cycle of the program. Special two day strategy sessions for teachers will
be held on alternate Saturdays in September to discuss ways of neutralizing
gender bias and to provide a forum for developing ad discussing effective
methods of outreach. The foci of the program are recruitment and retention.