* 9053563
* Teaching Science in Early Childhood Classrooms
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1994
* Karen Worth, Wheelock College
* Standard Grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 07/31/1994
* USD 356,532.00

This project involves Wheelock College with the Associated Day Care Services of
Boston (ADCS), Boston Head Start, and Cambridge Head Start, to design, pilot,
produce, and disseminate a comprehensive staff development program in early
childhood physical science. The materials produced will enable those individuals
responsible for education quality in community-based, pre-school settings to
provide staff development activities to enhance science teaching and learning in
the classroom. The project will also allow Wheelock to design and implement
three institutes to train trainers in the use of the new program. During the
first year of the project the staff will work intensively with early childhood
teachers in their classrooms and in workshop and seminar sessions. As the
teachers enhance their skills in teaching physical science and redesign their
environments, the project staff will gather data on the nature of the teaching
and learning and on the specific training needs of early childhood teachers.
Year two will be focused on the development of an extensive Staff Development
Manual and accompanying training video. During year three project staff will
field test the materials and conduct three institutes in three states to train
early childhood staff developers in their use. Ongoing dissemination of the
final products will occur through national and local conferences and regional
day care and Head Start training networks.