* 9053581
* Comfortable Approach to Teaching Science II (CATS II)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1990,02/28/1995
* Ming-Yu Li, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 02/28/1995
* USD 468,158.00

This three year project is aimed at elementary teachers with little or no
experience in teaching science and utilizes the expertise and resources of NASA,
the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and the California State Polytechnic University at
Pomona, California. This project, based on a successful previously funded
project, will increase the teachers' comfort level with science, mathematics and
technology. This newly acquired confidence will result in increased motivation
and time spent in the teaching of science. Each summer fifty teachers
(two/school) and their administrators (25) will be selected from schools in
California, Indian reservations in the Southwest and from Eastern and Southern
sites served by several Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU). The
participants will spend four weeks in intensive instruction during each of the
summers, followed by academic year meetings. The topics of electricity, sound,
light and astronomy will be covered at a pace which allows time for thinking and
experimenting. A variety of effective teaching strategies with emphasis on
understanding mathematical applications will be used. The second and third years
continue with new groups of teachers and administrators with the continued
support of past participants. Administrators are required to implement a science
plan including staff development at the school site. "Clone" programs will be
set up at HBCU sites to insure the proliferation of this model. In addition to
the NSF request, NASA, JPL, the University and the participating schools are
contributing an equal amount of the funding.