* 9054583
* Mathematics Teachers Preparation Improvement Project
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/1991,10/31/1993
* Dwayne Channell, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Haver
* 10/31/1993
* USD 426,322.00

This project will develop materials for two mathematics courses for preservice
teachers, one course for teachers at the elementary-middle school level and one
for teachers at the high school level. The related theme of the courses is
teaching and learning with computing technology. The course for K-8 preservice
teachers will center on probability and statistics. The materials development
will include laboratory-based activities that integrate calculators and
computers to motivate, enhance and reinforce the learning of probability and
statistics. The course for secondary preservice teachers will involve students
in active learning situations designed around cooperative and individual
investigations of mathematical problems. Emphasis is placed on mathematical
problem solving, mathematical modeling, and multiple representations of
mathematics. Probability and statistics will be the setting for some of the
problems. Computer technology is used to generate data, perform statistical
analyses, sketch graphs, draw geometric figures, approximate solutions to
equations, and carry out algorithms. The materials from both courses will be
disseminated widely with a special focus on the teacher preparation institutions
within Michigan. The NCTM Standards will be the basis for decisions about
curriculum to be included and instructional strategies to be used. The project
team will be supported by a team of advisors from other teacher education
institutions within Michigan and from other states. The advisors have been
selected for their expertise in technology, mathematics, and statistics.
Teachers will also be involved as advisors in the project. The cost sharing will
be 50% of the NSF funding for the project.