* 9054628
* Learning Science through Guided Discovery:  Liquid Water &  Molecular Networks
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1993
* H. Eugene Stanley, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Barbara J. Hunter
* 07/31/1993
* USD 1,062,325.00

In every drop of water, down at the scale of atoms and molecules, there is a
world that can fascinate even young, non-verbal science students and ardent
science-phobes. The objective will be to learn science through guided discovery.
Students will study liquid water and molecular networks using advanced
technology to provide windows into submicroscopic worlds, first of water and
later of macromolecules such as proteins and DNA. The study of water is
interdisciplinary, spanning the disciplines of biology, chemistry, and physics.
Students will study questions that cut across these disciplines as well as those
internal to each field. A new generation of desktop computers now permits us to
leapfrog directly from the large-scale properties of water that we experience
every day to "real time" dynamic motions in the submicroscopic world. This
permits students to learn according to a new paradigm: doing science while
exploring and manipulating structures using student-controlled, animated
graphic, simulations on the molecular scale, rather than being told about
science and given tests on structures. The project will actively develop this
new paradigm and probe student understanding and seek to determine if students
can apply their insights and developed intuition to predict the properties of a
wealth of alternative materials easily and rapidly modeled by the computer.