* 9054948
* Project Genethics:  Mentor Teachers Implementing Validated  Model Workshops in Human Genetics and Related Societal      Issues
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1994
* Jon Hendrix, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* clayton howard
* 11/30/1994
* USD 668,419.00

This project is a three year program that includes 1) the training of ten new
two-member "Mentor Teacher" teams, and 2) a series of twenty three, two-week
workshops led by 16 Mentor Teacher teams. Mentor Teachers are previous
participants in NSF sponsored leadership development projects in human genetics
and bioethical decision-making held at Ball State University and conducted by
the staff of the Human Genetics and Bioethics Educational Laboratory (HGABEL).
Six, two-member, Mentor Teacher teams were trained with previous NSF funding.
The training of ten new teams will take place during the summers of 1991 and
1992 at Ball State University. The Mentor Teacher led workshops will take place,
nationwide, during the summers of 1991, 1992, and 1993. These workshops will be
based upon an effective model workshop that was developed, tested, and evaluated
by Mentor Teachers and HGABEL staff during three previous workshops involving 54
teachers and over 5300 students. The purpose of this program is to prepare over
550 high school biology teachers to 1) instruct their students about concepts in
human genetics, and 2) develop student skills in bioethical decision making.
Workshops will emphasize hands- on experiences, many of which are directly
applicable to the classroom. Other pedagogical strategies employed will involve
contemporary learning cycles and classroom behavior modeling by the Mentor
Teachers. An amount equal to 62% of the NSF award will be provided as cost
sharing.