* 9054175
* Critical Thinking and Problem Solving in the Foundations of Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1991,12/31/1991
* Peter Henderson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* William E. Haver
* 12/31/1991
* USD 45,455.00

This workshop focuses on approaches to developing thinking and problem solving
skills in introductory level courses by integrating problem solving,
mathematics, and computer science. Educators in both the mathematics and
computer science disciplines have observed and commented on the weaknesses of
entering students. Students are unable to solve problems and lack mathematical
maturity. Such weaknesses should be addressed early in the curriculum.
Mathematics and computer science are closely related disciplines with one
drawing upon the other. This relationship is utilized to encourage students to
learn to use mathematics as a problem solving tool for computer science, and how
mathematics can be used to motivate an understanding of concepts fundamental to
computer science. Mathematics and computer science faculty with a better
understanding of these important relationships will be more effective teachers.
The target audience is faculty who are actively engaged in teaching
undergraduate mathematics and computer science courses. Minority and women,
groups underrepresented in mathematics and computer science education will be
encouraged to participate. The two week intensive program introduces them to new
approaches for integrating mathematics and problem solving into computer science
courses, and using mathematics concepts to motivate a better understanding of
computer science concepts. //