* 9054022
* Model Undergraduate Project for the Disabled: A Study of Issues Involved in Underrepresentation
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1991,10/31/1993
* Donald Clark, National Association for Industry Education Cooperation
* Standard Grant
* Costello L. Brown
* 10/31/1993
* USD 103,011.00

The purpose of this project is to study the issues involved in
underrepresentation of undergraduate students with disabilities in science and
technology from the perspective of senior high school and college undergraduate
students with disabilities, parents of students with disabilities, college
science and engineering program administrators and faculty, secondary special
education program administrators and teachers, disabled student service program
directors, scientists and engineers with disabilities, and representatives of
business/industry. The study is identifying barriers to career access
opportunities and developing strategies to remove or overcome them. The project,
involving four national organizations, will conduct three regional workshops for
approximately 300 invited participants using the nominal group technique process
to generate, clarify, and prioritize the barriers and strategies information.
The project will prepare and disseminate conference proceedings and a workshop
(3,500 copies) to facilitate replication of the workshop model in all areas of
the country. The project's strengths include its potential impact on on the
target population, use of inter-organizational networks, support and involvement
of business and industry, and potential for replication and sustained
activities.