* 9054261
* Workshop for the Introduction of Molecular Biology into     the Undergraduate Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 11/01/1990,10/31/1994
* Michael Winfrey, University of Wisconsin-La Crosse
* Standard Grant
* William E. Haver
* 10/31/1994
* USD 112,162.00

An intensive two-week laboratory workshop that allows 20 university faculty to
learn the basic principles, techniques and applications of modern molecular
biology is being offered during three summers. The goal of the program is to
provide participants with the experience and materials to implement an effective
undergraduate molecular biology laboratory program. Because of rapid advances,
few educational institutions have been able to incorporate modern molecular
biology in their laboratory curricula. This workshop will provide an important
contribution to undergraduate education by offering undergraduate teaching
faculty hands on experience with these techniques. The course consists of
laboratory exercises in DNA purifications and separations, gene cloning,
Southern blotting and hybridization, DNA amplification and sequencing, and DNA
sequence analysis. Laboratories are be supplemented with lectures on the
principles of the methods used, and by seminars on the applications of molecular
biology, presented by recognized experts. Laboratory and lecture emphasis is on
applications that are applicable to undergraduate teaching laboratories, and
participants receive the necessary experience and manuals to implement the
exercises. Sustained interactions among participants and with the staff is
encouraged during the workshop by frequent discussion sessions, and following
the course by holding a follow-up session 11 months later. Here participants
will their experiences in developing and implementing exercises into new and
existing curricula.