* 9054188
* Undergraduate Faculty Enhancement Workshop in Laser/Electro-Optic Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/1991,02/28/1994
* James Parks, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 02/28/1994
* USD 81,000.00

A two-week workshop (August 11-23, 1991) in laser/electro-optic technology is
being offered for four-year college teachers located primarily in the
Appalachian Region. Participants receive instruction and training in the theory
and principles of lasers, laser safety, electro-optics, and the design and
construction of lasers. Special attention is given to the use of lasers in
advanced undergraduate laboratory experiments. Applications in basic science,
analytical chemistry, medicine, communications, and manufacturing will be
illustrated in field trips to the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, the Oak Ridge
Methodist Medical Center, the University of Tennessee, the Thompson Cancer
Survival Center, the Atom Sciences corporation, and in a local manufacturing
plant and local fiber optic communications company. Material for this proposed
workshop has originated from a course in laser/electro-optic technology
developed by the Project Directory and taught at Pellissippi State Technical
Community College. Additional relevant material has arisen from innovative
laboratory experiments developed at West Virginia Wesleyan College. Motivation
for offering this workshop comes from a survey conducted by the Laser Technology
Center which showed that a need exists for training and educating persons in
laser/electro-optic technology.//