* 9054978
* A Comprehensive Training and Education Program in Statisticsfor Teacher Enhancement in the Mayaguez Region of Puerto    Rico
* EHR,DRL
* 04/01/1991,06/30/1994
* Bodapati Gandhi, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Henry S. Kepner, Jr.
* 06/30/1994
* USD 266,259.00

This two-year project will be conducted at the University of Puerto Rico,
Mayaguez, and will serve a cadre of twenty teachers of mathematics, fourteen at
the secondary level and six at the middle school level. All teachers will come
from the Mayaguez area. The project will provide two years of teacher education
in the area of statistics, which has recently been added to the secondary
curriculum in Puerto Rico. During a six-week summer institute, the teachers will
learn statistical concepts and pedagogical strategies through projects and
activities. Current curriculum materials such as the Quantitative Literacy
Series will be introduced. Staff includes university statisticians and school
personnel with expertise in pedagogy. During the academic year, staff will visit
the teachers' classrooms to provide support and assistance as the teachers
implement the statistics course. In addition, teacher participants will conduct
dissemination workshops with their colleagues as needed and as appropriate. This
project is significant in its likelihood of building a cadre of teachers with
strong statistics expertise in the Mayaguez area. Cost sharing is provided by
the University as 10% of the NSF request.