* 9055488
* Inservice Institutes for Junior/Middle School Science       Teachers with Presidential Awardees as Instructional        Mentors
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1995
* Robert Lewis, National Science Teaching Association
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 07/31/1995
* USD 1,945,300.00

Teams of four Presidential Awardees (PAs) in Science Teaching will work with a
university professor in 3-week summer institutes for middle school teachers.
Each of four institutes will be held at a college or university site facilitated
by a site coordinator who is a professor of science and a team of four (PAs) who
will serve as instructors. Each PA team will include a chemistry, physics,
biology, and earth science teacher. Potential institute sites for 1992 include
the State University of New York, Purchase, University of North Carolina,
Wilmington, Purdue University, West Lafayette, and Southern Oregon State
College, Ashland. Each institute will accommodate 30 participants for a total of
360 middle level teachers in the three-year project. The institute programs will
be structured to include content in science, teaching methodology, cooperative
team building, and special lectures on leading-edge science topics. In addition,
special sessions on leadership training, conducting peer-led workshop, reviewing
curriculum materials, and securing funding will be held. An instructional
syllabus and a site coordinator's handbook will be produced to provide program
consistency at each site. The aim of APAST/NSTA institutes is to obtain a mix of
science teachers for different geographic areas and a variety of teaching
circumstances to foster an exchange of experiences and view points. Teachers
will be selected based on perceived need, leadership potential, and willingness
to secure district funds for follow-up activities. At the workshops,
participants will prepare lesson plans based on content learned at the
institutes. Compilations of the teaching materials will be distributed to all
participants, site coordinators, and members of APAST. In addition, all
participants will conduct at least one peer- led inservice workshop in their
school districts or at an educational convention in the fall. Mini-grants will
be made available to participants who have completed and returned an inservice
report form and have presented a rationale for the funds as well as an itemized
budget and evidence of cost sharing on the part of their school district.
Evaluation will address content and pedagogy gain by participants through the
administration of pre-and post- standardized science content tests. In addition,
three teachers in each workshop will be followed over a three year period as
case studies. The project evaluator will document professional growth of these
selected individuals through telephone interviews and response forms. Mr. Robert
Lewis, President-elect of APAST and a Presidential Awardee, is the Principal
Investigator and Ms. Marily DeWall of NSTA is the Co-PI. Cost sharing equals 10%
of the NSF award.