* 9055393
* Science and Mathematics for Arizona's Rural Teachers ProjectSMART
* EHR,DRL
* 04/15/1991,09/30/1994
* Carleaton Nuhn, Mammoth-San Manuel Unified School District #8
* Standard Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 09/30/1994
* USD 460,764.00

Project SMART (Science and Mathematics for Arizona's Rural Teachers) is a three
year project sponsored by the Mammoth - San Manuel School District No.8 in San
Manuel Arizona. It is designed to improve both the mathematics and science
instruction practiced in grades K-8. Staff development and curriculum
implementation workshops and institutes are planned for two groups of teachers.
The first group, the Math and Science leadership team, will consist of 25 master
teachers who will participate in leadership institutes each summer for three
years. This group will acquire the background, skills and expertise necessary to
become part of a facilitator team for teacher workshops. The second group,
classroom teachers, will attend workshops of their choice designed to address
content, teaching strategies and effective curriculum needs of teachers. A
series of workshops will be developed and offered at different sites in the
district. Instructional support programs consist of workshops for
administration, parents and paraprofessionals. Partnership activities with
school districts, county offices, community colleges, universities, state-level
educations and private funding agencies will be carried out to generate support
for mathematics and science improvement efforts during and after the NSF
project. The NSF funds for this project are being matched by the SMART consortia
institutions by an amount equivalent to 71% of the grant.