* 9055440
* Laser Applications in Science Education (Lase):  Phase 2
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1991,05/31/1993
* Gareth Williams, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Haney
* 05/31/1993
* USD 92,756.00

The LASE project is centered on an innovative "do-it- yourself" optics
laboratory course based on the principles of manipulating and modulating laser
beams, and designed to make physics more attractive to high school students by
introducing them to every-day laser applications. To facilitate implementation
of these ideas, 2 two-week Summer workshops will be provided during 1991 to
train forty high school physics teachers to teach the course, with in- service
help, the following academic year. The project concentrates on three strong
pedagogical ideas developed during the first phase of the project: 1. providing
each participant with an optical system designed to be easily reproduced or
modified in any modestly equipped workshop, and incorporating many "off-the-
shelf" hardware-store items (A prototype has already been competed), 2.
providing a series of station-by-station instructions beforehand for the
participants as they all work on the same activity at the same time. This is the
advantage of having a common optical system, 3. involving all participants as
peer teachers during the 1991-92 academic year in-service phase of the program.
Groups of five teachers will take charge of each of the monthly meetings
scheduled for that period. Students will help them. Ten teachers from Phase 1
will provide instruction during the Summer workshops, along with faculty from
San Jose State University. Assistance will be provided by a full-time technician
and SJSU physics majors. The forty participants will bring along at least one
guest teacher to at least one in-service meeting during the year. This will be
formally required. By year's end close to seventy teachers will have been
actively involved. Cost sharing equals 48% of the NSF award.