* 9055834
* Student Belief in Cultural Context:  A Logico-Structural,   World View Investigation of Belief and Culture Among        Secondary Science Students....
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/1993,01/31/1997
* LOUETTE MCGRAW, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond J. Hannapel
* 01/31/1997
* USD 139,592.00

To date, science educators have not studied what students believe about the
world, beliefs rooted and nurtured in students' socio- cultural environments. If
one were speaking of a non-Western, developing nation, one would speak of
students' traditional culture in contrast to the culture of science. Americans,
on the other hand, assume that science is a natural part of American students'
culture. However, there is widespread disinterest in science. Also, American
society is increasingly pluralistc, and there are several cultural subgroups
traditionally under represented in science. A new approach is for American
science educators to consider the possibility that science is a second culture
experience for many students. Traditionally, the study of culture is left to the
cultural anthropologists. However, in recent years scholars in several
disciplines have undertaken cultural studies in which they investigate the
validity of cultural assumptions in their fields. Similarly, cultural studies in
science education can contribute significantly to our understanding of the
barriers to effective science education. We suggest that it is important for
science educators to understand the fundamental, culturally based beliefs about
the world that students bring to class, and how these beliefs are supported by
students' cultures; because, science education is successful only to the extent
that science can find a niche in the cognitive and socio-cultural milieu of
students. Thus, the purpose of the proposed research is to gain an understanding
of high school students' fundamental beliefs about the world, and how their
personal, cultural environments foster and support those beliefs. The
methodology is ethnographic, involving the extensive interviewing of students.