* 9055397
* Chemistry Laboratory Assistant
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1995
* David Brooks, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Debbie Jones
* 11/30/1995
* USD 223,581.00

This three-year project sponsored by the University of Nebraska- Lincoln, will
develop a multi-media guide, called the Chemistry Laboratory Assistant, to help
high school teachers develop high quality laboratories in chemistry in the
nation's high schools. The objective of Chemistry Laboratory Assistant is to
help the teacher manage hands-on chemistry classroom activities. The project
will do this by developing computer software which makes use of the hypermedia
programs available on personal computers. This software will help teachers
prepare materials for an extremely wide range of experiments currently in use in
high school chemistry courses throughout the country. The software will be
developed using input from teams of leading chemistry teachers and the software
interface will be designed in accord with guidance from state science
supervisors. The software will include procedures for preparing solutions, for
storage and disposal of substances, for inventory and for scaling amounts to fit
the experimental pedagogy. Tutorials for student assistants and beginning or
cross-over teachers will be included. The software will be modifiable to meet
the chemical-usage requirements of the individual states. Dissemination will
occur at NSF summer workshops and booths at national meetings. The software will
be mailed to 1500 former summer workshop participants identified by the project
director from participant lists. Matching funds for the project from the
University of Nebraska-Lincoln total more than 12% of the NSF funds.