* 9055398
* Interpreting Current Research on Global Environmental Issuesfor Middle-School Teachers and Their Students
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1991,09/30/1995
* Sharon Walker, Gulf Coast Research Laboratories
* Standard Grant
* Emma L. Walton
* 09/30/1995
* USD 531,673.00

This proposal is designed to create among middle-school teachers and their
students an enhanced awareness and understanding of global environmental issues
by providing a structure for the transfer of marine and aquatic research results
and methods to middle-school educators. A total of 150 teachers will participate
in five, three-week summer workshops during a three-year period. Each of the
five workshops will be conducted at the Gulf Coast Research Laboratory located
in Ocean Springs, Mississippi. The workshops are designed to: (a) raise the
awareness and understanding of the participants concerning global environmental
issues; (b) give the participants a variety of field, laboratory, and classroom
teaching techniques; (c) provide a forum for teachers' interaction with research
scientists; and (d) translate research into teaching applications. The teachers
participating in these workshops will represent Mississippi, Alabama, Florida,
and Louisiana. Each of the workshops will recruit participants from these four
states. Each of the three-week workshops will be supported by "follow-up"
participation in state, regional, and/or national meetings. During the academic
year, participating teachers are expected to develop an inservice training
program within their respective school districts. Four general areas of global
environmental concern will be addressed by this project. They are: (1) climatic
changes, (2) marine and estuarine pollution, (3) decline in biodiversity, and
(4) overpopulation. A multi-disciplinary approach will be utilized through the
interactions of research scientists, marine and science educators, and classroom
teachers. Teaching methodologies will encompass the science/technology/society
philosophical approach. In summary, this project, through the interaction of the
middle-school classroom teachers, marine educators and marine scientists should
provide an excellent opportunity for science teachers and other science
educators to improve their knowledge and skills relating to the study of global
environmental issues. The 150 teachers, representing four states, have the
potential of reaching more than 22,000 students. Cost sharing equals 39% of the
NSF award.