* 9055390
* Training for Leadership and Enabling Change:  A Model       Inservice Delivery System
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/1991,10/31/1995
* John Dossey, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* diane spresser
* 10/31/1995
* USD 615,045.00

The University of Northern Iowa seeks funds for a three-year program to improve
the teaching of secondary school mathematics through implementation of the NCTM
Standards and the use of the Addenda materials. Forty-two Presidential Awardee
middle and high school mathematics teachers will receive three weeks of
intensive summer training in effective in-service skills and in algebraic
thinking and its connections to various areas of mathematics. They will then
conduct 12-hour in- service programs in their local school districts during the
school year. The second year participants will attend a two-week summer program,
followed by their presenting one-week regional summer workshops and 12-hour
regional and state in-service programs. The third year participants will attend
a one-week summer program and will present one-week summer workshops. Follow-up
activities will include field-testing of materials developed for the workshops
and regional meetings held during the school years. The project will include in-
service packets, a monograph on evaluation methods, and a paper summarizing
research on teacher change, all of which will be prepared by participants and
staff. In addition to the forty-two first-wave teachers, it is anticipated that
1680 second-wave middle and high school teachers will be enhanced. The
dissemination of the in- service packets has potential to create a third-wave of
teacher enhancement. The University of Northern Iowa's cost-sharing will account
for 13% of the NSF budget. This model delivery system for in-service training
has high potential for becoming an exemplary teacher-teaching-teachers model
which could serve as a guide for other mathematics teacher enhancement programs.