* 9055487
* High School Teachers Engineering Program
* EHR,DRL
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1995
* Sally Steadman, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 09/30/1995
* USD 211,385.00

The University of Wyoming will conduct the High school Teachers Engineering
Program (HISTEP), a three week, residential summer program beginning in 1991.
This three year program is designed to help recruit students for engineering
careers by enhancing the capabilities and enthusiasm of mathematics and science
teachers. HISTEP provides thirty high school mathematics, chemistry, and physics
teachers with the opportunity to explore engineering applications in a
laboratory setting. The laboratory sessions offer both enrichment opportunities
for experienced, enthusiastic teachers and opportunities to expand subject
matter content for less well-prepared teachers. The teachers will build a
digital circuit, smash timber trusses, and design with computer assistance, all
engineering applications which directly relate to topics typically covered in
high school mathematics, physics, and chemistry courses. The engineering faculty
conducting the laboratory sessions will participate in a learning strategy
seminar, and will apply these teaching methodologies to their laboratory
sessions. Faculty knowledgeable in effective science teaching practices will
conduct the seminars, and will also assist the participants in developing
instructional materials for their classrooms. The sessions will enhance the
teachers' creative thinking and problem solving skills and establish an
appreciation for the role of science in our society, consequently benefiting
both technically oriented students and those pursuing nontechnical careers. The
sessions, covering a wide variety of scientific topics with a significant level
of participation, are intended to create a high level of interest among the
participants. The diversity of the program provides a unique, and stimulating,
experience for professional growth. The participants will conduct
workshops/demonstrations for colleagues in their school district and for parent
groups. The engineering faculty from the Wyoming community colleges are
available for assistance with the workshops. HISTEP participants will attend an
annual meeting where they will have an opportunity to discuss the implementation
of their summer activities, their successes, their failures, and the assessment
data on their students' problem solving skills. Cost sharing equals 45% of the
NSF award.