* 9055494
* Science in the Twenty First Century:  The Science 21 Project
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1991,01/31/1995
* Martin Marin, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 01/31/1995
* USD 650,000.00

This proposal will provide training over a two and one-half year period to
enhance content preparation for 60 under- prepared or uncertified intermediate
school teachers in minority districts in New York. Under the aegis of the City
College of New York, CUNY and in cooperation with local school districts and the
Bronx High School of Science Regional Resource Center (funded by the Department
of Education), the City College will establish 3 District Resource Centers for
intermediate school science teachers in the boroughs of Manhattan, the Bronx,
and Queens. The project entitled "Science in the Twenty-First Century: The
Science 21 Project", will provide training to the 60 teachers in minority school
districts through linking college courses focused on the content of the middle
school curriculum with training in inquiry pedagogy provided by university and
Regional Center trained peer leaders to be located in the boroughs of the
Community School Districts listed above. For each of the designated years of the
project, a cohort of 30 under-prepared and/or uncertified intermediate/junior
high school science teachers per year (for a total of 60 participants) will
attend courses given by the City College five days per week for four weeks (90
hours) and earn tuition free graduate credits. During the course of the project
the teachers will have taken courses in physical science, life science, and
earth science, earning six tuition-free graduate credits per course totalling 18
graduate credits. Training will take place during the summer and the academic
year. In summary, through teaching content to under-prepared teachers in
minority school districts, the program is enabling teachers to provide
appropriate content to their students and to increase their own professional
standing. Through linking the City College School of Education, the Bronx
Science Regional Resource Center and local school districts, a network of
trained teacher leaders is being created who will be in place as local trainers
after the conclusion of the project and who will have ongoing access to the
resources of the supporting institutions. Cost sharing equals 72% of the NSF
award.