* 9055376
* University of New Hampshire Leadership Network for          Teachers Grades 5-12
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/1991,10/31/1994
* Karen Graham, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* diane spresser
* 10/31/1994
* USD 426,046.00

The University of New Hampshire seeks funds for the three-year program to
impact the direction of the teaching and learning of mathematics in the rural
regions of the Northeastern United States. Teams of a middle and a high school
teacher of mathematics and a school supervisor or administrator from each of 12
rural schools or school districts in the Northeast will participate in the
project. The teachers will attend two summer institutes: the first a four-week
institute whose focus will be the teaching and learning of algebra and of
statistics, and the second a three-week institute on assessment. The teachers
and their supervisor/administrator will then attend a two-week institute the
third summer which will focus on leadership development, the change process in
the schools, and conducting inservice workshops. School year follow-up
activities will include a yearly fall meeting at NCTM's Northeast Regional
Conference and a yearly spring session at the University of New Hampshire as
well as school visitations by the staff. In addition to the 36 first wave
teachers and administrators, it is anticipated that an additional 360 second-
wave middle and high school teachers and administrators will be enhanced. The
University of New Hampshire's cost-sharing will account for 7% of the NSF
budget. Enhancing the teaching and learning of middle and high school
mathematics in rural pockets of the United States must be a vital component of
improving mathematics education for the 21st Century. This project can serve as
a model for such enhancement.