* 9055574
* Portfolio Culture:  A Model for Interactive Science         Instruction and Assessment
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1995
* Richard Duschl, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Earle
* 07/31/1995
* USD 895,966.00

The goal of this project is to develop and evaluate a new model of instruction
and assessment that fosters the construction of scientific meaning in students
and that encourages conceptual development consistent with the growth of
scientific knowledge. We propose the development of a Portfolio Culture in
science classrooms. the implementation of a portfolio culture represents a
fundamental change in teaching priorities, classroom practices, and
institutional functions. This project is directed at evaluating and documenting
how the adoption of a portfolio culture affects student performance as well as
how teacher attitudes and practice are affected. This research will have several
outcomes: setting classroom instructional guidelines that inform teachers about
the selection and sequences of instructional tasks; generating strategies to
conduct formative assessment of students' knowledge bases; providing
recommendations for in-service education programs that strive to implement
conceptual change teaching reforms; and exploring ways that alternative
assessment strategies can be used by other educational constituents to
communicate learning outcomes. Educational Testing Service is contributing
substantial financial and staff resources to support initial phases of this
work. Pittsburgh Public Schools is willing to contribute costs associated with
participation by teachers and administrators.