* 9055528
* Minority Mathematics and Science Education Cooperative:     Summer Courses for Elementary Teachers
* EHR,DRL
* 05/15/1991,04/30/1994
* Wayne Carley, Lamar University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 04/30/1994
* USD 935,636.00

This project will develop the Summer Mathematics and Science Courses for
Elementary Teachers portion of the Minority Mathematics and Science Education
Cooperative (MMSEC). These courses are the third phase of MMSEC's 3-year
comprehensive training of elementary teachers in mathematics and science content
and teaching methodology. When completed these courses will offer teacher
university -level content courses in science and mathematics which will support
earlier activities of academic year inservice workshops and summer trainers'
institutes. These earlier programs provided teachers with strong, creative
teaching methods based on hands-on inquiry learning and contextual knowledge and
understanding needed to improve the deficient performance and classroom
achievements of minority children. The eight Texas sites for this project --San
Antonio, Ft. Worth, Arlington, Dallas, Nacogdoches, Beaumont/Port Arthur,
Edinburg, and Laredo-- and the eight institutions of higher education -- Stephen
Austin State University, Texas Christian University, University of Texas at San
Antonio, Lamar University, University of Texas at Pan American, Laredo State
University, University of Texas at Dallas, and Tarrant County Junior College --
along with the support of the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board form a
powerful partnership to improve the teaching of mathematics and science in
predominantly minority schools. It is estimated that through this partnership
536 teachers will be educated and over 10,616 students will be reached
indirectly.