* 9055533
* Exploring the Blue Planet: The Scripps Hall of Oceanography
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1992
* Donald W Wilkie, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Butler
* 08/31/1992
* USD 500,000.00

In spring of 1992, Scripps Institution of Oceanography will open a new
Aquarium-Museum. The enlarges facility will include a 3700 sq. ft. gallery, the
Scripps Hall of Oceanography. Funding is requested for a new exhibit in this
gallery, Exploring the Blue Planet, which will offer visitors an overview of the
ocean sciences -- to our knowledge, the only major exhibit on oceanography in
the United States. The exhibit first introduces visitors to our water planet,
followed by a walk through the history of oceanographic research. Visitors are
then invited to explore the ocean world as if they were oceanographers
themselves, making discoveries as they follow the theme of "water" through the
hall, adding components one-by-one to build a global system: first water alone
(water chemistry and movements), then adding air (climate and weather), next
adding land (seafloor spreading and plate tectonics), and finally adding life
(adaptations of organisms to the marine environment). Through interactive
exhibits on scientific concepts, coupled with exhibits on related Scripps
research projects, visitors gain an appreciation for the process of science and
its application to their everyday lives. The conclusion of Exploring the Blue
Planet brings together the four realms of water, air, land and life to emphasize
the nature of Earth as an interrelated global system. Visitors learn that
oceanography, an interdisciplinary science that is global in scale and often
international in practice, lends itself to a balanced and comprehensive
investigation of global change and our future on earth.