* 9055422
* Northeast Louisiana University Enrichment Program for High  School Teachers of Computer Science
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/1991,10/31/1995
* Paul Ohme, The University of Louisiana at Monroe
* Standard Grant
* diane spresser
* 10/31/1995
* USD 454,547.00

Northeast Louisiana University seeks funds for a three-year program to upgrade
secondary computer science teachers' understanding of fundamental computer
science topics and of current research in the field. Two groups of twenty-five
teachers will be trained to be teacher-leaders throughout the state of
Louisiana. The method of delivery will be different for the two groups. The
first group will attend three-week summer institutes during the first two
summers of the project followed by nine days of instruction during the third
year. The second group will attend ten weekend sessions during each of the
second and third year of the project. These alternate delivery mechanisms are
designed to meet the needs of the teachers. Teachers will be enhanced in such
topics as object-oriented programming, algorithm design and analysis, computer
architecture, telecommunications, and parallel processing. Five master teachers
will assist participants in improving pedagogical and classroom management
skills, in methods of recruiting females and minority students to take computer
science courses, and in designing computer science curriculum for the schools.
Project Directors will write professional development materials in the form of
in-service training modules for presentation to school officials and for the
first-wave teachers to use in enhancing second-wave teachers. Follow-up
activities for first-wave teachers will include weekly communication by e-mail
and by tele- conferencing, a mentoring program with the master teachers, and
site visits from the project directors. In addition to the fifty first-wave
teachers, it is anticipated that an additional 250 second-wave computer science
teachers will be enhanced. Northeast Louisiana University's cost-sharing will
account for 37% of the NSF budget.