* 9057916
* Presidential Young Investigator Award: Precision Finishing  of Ceramics
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1990,03/31/1997
* Srinivasan Chandrasekar, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 03/31/1997
* USD 312,500.00

Ceramics are widely used in precision electronics and biological applications
such as sensors, bio-implants, and magnetic heads, and have potential for use in
mechanical components such as engines and bearings. In view of the high accuracy
required, ceramic surfaces for these applications are generated primarily by
slicing, grinding and fine finishing processes such as lapping and polishing.
The processes alter the near-surface mechanical and electromagnetic properties
of the ceramic causing their performance in systems to deteriorate. Therefore, a
critical need exists to understand these effects and to be able to control them
through suitable finishing/post- finishing processes. The goal of this research
is to understand the science and technology of ceramic finishing to generate
atomically smooth surfaces of high quality. The research will use well developed
surface characterization techniques such as x-ray diffraction, electron and
tunnelling microscopy to characterize the near-surface deformation in finished
ceramic surfaces. It will quantify deformation induced changes in the near-
surface electromagnetic and mechanical properties. A series of studies will be
carried out to understand the material removal mechanism during fine- finishing
and its influence on the near-surface properties. By integrating the process-
property understanding developed above, fine-finishing processes will be
developed for generating ceramic surfaces with controlled surface quality.