* 9057420
* Presidential Young Investigators Award
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1990,08/31/1997
* Andrew Packard, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/1997
* USD 277,325.00

This award is to provide research support to Dr. Packard under the National
Science Foundation's Presidential Young Investigator Awards (PYIA) Program. The
objectives of the PYIA Program are to provide support to the Nation's most
outstanding and promising young science and engineering faculty. The awards are
intended to improve the capability of U.S. academic institutions to respond to
the demand for highly qualified science and engineering personnel for academic
and industrial research and teaching. Dr. Packard's field of research is applied
mathematics, with emphasis on linear algebra and control. The research to be
done can be split into three topics: analysis, design and modeling.
Specifically: (1) Analysis of linear fractional transformations- The motivation
for this comes from control system design where it is often natural to model
individual components as a nominal model, along with a linear fractional
perturbation set, which together are called the "model pair". The structured
singular value (ssv) of a matrix is the conceptual mathematical tool which
answers many questions about the behavior of the matrix when it is perturbed in
a linear fractional manner. The PI will use these tools to study the optimal
synthesis of linear systems. His main theoretical goal is to develop a more
unified approach which includes both one-dimensional, and multidimensional (for
example, image processing) systems. The ssv will be the starting point for this
research, since both types of systems, system properties (such as stability and
input/output norms), and the robustness of these properties, are equivalent to
ssv tests. (2) Robust Control Design- He plans to study computational problems
with H-infinity design and the optimal diagonally scaled problem (the diagonal
scaling "tricks" H- infinity into designing robust closed loop systems). (3)
Modeling- Improved models alleviate the problems of plant/model mismatch. He
plans to use ssv and H- infinity to produce sets of models from existing
modeling tools, rule out model pairs via measurements (invalidation), and
produce models from measurements (identification). He plans to experimentally
verify these theoretical models.