* 9057567
* Presidential Young Investigator Award:  "Semantics-based    Generation of Optimizing Compilers"
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/1990,03/31/1996
* Peter Lee, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 03/31/1996
* USD 200,000.00

It is becoming standard practice to write formal descriptions of programming
languages. The fundamental benefit of a "formal semantics" is that it
constitutes an unambiguous standard of reference against which questions about
the meaning of programs can be answered. Also, it serves as the basis for
mathematical reasoning about programs, for instance for the purposes of
optimization. While these certainly are practical benefits, other pragmatic
aspects of languages are not normally reflected in a formal semantics, such as
the distinction between compile-time and run-time, whether automatic garbage
collection is needed, and so on. In previous research, a technique called "high-
level semantics" was proposed which addressed some of these issues. The main
result was that for Pascal-like languages, high-level semantics allows one to
generate realistic compilers automatically. Unfortunately, this technique does
not extend easily to more advanced languages incorporating such notions as
polymorphism, nonstrictness, concurrency and so forth. Low-level features such
as pointer arithmetic and volatile variables also prevent problems. Perhaps most
importantly, semantics-based optimization techniques are hard to incorporate. In
this project, techniques for formally describing and automatically implementing
such advanced languages features and optimizations will be developed. The goal
is to automatically generate nearly practical compilers for advanced languages.