* 9057155
* Mathematical Sciences: Presidential Young Investigator      Award
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1995
* Matei Machedon, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1995
* USD 125,000.00

This project represents work performed by a Presidential Young Investigator on
mathematical problems arising in the theories of partial differential equations
and several complex variables. In the context of the research these are not
separate areas but are connected by fundamental questions relating to
understanding when a differential equation, defined on the boundary of a domain
in a space of several complex variables, admits a solution. When this is the
case, it follows that the boundary data extends to a neighborhood of the
boundary as an holomorphic function. Domains in the space of two complex
variables for which the problem can be solved have been characterized. The
present work will look at the higher dimensional cases. There is reason to
believe that a direct generalization to higher dimensions may not be possible.
Estimates needed in the proof of the two-dimensional result do not carry over
directly. New metrics recently introduced will provide good estimates of
fundamental solutions of the differential equations, however the sharpness one
needs cannot be obtained. In addition to attacking this most pressing problem of
the day, work will also be done in using methods developed in analyzing the
partial differential operator on manifolds which are not necessarily the
boundary of a domain in several complex variables.