* 9057124
* Mathematical Sciences: Presidential Young Investigator Award
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1990,03/31/1996
* B Bayly, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 03/31/1996
* USD 201,439.00

The Presidential Young Investigator will continue working on several problems
in the general area of fluid transport. The first area involves the study of
fluid stability; in particular, Bayly will try to extend results on broadband
instability from two dimensions to three dimensions. The goal of this research
is to develop a global picture of instability modes and hence, a coherent
picture of broadband instabilities in general flows. The second area involves
the magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) dynamo problem; in particular, the investigator
and a colleague at NYU will try to discover what is needed to produce a fast
dynamo. Their strategy is to perform high-resolution MHD simulations of dynamo
actions and establish rigorous error bounds on the numerical discretizations.
Various types of fluid dynamical phenomena involve the creation and evolution of
instabilities. An instability is produced when a small or large perturbation
upsets an existing balance of forces and leads to the formation of a new
equilibrium state, which in turn might itself change in response to new
perturbations. It is easy to imagine that one is interested in such changes in
equilibrium states, since the design of apparatus depends crucially upon what
the prevailing equilibrium state is thought to be in a given flow situation. The
investigator will use analytical and computational tools to describe the
evolution of broadband instabilities in complex flows and the impact of
relatively large disturbances.