* 9057119
* Presidential Young Investigators Award:  Modification of    Protein Structure Near Charged Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1996
* Karen Gleason, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/1996
* USD 312,500.00

The focus of this PYI research is on achieving a fundamental understanding of
thin films and Interfacial Transport by utilization of state-of-the-art NMR
techniques. Several diverse areas of focus are: Hydrogen in SiO2 Thin Films and
at Si/SiO2 Interfaces - The use of < 100 A thick films and lower growth
temperatures in integrated circuit manufacture leads to increased hydrogen
incorporation. In SiO2 films, hydrogen is proposed to pasivate electrical
defects, modify oxidation kinetics, and alter film properties. Crystalline
Diamond Thin Films - Improved understanding of diamond nucleation and growth is
needed in order to deposit single crystalline films over large areas, as desired
for semiconductor applications. Photoresist Thin Films - Efforts to optimize and
control microlithographic processes are influenced by the density variations and
motion in polymeric photoresist films. Proteins Near Charge Interfaces -
Transport across biological membranes and several bioseparation and biocatalysis
techniques involve proteins near charged interfaces. Changes in tertiary protein
structure induced by thorough preferential interaction with charged and polar
protein segments can be observed directly with NMR. Reversed micelles, having
few chemical components and large surface areas, provide a relatively simple
system for initial study. A fundamental understanding of thin films and
interfaces is a crucial components of process optimization in the
microelectronics and biotechnology industries. Unique and valuable information
is elucidated through the application of selected nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) techniques to study the atomic scale structure of thin films and
interfaces. This knowledge can be used to develop and test atomistic models of
film growth and interfacial chemistry, with the ultimate goal of tailoring
chemical processes for desired application.