* 9057123
* Presidential Young Investigator (PYI) Award:  Development   of Superconducting Detectors for Use in Submillimeter       Spectroscopy
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1996
* Jonas Zmuidzinas, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Van Citters
* 07/31/1996
* USD 129,000.00

Research under this Presidential Young Investigator Award will have three main
thrusts. The first is the development of improved submillimeter receiver
components. The Principal Investigator is particularly interested in expoiting
superconducting thin film and tunnel junction technology to develop novel
submillimeter circuits. Devices such as SIS mixers, 2-dimensional imaging
arrays, submillimeter Josephson oscillators, SQUID and parametric amplifiers,
low-loss transmission lines, passive components such as filters couplers, and
perhaps even integrated receivers are all feasible with this technology. The
second thrust is the construction of practical receiver systems for astronomical
use at the Caltech Submillimeter Observatory and the Antarctic Telescope and
also on airborne telescopes, and eventually for space missions. This effort will
be pursued in parallel with the first, using existing components when necessary
but taking advantage of new components as they are developed. The third thrust
is the employment of these receivers to attack astrophysical problems. Principal
interests at present are the structure and physics of molecular clouds,
photodissociation regions, molecular outflows, and star-forming regions.
Submillimeter spectroscopy is the optimal method for studying the warm and
dencse gas typically found in these regions.