* 9057130
* Presidential Young Investigator: Synthesis of Glycopeptides and Conformational Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1990,12/31/1996
* Daniel Kahne, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 12/31/1996
* USD 312,500.00

Dr. Daniel E. Kahne will be supported as a Presidential Young Investigator by
the Organic Synthesis Program. He will be studying how the attachment of
carbohydrates to a peptide alters its structure and in so doing modulates the
biological activity. New methods of synthesizing glycopeptides will be developed
in order to facilitate the necessary structure-function studies. The first step
involves working out strategies to synthesize glycopeptides. Currently a
glycosylation method is being developed that can be used to attach sugars to
amino acids rapidly and in good yield. Glycopeptides will be incorporated using
solid phase synthesis. This will primarily involve manipulation of protecting
group schemes so that the carbohydrate moiety can be deprotected and the
glycopeptide cleaved from the resin without hydrolysis of glycosidic bonds. The
glycopeptide sequences will have been chosen from systemswhere there is evidence
that the carbohydrate induces a conformational change in the peptide. Initial
studies will be confined to peptide sequences of six to eight amino acids.
Proton NMR will be used to compare the structure of the glycopeptide with its
nonglycosylated analogue to evaluate the effects of the attached carbohydrate.
Assignments and coupling constants can be obtained from homonuclear (phase-
sensitive) and heteronuclear correlation spectroscoyy. Through-space
interactions (dipolar coupling) obtained from NOESY or spin-locked (transverse)
NOE spectroscopy will give information about the solution conformations.
Additional information about conformational structure and dynamics can be
obtained by measuring amide exchange rates and relaxation times. The studies
should begin to give a better understanding of how attached carbohydrates can
modulate secondary structure in glycosylated regions of proteins.