* 9057331
* PYI:  Studies in Population Genetics, Life History Traits   and Host-Parasite Dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1990,09/30/1998
* Steven Frank, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 09/30/1998
* USD 296,396.00

During his five-year Presidential Young Investigator Award, Dr. Steven Frank,
University of California, Irvine, plans to continue and expand his research
activities in four areas. The first two concern the inherent instability and
resulting dynamics caused by conflict at different genetic and ecological
levels. Specifically, Dr. Frank will extend his present work on genomic conflict
to explain uniparentally inherited sex-biasing elements and the role of meiotic
drive in maintaining chromosomal inversions and genetic differences between
species. Using host-parasite systems, he will also attempt to relate observable
statistics about spacial variation to models of long-term ecological and
evolutionary dynamics that maintain observable patterns. A third research goal
involves understanding the patterns of parental investment in male vs. female
offspring, including exploring a different interpretation of sex allocation in
warm- blooded vertebrates. Finally, Dr. Frank will initiate research on the
evolution of learning by merging advances in artificial intelligence and
computers with classic methods from population genetics and evolutionary
biology. His goal of applying advanced computer technology to evolutionary
genetics is particularly innovative and, if successful, may herald a new era in
evolutionary biology research.