* 9057157
* Presidential Young Investigator Award
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1990,12/31/1995
* Madeline Shea, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1995
* USD 312,500.00

Individual-site and individual-species techniques will be developed to elucidate
molecular mechanisms of cooperativity in regulatory calcium-binding proteins
such as calbindin nd calmodulin. This class of proteins regulates the cellular
response to transient calcium fluxes in almost every tissue type. Cooperative
calcium binding to these proteins causes large and specific conformational
transitions that modulate protein-protein interactions by controlling the sites
and extent of their binding to important cellular enzymes or structural
proteins. To understand the molecular mechanism of cooperative calcium binding
and its ramifications new methods are needed that can probe the intermediate
states of binding. One planned approach is to apply the cryogenic isoelectric
focusing technique to isolate partially saturated calcium- binding proteins and
complexes of calcium-binding proteins with their target enzymes. This will allow
the quantitation of intermediate states of the protein assemblies and the
determination of which ones are functionally significant. Analysis of these
experiments will use non-linear least squares methods to determine model-
independent thermodynamic and kinetic parameters. Classical binding methods
(such as equilibrium dialysis) and spectroscopic techniques (CD, fluorescence,
n.m.r.) also will be applied. Statistical thermodynamic models that will
describe the functionally significant properties of the system in terms of the
relevant chemical species and the rules that govern transitions between them
will be formulated. This will allow a test of whether the identified physico-
chemical properties of the system components are necessary and sufficient to
account for the biological behavior. It may also assist in design of drugs that
mimic these interactions. The coupling of ligand binding and conformational
change within the calcium-binding protein and its linkage to assembly of an
activated enzyme complex offer many opportunities to test and expand ideas about
chemical work, free energy coupling and dynamic control of cellular events.
These findings will have broad applicability to other biological systems.