* 9057258
* Presidential Young Investigators Award:  Fundamental        Mechanisms of Heat and Mass Transport With Phase Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1990,07/31/1997
* Per Peterson, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* ASHLEY F EMERY
* 07/31/1997
* USD 312,500.00

Condensation in multispecies systems can be dramatically different from single-
component condensation in enclosures. Variation of species concentration along
phase boundaries can result in large, nonlinear decreases in condensation rates,
with strong impacts on the fluid mechanics. Experiments show that semi-stagnant
multispecies systems can exhibit complex bifurcation behavior and large pressure
fluctuations, but only approximate modeling techniques are available, even for
steady-state recirculating conditions. Here new numerical techniques for
boundary conditions are being combined with laser holography experiments to
determine species distributions. In a second area of research, conjugate heat
transfer effects on nuclear boiling will be investigated under conditions of
strong convection, as occur in critical flashing flows in nozzles, pipes, and
cracks. Conjugate heat transfer in the wall material will result in some wall
subcooling at the temperature inflection point where bubble nucleation occurs.
Under conditions where this wall subcooling is large, bubble nucleation will be
depressed and large liquid superheats observed, strongly altering the flow
dynamics. This new hypothesis provides good correlation of existing experimental
data over wide superheat ranges, but study of heat transfer under high velocity
flashing conditions is required to permit nonempirical modeling. A third topic
of interest is multiphase transport in porous materials. Under certain
conditions, experiments have shown solute leaching and transport are enhanced
under unsaturated conditions. Most studies however, particularly for geologic
repositories for high-level nuclear waste storage, assume saturated conditions
as "worst case" scenarios. Here research is focusing on two and three-
dimensional transport in unsaturated systems, paying particular attention to the
waste forms of species affecting leaching rates, ion exchange and mass transfer,
and coupling between the fluid mechanics and temperature, concentration, and
pressure fields. When gas, vapor, liquid, and solid phases coexist, the
fundamental mechanisms of heat and mass transport can be greatly complicated by
behavior at phase interfaces. Often the location, thermodynamic state, and heat
and mass transport across the phase interfaces cannot be modeled or even
measured experimentally. These difficulties are being addressed by research on
three specific topics, with primary application to nuclear and conventional
energy conversion systems, and processing and storage systems for nuclear and
chemical wastes.