* 9057921
* Presidential Young Investigators Award: Combustion Synthesisof Diamond
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1996
* David Goodwin, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 06/30/1996
* USD 312,500.00

A low pressure, flat flame burner will be used to grow diamond under highly
controlled and well characterized conditions. Low pressure, porous plug-
stabilized flames have a simple one- dimensional structure which lend themselves
to accurate modeling and diagnostic probing, providing a significant advantage
for fundamental studies over other types of diamond growth reactors. Stable
species concentrations will be measured in the boundary layer of a temperature-
controlled substrate placed in the flow. Radical species and temperatures will
be measured using laser-induced fluorescence, resonantly-enhanced multiphoton
ionization, and Raman scattering techniques. IR/visible sum generation will be
used to detect molecules adsorbed on the substrate during diamond growth. A
reacting flow numerical model will be developed and predicted species,
temperature, and growth rates will be compared to experimentally measured
values. Diamond films appear very promising for tribological, optical, and
electronic applications, but the quality of currently- grown films is
insufficient for most uses. The experiments planned will be the first to study
diamond growth in a thoroughly characterized environment, and should yield
significant information on the processes responsible for maximizing growth rate
and controlling quality.