* 9057573
* Presidential Young Investigator Award
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1994
* Timoleon Sellis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Ashany
* 01/31/1994
* USD 150,000.00

This project focuses on research in three areas: Query Optimization, Active
Databases, and Learning mechanisms for relational database management systems.
Query optimization is necessary to provide fast access to large databases; in
this project, techniques that allow the optimization of multiple queries, thus
providing higher throughput for the system are developed and implemented in a
prototype system. In contrast to the traditional single command-at-a-time
optimization, a multiple-query processing strategy avoids redundant page
accesses by accessing data common to more than one query, only once. The
research on Active databases investigates methods that allow the specification,
efficient monitoring and processing of triggers in relational systems. Such
methods are essential in contemporary systems and allow the database management
system to "react" to changes performed. The use of machine learning is explored
at the buffer management and query optimization levels in order to improve the
performance of database systems. In particular, schemes that will adapt the
above sub-systems based on the query and user environment, are investigated. The
contributions of the research in the above three areas lie in improving
performance of relational database systems in contemporary applications, such as
deductive and engineering databases.