* 9057675
* Presidential Young Investigators Award: Sources and         Applications for Short Wavelength Electromagnetic Radiation
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1990,03/31/1997
* John Booske, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia M. Ayres
* 03/31/1997
* USD 322,500.00

Research is planned to make new advances in mm-and sub-mm wave sources, as well
as their applications. This work will be based on prior experience in developing
mm-wave Free Electron Laser devices at reduced beam voltages (both high power
0.5-1.0 MV FEL oscillators and 50 kV harmonic "ubitron" amplifiers). The new
directions, however, will emphasize studies of compact, "low" voltage (< 100
kV), and moderate power (0.1-100 kW) devices to be compatible with commercially
practical civilian and government applications. To accomplish new developments
in this field, research innovations in electron beam generation and focusing
techniques, small-scale radiation cavities and periodic structures, and
nonlinear efficiency enhancement and mode control techniques will be carried
out. Also research on compact periodic structures as an opportunity to research,
develop, and perform (scaled) testing of new insertion devices for high energy
electron storage rings will be performed. Such insertion devices should extend
the capabilities of U.S. storage ring facilities as high brightness IR, VUV, and
x-ray light source facilities for spectroscopic, materials science,
lithographic, and biomedical applications. Finally, in addition to the ceramic
sintering process, there are several new applications for moderate power mm-wave
sources such as, mm-wave heating of a compact, high density, mirror plasma to
efficiently generate soft x-rays for lithography and materials processing
applications. Another interest is to study the use of mm-waves for improved
thermal processing of dielectric coatings. A third area of interest would be the
previously mentioned use of coherent sub-mm sources, (i.e., wavelengths between
0.01-1.0 mm) for spectroscopy of various chemical chain reactions and solid-
state semi-conductor phenomena.