* 9058545
* Presidential Young Investigator Awards
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1990,07/31/1996
* Victor Sanvido, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ken Chong
* 07/31/1996
* USD 347,500.00

The research plan is to develop a conceptual model, or framework, of the
information required to manage, plan, design, construct, and operate a building.
This model has several development steps. 1. Separate the information into that
required drive to process, and information required to describe the product
(building). Separation will be based on the NSF funded Integrated Building
Process Model (IBPM), current collaborative work with the NSF Engineering
Research Centers at Carnegie Mellon and Lehigh, and industry input. 2. Define in
detail the information required to control and drive the process. 3. Define the
information that describes the building product and link the function, form,
economy and time attributes of the building; at different levels of abstraction,
(e.g., building, system, floor, room and component levels); from multiple
perspectives, (e.g., structural, electrical); at the various stages in the life
of the facility (as defined by the process model). 4. Develop a prototype data
classification and coding system to allow users to interactively access
information from multiple perspectives in different forms. 5. Select a building
representing a typical environment for implementation of this research, e.g., a
200,000 square foot mixed use building, and collect the information specified by
the framework or model. 6. Test the key attributes of the prototype on the
selected building by allowing the users to pose typical scenarios and queries to
the prototype. Analyse the information structure for absence and duplication of
information. 7. Propose changes in information systems and processes to
industrial participants.