* 9058467
* Presidential Young Investigator (PYI) Award - Interstellar  Chemistry
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/1990,06/30/1993
* Lucy Ziurys, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 06/30/1993
* USD 124,999.00

Dr. Ziurys' Presidential Young Investigator Award will be used to study
interstellar chemistry. In the laboratory she will measure transition
frequencies of molecules which are potentially present in interstellar clouds
but which have not yet been observed. With the rest frequencies known, she will
then carry out observations to search for these molecules in selected molecular
clouds known to be undergoing star formation. It is currently thought that most
interstellar molecules are formed by gas phase positive ion-molecule reactions.
About 50% of these reactions are exothermic. They also have negligible
activation energy barriers, and they require only 2-body collisions. Thus, they
can proceed rapidly in the low temperature, low density environment of
interstellar molecular clouds. When stars form in these clouds, however, the
physical conditions become altered. Under these circumstances, activation energy
barriers are readily overcome, endothermic reactions can occur, and what is
termed "shock" or "high temperature" chemistry takes place. In addition shocks
and elevated temperatures can cause the destruction of dust grains and release
refractory elements into the gas phase. It is evident that this "high
temperature" chemistry must be important in the synthesis of molecules in star
forming regions, but its exact role has yet to be determined. Dr. Ziurys'
research addresses both the laboratory measurement of the properties of
molecules which are potential constituents of the "shocked" regions of
interstellar clouds and the astronomical observations to search for these
molecules in space.