* 9058392
* Presidential Young Investigator Award
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1990,03/31/1996
* Lee Lynd, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* william weigand
* 03/31/1996
* USD 334,900.00

Research will be carried out focusing on renewable resources and waste
treatment. The capabilities of living systems will be explored in this context,
using an integrated approach employing engineering, biological, and chemical
principles. A particular focus is fundamental understanding which could make a
contribution toward the realization of applied goals. Specific areas of interest
include ethanol production from lignocellulose, and anaerobic waste treatment
and remediation. Current and anticipated research related to ethanol production
addresses metabolic control of product formation, cellulase kinetics, and
bioreactor design. Thermophilic bacteria and enzymes are of particular interest.
Investigation of metabolic control will involve coupling understanding of
microbial physiology and energetics with engineering approaches to manipulating
the fermentor environment in order to increase ethanol yields. Bioreactor design
for continuous fermentation of lignocellulosics at high concentrations will be
pursued both experimentally and theoretically. This will encompass consideration
of plug-flow cellulose distribution, differential residence time of both cells
and substrate due to substrate-broth density differences and cell-substrate
adhesion phenomena, and modeling and understanding in vivo cellulose hydrolysis
and fermentation. Approaches to anaerobic waste treatment and remediation will
include selective inhibition of sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB) via
biochemically-based strategies. In addition, the physiological basis for the
relatively incomplete treatment often obtained by anaerobic systems, and
possible solutions to this problem, will be addressed. Finally, the use of
anaerobic systems for the detoxification of hazardous wastes will be
investigated, including both engineering and biological considerations.