* 9058020
* Presidential Young Investigator Awards
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1990,01/31/1998
* Peter Salovey, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 01/31/1998
* USD 257,950.00

With a Presidential Young Investigator award from the National Science
Foundation, Dr. Peter Salovey will continue his work one motion as a central
organizing process in human perception, cognition, and action. Salovey's recent
work has focused on the effects of mood on important human decisions: for
example, he has shown that transient mood states influenced the manner in which
people interpreted and evaluated physiological sensations. These evaluations had
important consequences for decisions that had critical implications for their
physical health. In other research, Salovey has shown how comparisons among
individuals can give rise to envy and jealousy, and how these emotions can be
influenced by aspects of the situation that appear to have little to do with
them. Salovey's work is important for several reasons. Substantively, it heralds
important new developments in the study of emotions. In terms of scientific
progression, the work is a departure from the more simple information processing
approaches, which conceptualized human decision making as little different from
that of a computing machine. The new view, with Salovey as one of the major
proponents, sees human information processing as closely influenced by such
human features as mood and emotion. This is a more realistic, if more difficult,
approach, which in the hands of a skilled scientist of Salovey's talent, will
pay enormous dividends.