* 9058560
* Presidential Young Investigator Awards
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1990,01/31/1997
* Sue Bidstrup-Allen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah L. Crawford
* 01/31/1997
* USD 312,500.00

Polymers play a critical role in electronic materials processing, including
packaging and interconnection of electronic components, photolithography, use as
passivant overcoats and interlevel insulators. The performance of an electronic
device often hinges on the properties of the polymer film used in these
applications. Structure-property relationships are crucial for developing new
chemical systems, formulating process models and predicting end-use performance.
My research interests are focused on these materials issues in electronic
packaging and interconnection. Two of my ongoing research projects are: 1)
Integrated Circuit Encapsulation. Rapid polymerization processes, including
resin transfer molding, are employed in chip packaging operations. These
processes would benefit from an on-line monitoring technique which provides
instantaneous information on the state of cure and does not disturb the
manufacturing process. In-situ monitoring of dielectric properties via the use
of microsensors may be a valuable method for elucidating structural and
mechanical properties. The goals of this study are to establish the fundamental
relationships between conductivity and structural and rheological properties,
and to develop a dielectric cure monitoring system for controlling the
encapsulation process. 2) Non-Destructive Analysis of Polyimide Films. High
performance polyimide films and coatings are required by the electronics
industry. The properties of these polyimides are critical in the fabrication and
performance of integrated circuits. Thermal cure history fabrication environment
and type of substrate upon which the pre-polymer is cast all can have a
significant effect on the chemical structure of the polymer, which in turn
affects the final performance properties of the film. In this study, in-situ
spectroscopic, birefringence, X-ray diffraction, thermal and dielectric analysis
will be combined with microfabricated load-deflection test sites to study the
processing, environmental and structural dependence of performance properties
for thin polyimide films.