* 9058316
* Presidential Young Investigator Award - Analytical Modeling of Structures and Applications in Earthquake Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1998
* H. Allison Smith, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 01/31/1998
* USD 312,500.00

This project is supported under the Presidential Young Investigator (PYI) Award
program. The project is initiated in FY 90 for a 5-year period. The objectives
of the project is to develop analytical modeling techniques for vibrating
systems and apply them in earthquake engineering. The development of analytical
models that accurately represent structural behavior plays a crucial role in
dynamic response prediction. Many analytical procedures are rendered ineffective
if the finite element model and computational technique used in implementing the
procedure involve inaccuracies due to improper respresentation of the vibrating
system. The research will focus on the development of finite element models used
to implement dynamic analyses of structural systems. These models must
accurately represent all structural attributes such as stiffness and mass
properties, boundary conditions, joint fixities, and material and geometric
nonlinearities. Several tasks have been identified as part of an overall
research program: 1) development of a high-resolution finite element model of an
existing structure which will represent structural characteristics with minimal
approximation, 2) development of a conventional finite element model of the same
structe which contains typical modeling assumptions, 3) studies involving the
two models which evaluate the validity of the assumptions in the conventional
model when compared to the high-resolution model, and 4) development of new
techniques which will minimize the inaccuracies associated with the modeling
associated with the modeling assumptions. This research will be implemented on
structures undergoing seismic excitation. This research will benefit industry by
verifying and quantifying assumptions used in modeling vibrating systems and
will enhance dynamic analysis technology by developing techniques which minimize
modeling inaccuracies.