* 9058078
* Presidential Young Investigators Award:  Mechanistic        Studies of Colloidal Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1990,12/31/1995
* Stacy Bike, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/1995
* USD 329,000.00

The focus of this PYI-directed research program will be on colloidal particles
and the focus associated with their transport. One force of fundamental interest
is electrokinetic lift, which arises from the relative motion of charged bodies
in electrolyte solutions. Electrokinetic lift is significant to all particle
transport processes including hydrodynamic chromatography, deep-bed filtration,
suspension rheology, and the detachment of particles from surfaces during fluid
flow. Given the broad applicability of this force, it is essential that one
assesses the importance of electrokinetic lift in a given system. Previous
analyses of this force have focused on two bodies bearing thin, equilibrium
double layers. Such simplified models, while easy to theoretically characterize,
are not technologically relevant. For example, the analyses have shown that
electrokinetic lift is more important in nonaqueous media, which are
characterized by thick, nonequilibrium double layers. The PI will initiate an
in- depth analysis of this force, removing first the equilibrium double-layer
restriction and, second, the thin double-layer restriction. These theoretical
studies will be coupled with experimental observation of lift. Later, transport
studies will then be extended to focus on the role of colloidal forces in the
rheology of dispersions with application to coatings and films. The results of
this work will greatly enrich the fundamental understanding of the transport of
colloidal particles.