* 9058397
* PYI:  Complexity Uncertainty, Information, and Organization in Control System Design for Modern Engineering Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1990,01/31/1996
* Carl Nett, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/1996
* USD 242,500.00

The overall goal of our research program will be to make progress toward the
development of control system design methodologies which support the following
control system design paradigm: Minimize control system complexity subject to
the achievement of a specified control accuracy in the face of
system/environmental uncertainty. A key focus of this research program will be
the role and use of information and organization for the achievement of this
paradigm, as the nature and use of available information, and in particular how
it is organized, largely determine how effectively the control system reduces
the effects of system/environmental uncertainty, and what level of complexity is
required to do so. The task in our research program will include the development
of control-oriented system identification methods. In this work we have
developed methods for identification H-infinity; in other words, the identified
model converges to the unknown system in the H-infinity norm, and at each step
an explicit bound is given on the H-infinity norm of the error between the
identified model and the unknown system. This bound is precisely the uncertainty
specification required in most currently popular approaches to robust control
system design. Applications feedback will be essential for the achievement of
our immediate goal of better bridging the gap that currently exists between the
areas of robust control and system identification. For this purpose we have in
mind an important application; namely, active control of fan/compressor stall
phenomena in advanced variable-cycle aircraft gas turbine engines.