* 9058579
* Presidential Young Investigator Award:  Rapid Numerical     Algorithms for Scientific Computation
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/1990,01/31/1997
* Leslie Greengard, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert G. Voigt
* 01/31/1997
* USD 312,500.00

One goal is to incorporate the Fast Multipole Method (FMM) into the molecular
dynamics simulation package being developed by Charles Peskin and Tamar Schlick
at the Courant Institute. In such particle simulations, the greatest
computational burden has classically been that of evaluating the self-consistent
electrostatic field induced by all of the partially charged individual atoms.
This is precisely the problem addressed by the FMM. The hope is that certain
inaccuracies in molecular dynamics calculations can be eliminated, yielding more
physically reasonable results. The second major area of research is potential
theory for the heat equation. Earlier work, in collaboration with John Strain,
has yielded a scheme for the rapid evaluation of heat potentials. It is planned
to devote substantial research time over the next few years to the examination
of extensions of this scheme as well as its ramifications. The combination of
potential theory and integral equations may provide a fundamental change in the
way heat equations are solved, since spatially complex and time- dependent
domains are handled without additional difficulty. It also appears likely that
the method will extend in a natural way to variable coefficient and nonlinear
parabolic partial differential equations. The third area of research is phase
separation in material science. A new integral equation-based scheme has been
constructed for the Laplace equation in multiply connected domains. It is
planned to incorporate this method into a model of "Ostwald ripening," which
follows the dynamic motion of the interface between two phases. This requires
the solution of Laplace's equation at each step.