* 9060603
* Plasma and Ultra Violet Damage in Oxygen Photoresist        Stripping with a Downstream Microwave Plasma Source
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1991,09/30/1991
* Richard Post, Applied Science and Technology Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1991
* USD 50,000.00

The goal of this program is to investigate the causes of semiconductor wafer
damage during oxygen photoresist stripping with a downstream microwave plasma.
The use of oxygen plasmas for dry stripping of photoresist eliminates the
handling, disposal, and resist degradation problems associated with liquid
processes. A downstream, microwave- produced plasma has the additional
advantages of no electrode contamination and low plasma potentials. However, as
with other plasma etching methods, downstream microwave processing is associated
with wafer damage including mobile ion contamination and electrostatic breakdown
of oxide gates, wall-sourced contamination, and degradation from chemical or
structural changes. The causes of such surface damage are not well understood.
We propose to correlate such damage with plasma source phenomena such as UV
radiation and surface charging. During phase I, we will make radial and axial
scans of plasma density, electron temperature, and space potential in the
vicinity of the wafer while monitoring neutral gas constitutents for a range of
stripping rates and plasma source operating points. For phase II, on the basis
of CV curve shift analyses we will correlate damage with plasma associated
phenomena such as UV, surface charging, synergistic effects, and wall-sourced
contaminants and develop means of effectively curtailing them.