* 9060358
* Semiconductor Surface Chemistry for Biosensors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1991,09/30/1991
* Patrick Guire, SurModics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1991
* USD 50,000.00

The concept of photoaffinity immobilization of specific binding proteins has
been patented and reduced to practice with antibody on glass by this company.
The development of additional reagents and reaction procedures is proposed for
the affinity coupling (covalent) of receptor molecules (especially antibodies)
to the activated surface of passivated (by hydrophilic spacer coating) silicon-
based sensors. Additional trifunctional photoreactive reagents will be
synthesized and coupled to the sensor surface for the specific covalent binding
of monoclonal antibody (using one of the two antibody binding sites), leaving
the remaining stabilized antibody binding site available for functional exchange
between surface-immobilized analyte and free analyte molecules in the test
sample. The specific, one-step purification-covalent immobilization of the
antibody through a long, hydrophilic, flexible tether adjacent to the short-
spacer immobilized analyte group, is expected to provide cost efficient
production of stabilized immunosensors with improved performance (faster
response and regeneration, as well as increased sensitivity, particularly where
rapid analyses are required). The system proposed will detect toluene and/or
related aromatic hydrocarbon derivatives. Demonstrating laboratory feasibility
with this immobilized, stabilized immunosensor system with this type of analyte
will support the utility of this technology for sensitive, rapid, and selective
sensing and monitoring of biologically active agents. The sensor device will
reversibly recognize and quantitate analyte content in batch or continuous
sampling situations and transduce the signal with electronic recording and
transmission of data. Such a device would offer a broad range of applicability
for periodic sample analysis and real time, on line monitoring of fluids (air,
water) as well as dosimetry measurements in air and physiological fluids.