* 9060646
* Actively Controlled Hood for Machinery Noise
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1991,09/30/1991
* John Cole, Cambridge Acoustical Associates Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1991
* USD 48,594.00

This project addresses the active control of noise for machinery. In most cases,
passive control, by means of acoustical hoods, is used to reduce noise. Some
applications include manufacturing machines in industrial environments, and
heating, ventilating and air conditioning systems in office or residential
spaces. In passive control, the hood is designed to attenuate the interior sound
field by providing for acoustical damping in the air cavity and for structural
damping in the enclosure walls. The performance achieved using these techniques
is limited by constraints of volume, weight, and cost. On the other hand, the
active control approach applies to the design of a closed loop feedback
controller where issues of time delays, stability, and bandwidth are important.
This project's approach is to design an enclosure structure that is as close to
a stiff membrane as possible. Such a structure's response is dominated by
supersonic structural modes. Cancellation of exterior noise is obtained by
minimizing the normal response along the enclosure surface. This approach will
be tested and compared with existing active control strategies. This approach's
expected advantages include reduction of the number of surface sensors required
to observe the response of the enclosure walls, and spatial filtering which
insures rejection of excitation by shorter wavelength disturbances.