* 9060634
* Application of Model-Based Predictive Control to Fossil     Power Plants
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1991,09/30/1991
* Bruce Gibbs, Coleman Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1991
* USD 49,950.00

The objective of the research is development of practical, multivariate model
predictive control (MPC) for fossil power plants. The approach used here
involves the development of a generic, reduced-order model (ROM) which captures
the dominate static and dynamic characteristics of power plants. This model is
necessary in order to predict the plant behavior. Since the model will not
exactly match the true plant structure, the parameters of the model must be
estimated using prediction error methods or nonlinear least squares. This model
will then be used in a Kalman filter to estimate process states in real-time.
These estimated states used for prediction, enabling the computation of the
optimal control sequence. The research builds on the results of a preliminary
study which attempted to demonstrate feasibility of the approach. The results
were encouraging but much more work is needed to make the approach practical. In
particular, the current structure of the ROM does not adequately model the
behavior of a plant and thus more modeling work is required. Another problem is
the computational burden, which currently precludes real-time operation on a
microcomputer. Several approximation techniques can potentially reduce the
burden by a factor of ten. Finally, parameters of the MPC algorithm (weighting
and control step size) must be evaluated to achieve the best performance. The
successful application of the method will enable increased efficiency and
availability, and reduced maintenance and pollution.