* 9060220
* SIMOX Structures for Optical Waveguides and Electro-        Optic Devices in Silicon
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1991,09/30/1991
* Fereydoon Namavar, Spire Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1991
* USD 49,861.00

Crystalline silicon is a new material for optical waveguiding in the 1.3 to 1.6
micron wavelength range. This proposal will advance the state-of-the-art of
silicon guided-wave optics, especially silicon optical interconnects. We shall
investigate a novel, three- dimensional, silicon-on-insulator (SOI) guided-wave
structure that will allow optical communications on two stacked levels within a
large-area silicon wafer. To do this we shall use multiple implants of oxygen
ions based on Spire's unique experience in producing multi- level Separation by
Implantation of Oxygen (SIMOX) structures. In addition, we shall examine ways of
fabricating low-loss SOI waveguides and high-speed electro-optic (EO) devices
integrated in SOI waveguides. Low-loss guiding and practical EO components are
two key areas that need to be researched to establish that silicon is a viable
and valuable optical material. Goal of the Phase II work will be to exploit
Phase I results to construct practical, high performance, guided-wave electro-
optic components in SOI. The best-suited SIMOX structures from Phase I will be
selected. Some possible approaches for Phase II are to fabricate Schottky-
barrier or p-n junction electrodes on SOI channel waveguides to obtain high-
performance optical phase modulators for the 1.3 micron wavelength.