* 9060649
* A Small Integrated Geophysical Instrument for the Field     Measurement of the Magnetic and Electrical Properties of    Rock Samples
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1991,09/30/1991
* Charles Elliot, Elliot Geophysical Co Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1991
* USD 48,705.00

Geophysical prospecting for mineral deposits depends on the physical property
contrast between various rock units and mineral deposits. A Broader
understanding of the physical structure of the earth can be realized from rock
physical data. A small pocket sized instrument to measure the magnetic and
electrical properties of rack samples under field conditions would be an immense
aid to explorationists. This need can now be fulfilled utilizing modern
microelectronic technology. The research objective is to develop a small
integrated meter for field use by explorationists. Years of experience in
physical property studies and instrumentation by our firm can make this
realizable, resulting in the development of such a meter and demonstrate its
scientific usefulness in geophysical exploration. The critical design must
provide conversion of the outputs of magnetic and electric sensors for
processing into meaningful geophysical data. Innovative design will consist of a
multiplicity of sensors independently attached to a master microprocessor
controlled system that are interchangeable in the field of for separately
measuring the magnetic and electrical properties of rock samples. Research will
determine the best consistent with operational demands. The effort proposed will
be directed toward solving these objectives.