* 9060106
* An Optimal Time-Dependent Receiver for Interference         Rejection
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1991,09/30/1991
* Jeffrey Reed, Advanced CounterMeasure Systems
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1991
* USD 49,979.00

This SBIR project examines a new and innovative method of implementing a
receiver that has superior performance over that of conventional receivers in
rejecting interference. The improved interference rejection allows the
transmitter to use less power to achieve the required bit-error rate
performance, and hence reduces the probability that the transmitter will
interfere with other users of the spectrum. The new receiver, called the optimal
time-dependent receiver (OTDR), is developed by considering a receiver as a
time-varying filtering process. The OTDR is an adaptive time-varying filter that
is optimized to handle changing signal conditions and nonstationary
interference. The superior performance of the OTDR is obtained by exploiting the
cyclostationary nature of the interference. The OTDR is capable of performing
down conversion, equalization, multipath rejection, interference rejection, baud
sampling, synchronization, and symbol conversion all within the same operation.
The OTDR can be configured to handle a variety of modulation types, all using
little or no additional hardware, and thus is capable of numerous and varied
modes. The OTDR is implemented using digital signal processing techniques and
the hardware can be made small, reliable, and maintenance free. The objective of
this SBIR project is to determine the theoretical and experimental performance
of the OTDR in several realistic commercial situations. The evaluation will
include determining the trade-off in the OTDR system design.