* 9061181
* Improving Productivity by Dose Equivalency Modeling
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1991,09/30/1991
* Robert Kennedy, Essex Corporation Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1991
* USD 48,518.00

This research will apply classical test theory to address a human performance
measurement problem: Screening workers for performance impairment may aid in
removing drugs from the workplace and improve productivity. The most
straightforward way to measure performance would seem to be under actual working
conditions. In cases where this has been attempted, however, job performance
measures were found to be generally insensitive to all but the most powerful
effects. A central problem is the lack of reliability of on-the-job measures.
However, tests which possess robust psychometric properties (stability,
reliability, etc.) have been shown to be sensitive to alcohol, sleep loss,
hypoxia, halon, and other chemical agents. Therefore, this research will index
human performance decrements on a battery of perceptual, cognitive and motor
tests to alcohol dosage (for which federally mandated standards already exist
for some occupations). Then calibration algorithms would be derived for
comparing performance changes in blood alcohol concentration units to losses
from other agents, treatments and stressors for which there may be a concern in
the work place. A fully up-and- running, special purpose test station will be
produced. The prototype will contain these algorithms so that they can be set to
predetermined levels. In Phase II, additional experimental work will be
conducted to refine the algorithms, add other treatments, and improve the design
of the test station by conducting test and evaluation at laboratory and work
sites. The availability in an occupational setting of a test station which could
index performance loss from any cause to a standard such as alcohol would have
immediate application in industry in screening for fitness for duty.
Additionally, monitoring by agencies, laboratories, or oneself can be useful in
the study of toxic elements (e.g., asbestos, fluorocarbons), environmental
agents (motion, radiation), illness (AIDS, dementia), work conditions (shift
work, exercise), and personal states (aging, fatigue, emotional stress).