* 9061016
* Electro-Optic and All-Optic Collinear Asymmetrical          Directional Coupler
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1991,09/30/1991
* Ray Chen, Physical Optics Corporation (Corporate Headquarters)
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1991
* USD 49,972.00

A new device structure, a collinear asymmetrical directional coupler using
In2O3/InxSn1-xOy heterostructure thin film, is introduced which will decrease
the power consumption needed to obtain full intensity modulation, is adaptable
to any substrate, has a high multiplexing capability, and will potentially give
yield to a new line of both electro-optic and all-optic devices. Conventional
coplanar directional couplers must have waveguides of exactly equal widths which
is extremely difficult to achieve. We will eliminate the stringent waveguide
channel tolerance requirements through a variable guided mode effective index
technique. Unlike the III-V and II-VI compound semiconductor heterostructure,
the In2O3/InxSn1-xOy film can be grown on any surface. Therefore, an active
device can be built on an array of substrate materials. The In2O3/InxSn1-xOy has
a transparent bandwidth from 400 nm to mid-infrared. A large number of optical
wavelengths can also be multiplexed. Finally, the index modulation of
In2O3/InxSn1-xSn1-xOy film is brought about by carrier injection. Consequently,
both electro-optic and all optical devices can be realized based on the novel
concept. The index modulation with carrier injection is two orders of magnitude
higher than with the linear electro-optic effect. The interaction length is
expected to be compatible with multi-quantum well devices.