* 9061180
* A Photochemical Method for the Production of Semiconductor  Grade Silicon for Use in Energy Conversion Devices
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1991,09/30/1991
* K. Ramaprasad, PCP Consulting and Research, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1991
* USD 50,000.00

The large scale use of photovoltaic-generated electricity hinges on the cost if
its production. Thin film amorphous silicon is emerging as the next generation
solar cell material with commercial potential. The progress in amorphous silicon
technology has been rapid enough that it is presently at the manufacturing
stage. The commercial method for the production of amorphous silicon is the glow
discharge method, using silane as the feed-stock. Photochemical methods are an
alternate, potentially more cost efficient, method to prepare amorphous silicon.
This project is a systematic study of the photolysis of silanes in the condensed
phase ("ice"), with a view to producing amorphous and polycrystalline silicon.
The emphasis will be on adapting the condensed phase photolysis for the
preparation of semiconductor grade amorphous and crystalline silicon, with the
ultimate objective of scaling up the method to a manufacturing process for
silicon solar cells. The method has the advantage of easily incorporating any
desired dopant by making the latter a co-condensate of the silane host. It has
the promise of gentler preparation conditions, compared to the glow-discharge
method, thus producing a better quality semiconductor.