* 9061264
* Low Cost, Light Weight Optics for Application to Infrared   Detection
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1991,09/30/1991
* Yubong Hahn, Rocky Mountain Instrument Company
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1991
* USD 49,325.00

The objective of this program is to select low cost, light weight materials
transmitting in the infrared and then to design optical components, and coatings
that are required for infrared detection. The investigations will be directed
towards the review of material technologies such as Ge-based chalcogenides and
plastics to achieve the selection goal of both low cost and light weight. The
experimental program will be directed towards gaining insight into the
evaluation of transmission properties, hardness factors, humidity and chemical
attack tolerance. The eligible material will be coated, to obtain transparent or
semi-transparent components. Tests such as adhesion, humidity, salt spray,
scratch, will be carried out in order to determine optical and mechanical
quality of the coated components. The results obtained during this program can
substantially reduce the cost of the detection system assemblies over currently
available ones that use expensive materials such as AnSe, AnS, Ge, GaAs.
considerable cost economies can be obtained by combining, for example, plastic
optical elements with other stronger material. Plastics and chalcogenides can
offer high performance if they are used in the areas of their capabilities. The
commercialization of these inexpensive optics will benefit the entire optical
community.