* 9061100
* Improved Bonding of Indium-Tin-Oxide (ITO) to Plastic       Substrates
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1991,09/30/1991
* Jacob Lin, Polytronix Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1991
* USD 50,000.00

The objective in this project is to develop a method which will permit the
production of adherent, abrasion-resistant coating of Indium-Two Oxide (ITO) on
plastic substrates. It is proposed that the desired goal be attained by use of a
gradient sublayer which gradually spans the gap in chemical and physical
properties between Indium-Two Oxide (ITO) and the organic substrate. This
gradient compositional sublayer will be deposited using radio frequency (RF)
plasma polymerization and plasma sputtering techniques. The proposed work is
predicted on the equipment availability and recent experiences with plasma
polymerization studies in our laboratories as well as recent literature results
demonstrating the surface metallization of plastic substrates using radio
frequency (RF) plasma techniques. The gradient sublayers employed will be ones
which change gradually from 100% organic character to a metal oxide (e.g.,
aluminum oxide A12O3) or non-metal oxide (e.g., silium dioxide SiO2) outer
surface to which the Indium-Two Oxide (ITO) will be bonded. Preliminary studies
in our laboratory using conventional sublayer coating techniques are
sufficiently promising to demonstrate the overall feasibility of the proposed
research. The development of a strongly adhesive, abrasion resistance coating of
Indium-Two Oxide (ITO) on plastic will open the door to a variety of promising
commercial possibilities. Most important of these would be the production of
all-plastic liquid- crystal displays (LCDs) as well as new inexpensive plastics-
based keyboards.