* 9061129
* High Temperature BCSCO Superconducting Films on Si          Substrate at Low Processing Temperature for Possible        Applications in Hybrid Opto-Electronic Devices
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1991,09/30/1991
* Rama Rao, Excel Technology Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1991
* USD 50,000.00

In the Proposed program, for the first time, epitaxial growth of thin film of
high temperature Bismuth-calcium-strontium-copper- oxide (Bi-Ca-Sr-Cu-O)
superconductor on Silicon (Si) substrate at low processing temperature by laser
induced deposition is examined. The first most important step in successful
application of these highly promising materials in micro- electronics and hybrid
opto-electronics, is the fabrication of high quality thin films on semiconductor
substrate. Thin film will be prepared by plasma assisted laser deposition
technique using 265 nm UV laser at 10 Hz. In this technique, a high flux of UV
photons is directed onto the Bi-Ca-Sr-Cu-O superconducting target which is in
close proximity to Si substrate. This technique has been successfully adopted at
Excel for depositing thin films of high temperature superconductor on various
insulating oxide substrates. One advantage of this technique is that precisely
controlled thin films of desired stoichiometry can be deposited at low
processing temperature without the need of any high temperature (900 degree C)
post annealing. This low temperature processing has implications relating to how
thin (10- 20 nm) a film can be deposited on Si before introducing substrate-film
interaction. Once a high quality thin film is produced, the next logical step is
to produce patterns in these films for device fabrication and also the
measurements of critical current density. Traditional wet processing methods
commonly used for patterning may have a detrimental effect on the properties of
the film. Thus in the present work, a dry processing method, namely laser
induced etching, will be utilized to fabricate 10-> wide line using 532 nm laser
at KHz rep. rate. Suerconductivity in the grown film will be confirmed by
perfect conductivity at transition temperature. Critical current density across
the micro-bridge will be measured by four probe resistive technique.