* 9061097
* A New Method of Time-Temperature Modeling of Sedimentary    Basins
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1991,09/30/1991
* Peter Solomon, Advanced Fuel Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1991
* USD 49,689.00

Time-temperature modeling of organic matter maturation has become an important
tool in petroleum an gas exploration in recent years. The most serious
difficulties in applying these models are: 1)obtaining accurate downhole
geological information, and 2)estimation of kinetic parameters. Single
collective kinetic rates are typically measured in the laboratory. These must
then be applied on much longer geological time scales. The validity of making
these extrapolations in time is always questionable. The innovation offered in
this proposal is the development of a combined theoretical and experimental
methodology for determining the chemistry and kinetics of the multiple reactions
in macromolecular decomposition to obtain a more valid extropolations between
geological and laboratory time scales. The methodology combines a unique
macromolecular network model of hydrocarbon pyrolysis (FG-DVC) with a unique
method of analysis (TG-FTIR) of the organic samples from the basin. FG-DVC
provides the link between oil, tar and gas generation terms of the variation
with maturation in Tmax of all species and the crosslinking associated with CO2,
CH4, and H2. The kinetic rate coefficients for the evolution of all these
species can be determined with the TG-FTIR. In collaboration with Dr. Jean
Whelan of Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute (WHOI), we will study two
geological basins for which state-of- the-art techniques have already been
employed to obtain the basing's properties. Samples will be subjected to TG/FTIR
analysis. The samples and basin modeling history will be employed to develop a
"FG-DVC maturation model" to predict the composition of kerogens in the basin.
The predicted compositions will then be used in the FG-DVC pyrolysis model to
predict the behavior under the TG-FTIR analysis. In addition, samples from
hydrous pyrolysis of basin samples performed at WHOI and at AFR analysis. In
addition, samples from hydrous pyrolysis of basin samples performed at WHOI and
at APF will also be tested by TG- FTIR to determine the rates and mechanisms of
chemical transformation which occur.