* 9061050
* Molybdenum Silicide (MoSi2) Based High Temperature Materialswith Enhanced Ductility and Toughness
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1991,09/30/1991
* Ranjan Ray, Marko Materials Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1991
* USD 49,887.00

Molybdenum silicide (MoSi2) based monolithic and composite materials have
potential aircraft applications in the temperature range 1000-1600oC. MoSi2
based intermetallics have proven to be rather formidable materials to process
because of its extreme brittleness. In order to successfully process and
fabricate components based on MoSi2, it is necessary to enhance its low
temperature ductility and toughness. This research focusses on preparation of
fine grained MoSi2 via advanced rapid solidification and powder metallurgical
processing to improve its low temperature ductility and toughness. The fine
grain size will reduce the slip length, therefore, lower the stress
concentration at the grain boundaries and thus enhance ductility. Phase I
research will also investigate the effect of TiB2 and HfC dispersoids on grain
refinement. It is expected that these stable dispersoids will retain the fine
microstructure as well as voids around these incoherent particles, especially at
high temperatures. Phase II research will investigate in more detail the
dispersoid/grain boundary and dispersoid/dislocation interactions to define the
processing-microstructure-mechanical property relationships so that optimum
mechanical properties will be attained at both room and elevated temperatures.