* 9061088
* Plasma Enhanced Chemical Vapor Deposition of BaTiO3
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1991,09/30/1991
* Peter Kirlin, Advanced Technology Materials, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1991
* USD 50,000.00

The use of perovskites such as BaTiO3 as thin film ferroelectric materials in
microelectronics and photonics has been limited by materials processing and
compatibility problems. High quality ferroelectric thin films have not been
grown at temperatures compatible with stand Si or GaAs processing technology.
Considering the superb electrical and optical properties of these materials as
well as their potential for use in the production of low cost DRAMs and non-
volatile memory devices, the development of new thin film deposition techniques
capable of producing high quality ferroelectric thin films at low temperatures
is especially important. Utilizing techniques recently developed at ATM for the
deposition of high temperature superconductors by metalorganic chemical vapor
deposition (MOCVD), a novel plasma- enhanced MOCVD process for the deposition of
BaTiO3 at temperatures compatible with silicon processing is proposed. The
specific goal of the Phase I program is to deposit a-axis oriented BaTi03 thin
films on Si(100) at temperatures below 650oC by plasma enhanced MOCVD. Prototype
random access memory devices based on BaTiO3 ferroelectric capacitor storage
cells will be fabricated and tested in Phase II. Lifetimes in excess of 1012
write/read/invert accesses and power-off memory retention over one year, which
represent a significant improvement over state- of-the-art ferroelectric memory
cells, are targeted.