* 9061184
* Intrinsically Absorbing Polymers for Antireflective         Coating Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1991,09/30/1991
* Terry Brewer, Brewer Science, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1991
* USD 50,000.00

Deep UV and I-line lithography will be used extensively throughout the 1990's to
build submicron integrated circuits. Recent studies with commercial deep UV and
I-line photoresists have shown that their performance falls dramatically when
printing over reflective substrates such as polysilicon and aluminum. The
formation of standing waves and stray reflections causes a severe loss of
resolution and CD control. The simplest approach for controlling reflectivity is
to apply a light absorbing polymer film, or antireflective coating (ARC),
beneath the resist. ARCs have been used successfully for the past decade by chip
makers working at G-line. The high absorptivity of the antireflective coating is
obtained by the addition of dyes to the polymer coating. To be compatible with
submicron processing, antireflective coatings for I-line and deep UV lithography
must be extremely thin ( 0.1um) and plasma etchable. Obtaining adequate
absorptivity with such thin films is difficult using a conventional dye-filled
polymer coating. The solution to this problem is to develop polymer coatings
which are intrinsically absorbing at the exposure wavelength. This innovation
eliminates the need for dyes and allows the optical density of the ARC to be
increased. During Phase I we will investigate the preparation of novel
intrinsically absorbing polymers for I-line and deep UV ARC applications. The
polymer structures will be developed using results from physical property
determination and real life lithographic testing.