* 1200899
* Robust Approval Process in the Face of Strategic Adversaries and Normal Applicants
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Jun Zhuang, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2016
* USD 305,958.00

The objective of this award is to explore a new class of decision models to
provide structural insights for robust screening when dealing with adaptive
applicants and incomplete information. This research is motivated by public
concerns on balancing congestion and safety due to security screening. Such
screening has been used to identify and deter potential threats (e.g.,
terrorists, attackers, smugglers, spies) among normal applicants wishing to
enter an organization, location, or facility. In-depth screening could reduce
the risk of being attacked. However it may also create delays and deter normal
applicants, which decreases the welfare of both the approver (authority,
manager, screener) and the normal applicants. This research will consider the
factors of security, congestion, equity, and the strategic and non-strategic
responses from various applicant types. In particular, this research will study
the applicants' strategies of applying, reneging, learning, and deceiving. This
research will also study the approver's strategies of screening, dynamic service
rates, multiple-servers and priority processing, multi-layer screening, and
secrecy and deception.

If successful, this research will lead to new frameworks that decision makers
can use for screening diverse groups of strategic applicants. These new
frameworks have the potential to reduce costs, avoid unnecessary waiting and
inconvenience, and improve effectiveness and efficiency of the approval
processes. Potential applications of this research include immigration systems,
job market background checks, and airport/container/border controls. The
relevance is illustrated by the recent national debate on selective "pat-downs"
and "advanced imaging" screening, and the associated changing travel patterns.
This research will engage many graduate, undergraduate, and high school
students, including those from under-represented groups. The results of this
research will be disseminated broadly to local, national and international
communities.