* 1200859
* Enhanced Modeling of the Rocking and Overturning of Objects on a Moving Base
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Andrew Smyth, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 06/30/2016
* USD 312,633.00

The rocking of objects and their overturning due to base motions such as
earthquake excitations accounts for a substantial fraction of losses and in many
cases functional disruption of facilities. While the rocking dynamics have been
studied by several researchers since the 1960's surprisingly there are very
large gaps in our ability to adequately simulate the response of the complex
dynamics associated with the problem. This is a case where the combination of
comparatively simple mechanical principles leads to highly complex nonlinear
phenomena which are sensitive to parameter variations within the problem. The
project will consider base deformability and damping properties, friction
interactions at the base, uplift (when the body bounces during rocking),
3-dimensional analysis (which includes tri-axial base motion) with mass
eccentricities of the object, non-rectangular base shapes, and more. The project
plan focuses on the development of advanced computational simulations tools to
model the complex nonlinear dynamics of rocking objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition, an enhanced model would provide risk analysis of a wide variety of
objects including everything from electrical transformers to masonry
antiquities. Having such a model would greatly improve the ability to infer the
historic earthquake record from the non-overturning or in some cases the
overturning of ancient "precarious rocks" and structures. This improved
understanding has the potential to better understand the historical events of
earthquakes. In addition, features such as cart-like wheels (to simulate
hospital medical equipment carts) will be added as extra degrees of freedom at
the base, and also base restrainers (which may fail) at the beginning of the
rocking response. In order to perform the inverse analysis, a probabilistic
approach will be developed to determine what earthquakes (or sequence of
earthquake) might have occurred over the history of a still standing ancient
object. The research plan includes an experimental plan to be carried out on the
PI's medium-scale shake table facility.