* 1200420
* Mimicking How the Fly Hears: a New Approach Towards Sound Source Localization
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Miao Yu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 03/31/2016
* USD 313,678.00

The research objective of this award is to further the fundamental understanding
of the dual optimality characteristic of the super acute ear of the fly Ormia,
and to use this understanding to develop novel fly-ear inspired sensor systems
with optimal performance and tuning capabilities. The proposed approach is
summarized as follows. First, the advantageous use of geometric nonlinearity of
the sensor structure whose stiffness will be controlled by thin film piezo-
electric actuators will be investigated. This approach will render sensors with
unique frequency tuning capabilities for achieving optimal performance over a
broad frequency range. Further, a system-on-a-chip optical detection system
featuring a differential low coherence interferometric system will be developed,
which enables the miniaturization of the entire sensing system. Finally, to best
use the proposed sensor, biologically-inspired adaptive sound source
localization and navigation will be investigated. Such an investigation is
expected to help understand the fly's unique localization-lateralization scheme
and bring about a new sensing paradigm for miniature robotic sound source
localization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research holds a promise
to significantly impact applications in health care, safety, and defense. The
learning experience of students will be enriched with innovative projects in an
interdisciplinary curriculum and a new course on bio-inspired sensors. Through
its integrated education and outreach activities, this research will provide
opportunities to talented high school students, who will be involved in research
activities at the University of Maryland to stimulate their interests in science
and engineering. In addition, educational activities through the Center for
Minorities in Science and Engineering and the Women in Engineering Program will
help increase the involvement of minority undergraduate students in engineering.