* 1200081
* Mobilization of Sand Particles and Erosion Progression Under Various Permeating Fluids
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Ming Xiao, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2013
* USD 195,734.00

Piping is known to cause catastrophic failures of levees and earthen dams, and
has been studied for nearly a century. In the typical experimental studies on
soil erosion, tap water or de-ionized water is used as permeating fluid;
therefore, the understanding of soils' erosion behavior is mostly limited to
situation where relatively pure water is the permeating fluid. In the field,
permeating fluids through earthen dams or levees may contain slurry (in the case
of slurry wall installation) or fines that are carried in the permeating fluid
from the upstream soil erosion. The fines content may have various sizes,
concentrations, and other physicochemical characteristics. Our repeatable
laboratory experiments in hole-erosion tests under constant head have revealed
that the piping progression of a sand differed significantly with different
permeating fluids. Bentonite slurry and water that contains 1% cohesionless
fines did not induce piping progression during a prolonged period, while water
and water with 0.1% fines caused the pre-formed piping hole to enlarge to the
side of the soil column in less than 40 minutes. This observation is counter-
intuitive in the case of fluid with cohesionless fines, based on the current
knowledge that permeating fluid with higher density and viscosity tends to exert
higher hydraulic shear stress and cause more erosion. The gap between the
current knowledge and the recent laboratory observation is due to the lack of
fundamental understanding of the suspension-fluid-soil interaction. The
hypothesis of this research is that the physicochemical characteristics
(viscosity, fluid density, ionic strength, pH, and possibly suspension's surface
electric potential) of the permeating fluids and the flow conditions
accumulatively contribute to the erosion of sand. The main objective of this
research is to identify the physicochemical mechanisms of suspension-fluid-soil
interactions and provide fundamental explanations for the different erosion
behaviors of sand under various permeating fluids and hydraulic conditions. The
research project will answer the following three questions: (1) Which forces
dominate the particle dislodging: inter-particle London-van der Waal forces and
electrical double layer forces, or the hydrodynamic forces? (2) How do the
various permeating fluids with different physicochemical characteristics
(particulate concentration, size, viscosity, fluid density, electrostatic
surface potential, ionic strength, pH) contribute to the dislodging forces?
Which is a dominating factor? (3) How does the flow rate (i.e., laminar and
turbulent flows) change the role of each of the aforementioned factors in
particle dislodging? The physicochemical characteristics of eleven permeating
fluids will be experimentally quantified. Microscopic flow experiments and
laboratory hole erosion experiments using the eleven fluids will be conducted to
reveal the individual roles of the aforementioned characteristics in the
particle dislodging process at different hydraulic conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will yield transformative knowledge because
it will provide realistic understanding of the piping progression in earthen
dams and levees. It will also guide us to realistically evaluate and remediate
many natural and built infrastructures, such as in natural riparian habitat
protection, in riverbed or bridge foundation scouring where flows can carry
various particles with different concentrations at different flow rate, and in
pipeline engineering where storm water, wastewater, or oil can have different
viscosity or carry various particle loadings. This funding will also provide
educational opportunities for the PI to mentor graduate students to become
future independent and confident researchers, to timely integrate
multidisciplinary research methodologies and outcomes into graduate and
undergraduate courses, and to outreach to and involve K-12 students and
underrepresented undergraduate students in research in order to attract future
talents to the STEM fields. The knowledge developed in this project will be
disseminated through websites, presentations in university and high schools, and
publications written by the PI and students.