* 1200032
* Rapid, Selective, Onsite Detection of Bacterial Pathogens Using A Bioinspired Microfluidic Sensor
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Jiang Zhe, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 07/31/2016
* USD 360,000.00

The objective of this research is to create a high-throughput microfluidic
biosensor for rapid, onsite, highly-selective detection of a variety of food and
water borne bacterial pathogens. The approach is to employ an innovative biotin-
streptavidin based immunoaffinity recognition method for real time bacterial
pathogen recognition, and a multiplexed parallel sensing array for rapid
detection. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is to enable a transformative
experimental tool for rapid analysis of bacterial pathogens because of the high
throughput, high selectivity and high sensitivity of the sensor. The
immunoaffinity recognition based on streptavidin-biotin interaction is label
free, requires only one universal surface modification with biotin, and can be
used for detecting many bacterial pathogens. Thus it will lead to a
transformative technology for low cost, onsite detection of bacterial pathogens
and cells. Research on multiplexation of signals from parallel microfluidic
channels will yield a generalized platform for developing high throughput
biosensors. &lt;br/&gt;The broader Impacts are multifold. The proposed research
will have transformative impacts on food and drinking water safety monitoring,
environmental monitoring, bio-warfare detection, and clinical diagnosis. This
project will provide interdisciplinary training opportunity for the graduate and
undergraduate students involved in the research. The project also aims to
develop lab-on-a-chip and bio-nanotechnology related educational materials and
contribute to motivating undergraduate students and K-12 students to pursue
science and engineering careers. Through University of Akron?s ?Increasing
Diversity in Engineering Academics?, ?Women in Engineering? and ?High School
Bridge? programs, undergraduate students and high school students will be
recruited to conduct research in this project.