* 1200535
* Collaborative Research:  Experimentally guided mathematics for the mechanochemistry of cell shape dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Kenneth Jacobson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 605,990.00

An integrated mathematical-experimental effort in cell biology is proposed,
focusing on morphology and dynamics of motile cell phenotypes. Specifically, we
probe and model the molecular mechanisms of chemical-mechanical transduction,
and mechanical feedback to chemical kinetics, with intracellular spatial and
temporal resolution of a living cell. The modeling goal is a platform to
integrate detailed biological data and test biophysical hypotheses, with a
predictive simulation tool for a cell in a specified extracellular environment.
The model platform incorporates advances in cell substructure identification and
property characterization (bilayer membrane, cortical layer, cytosol and
nucleus), coupled with advances in specific signaling molecules, their kinetics,
and their role in mechanical activation and deactivation (Rho family of
GTPases). The experimental challenges concentrate on achieving spatio-temporal
resolution in living cells, so that mechanical-chemical feedback mechanisms can
be measured and compared with model simulations. The mathematical challenges lie
in a faithful non-equilibrium description and simulation of each cell
substructure and its free boundaries, of reacting and diffusing signaling
molecular species in deforming substructures, and of the spatio-temporal
activation via mechanochemical transduction. A specific cell motility phenotype
identified by the Jacobson lab that sustains morphological oscillations with
disruption of microtubules is the test-bed for this
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One impact of this effort is an available platform
to simulate living cell morphological dynamics in conjunction with experimental
protocols to perturb intracellular chemical or mechanical processes. The
oscillation phenotype of the cell is a model system whereby a chemically induced
mechanical perturbation (disruption of microtubules) leads to a robust,
amplified response that affords hypothesis testing for mechanochemical
transduction mechanisms. The model and experimental methods will provide
exploratory tools for other cell motility phenotypes and their underlying
biochemical and mechanical basis, including dramatic topological changes
associated with blebbing and division. The dynamical cell structure simulation
tool will be implemented in a high performance computing environment to resolve
the complexity of the non-equilibrium, heterogeneous cell. Another impact lies
in the training of a new cohort of mathematicians and biologists who learn with
and from one another and understand biological principles and experimental
methods and the mathematics of modeling, simulation and experimental validation.
The outcome of this research will improve the mechanistic understanding of many
disorders due to a dysregulation of the cytoskeleton, including cancers.