* 1200422
* A Qualitative Comparative Analysis of Community Recovery
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2012,09/30/2016
* Bernard Amadei, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* David Mendonca
* 09/30/2016
* USD 269,989.00

This research aims to build a comprehensive theory of pathways to recovery
following a disaster by linking pre-disaster measures of causal conditions to
recovery outcomes. Despite efforts to improve community resilience to disasters,
the number and economic impact of disasters has increased each year over the
past 25 years. At the same time, little cross-case comparative research has been
completed to uncover what conditions enable a community to recover after a
disaster. Understanding the causal conditions that lead to recovery is, however,
fundamental to improving a community's ability to recover after a disaster. This
research seeks to transform our understanding of recovery by analyzing
comparative cases using a multi-method approach. This will enable us to
determine what pre-disaster factors and recovery strategies, combined or in
isolation, lead to successful post-disaster recovery. Specifically, this
research will (1) identify recovery indicators and important causal conditions
for community recovery across multiple disciplines (2) measure causal conditions
and recovery indicators for villages in India impacted by the 2004 Indian Ocean
tsunami; and (3) analyze the pathways of causal conditions that led to recovery
in the case study communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study
will allow community planners to prioritize and focus their efforts on the
causal factors that best strengthen the community's ability to recover from a
disaster. It will also contribute to the development of a disaster recovery
framework that can be expanded through future research.