* 1200221
* RET Site: Innovation-based Manufacturing
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Brenda Brand, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/2016
* USD 450,000.00

This award provides funding for a three year continuing award for a Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site Program
at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University (VT) entitled, RET Site:
Innovation-based Manufacturing, under the direction of Dr. Christopher B.
Williams. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last decades, the North American
manufacturing sector has been continuously challenged by competition from low
labor cost countries. In order to remain competitive, the manufacturing sector
is in urgent need of fundamental research efforts that are dedicated to enabling
the efficient transition of innovative laboratory research to full-scale
production. To address this need, VT has formed the Center for Innovation-based
Manufacturing (CIbM), which is composed of a multidisciplinary team of
researchers that are exploring new manufacturing technologies, improvements to
traditional technologies, and improved methods for managing innovation,
information, manufacturing processes and their related supply chains. The
mission of the CIbM is to create a foundation for innovation in manufacturing
systems as a means to accelerate the commercial development of innovative
technologies and thus transform and advance the country's manufacturing
infrastructure while training the next generation of manufacturing leaders. In
this vein, the CIbM proposes to host a RET site (RET:IbM) that will provide a
total of 36 science, math, and pre-engineering middle and high school teachers
(12 per year for 3 years) with a 6-week summer research and professional
development experience. The primary goal of the RET:IbM is to make significant
steps towards improving young people's perception of engineering and
manufacturing by providing opportunities for teachers to engage in cutting-edge
manufacturing research topics that are rich with contextual examples of STEM
principles. This goal clearly advances discovery and understanding while
promoting teaching, training and learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In-service and
pre-service teacher participants will be recruited from counties of southwest
Virginia, which contain both rural and urban areas, thus impacting a wide socio-
economic spectrum. The manufaturing focus of the proposed RET:IbM program will
resonate well with the region's established history, but recently diminishing
presence, in this vital portion of our nation's economy. The sum of the proposed
program's initiatives will result in a pipeline of educated and motivated
students eager to enter STEM disciplines.