* 1200577
* Arithmetic and Transcendence of Values of Special Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Matthew Papanikolas, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2015
* USD 161,485.00

The principal investigator proposes several projects in arithmetic geometry and
transcendental number theory that focus on the deep links between the analytic
and arithmetic information coming from values of special functions. The
investigator plans to continue the study of quantities related to Anderson-
Drinfeld motives in positive characteristic, especially periods, logarithms, and
special zeta and L-values. One focus will be to investigate further the Galois
theory of difference equations to prove new algebraic independence results for
these quantities. Another aspect of these investigations will be to search for
and develop log-algebraic power series identities on Drinfeld modules and their
tensor powers. Specializations of these identities will then produce explicit
formulas for special values of Goss L-series for Dirichlet characters, Hecke
characters, and Drinfeld modules, thus providing input for transcendence and
algebraic independence problems. In another project, the investigator will
pursue problems relating finite field hypergeometric functions to counting
points on algebraic varieties over finite fields and L-series associated to
classical and Siegel modular forms.

Number theory is one of the fundamental branches of mathematics, and it serves
as the basis for many applications, including cryptography and coding theory.
The proposed research considers questions involving values of analytic functions
that somewhat remarkably convey fundamental information about fields of
algebraic numbers or geometric objects defined over them. Such questions have
their genesis in work of Euler and Gauss, and mathematicians continue to
endeavor to unravel their mysteries. Several parts of the project lead naturally
to problems for graduate and undergraduate research.