* 1200830
* Risk, Variability and Decision-making in Whole-Body Movements
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,11/30/2016
* Alaa Ahmed, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 11/30/2016
* USD 339,982.00

Most daily movements involve some form of decision making under risk. For
example, people do not reach as far on an elevated platform compared to level
ground. Indeed, there are many behavioral examples of such risk-sensitive
movement control even when the dynamics remain the same. Despite these widely
observed risk-sensitive phenomena, there have been no quantitative descriptions
of the underlying movement decision processes. This project aims to fill this
gap, and develop dynamical models to identify the subjective costs and
rationales underlying whole-body movement under risk. Movements will be analyzed
under the framework of statistical decision-making under conditions of risk.
Subjects will perform whole-body movements in conditions of varying postural
threat. The behavioral changes observed between these conditions, in conjunction
with model predictions, will be used to infer the subjective risk-sensitivity
associated with the increased postural threat. This approach will inform the
analysis of risk-, variability- and age-related changes in functional
performance, and provide insights about the mechanisms underlying risk-seeking
and risk-averse behavior in a variety of movements.

This project is expected to advance knowledge and understanding in the general
area of neuromuscular dynamics and decision-making under risk; that is, how our
central nervous system weighs risks and rewards when moving our bodies. Although
great achievements in neuroscience have helped us to understand how our nervous
system controls our movements, relatively little is known about how our sense of
risk, especially as we age, influences these movements. An understanding of the
effect of risk and variability on balance and falls can direct future research
targeting injury prevention, identification of those at risk for falls, and the
design of interventions.