* 1200241
* Nanomanufacturing Using Imprint Lithography and Strain Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* David Gracias, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2016
* USD 299,946.00

This grant supports research on a manufacturing methodology for the fabrication
of large numbers of three-dimensional nanostructures and nanoparticles with
precisely patterned surface compositions. The methodology leverages top-down
planar patterning methods such as nanoimprint lithography and combines them with
bottom-up biologically inspired self-assembly methods based on strain
engineering. Experiments and theoretical models will be designed and utilized to
study mechanisms to improve assembly, throughput, precision and yield of
patterned polyhedral nanoparticles and curved nanostructures. Individual process
steps will be optimized using statistical design of experiments to identify
important factor-response relationships and the nanoparticles and nanostructures
will be characterized using optical and electron microscopies and spectroscopies
to probe their physical and chemical structure and properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the creation of a cost-effective method to
fabricate large numbers of patterned nanoparticles and 3D nanostructures will
open up new capabilities for optics, electronics and medicine. Studies directed
at the manipulation of thin film stress and surface forces at the nanoscale will
lead to a deeper understanding of the behavior of materials at very small size
scales. Three dimensional nanostructures composed of metals, semiconductors and
polymers are important for the development of computational, metamaterial, drug
delivery and sensor systems. Assessment of the reliability, efficiency and
reproducibility of self-assembly methods is also necessary to enable them to be
translated from the laboratory to a real-world manufacturing setting, thereby
providing significantly new capabilities for nanomanufacturing. The proposed
work will also contribute to training and education by the development of
instructional laboratory modules, the inclusion of undergraduate students in
research experiences and expose K-12 students, teachers and the public to the
frontiers of science and engineering, specifically in the area of
nanomanufacturing.