* 1200915
* Metric geometry and functions of bounded variation
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Nageswari Shanmugalingam, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 06/30/2015
* USD 237,809.00

Objects occurring in nature rarely are smooth in appearance. From fractal
objects to porous media, the equations that govern dissipation of quantities
such as heat and pressure have non-smooth components. Such non-smooth objects
also occur as limits of certain smooth objects. To understand and exploit the
behavior of such objects, we need to remove the smoothness assumptions from
Riemannian geometry. For such non-smooth objects we need to study behaviors of
non-smooth energy minimizers and their connection to the geometry, that is, the
structural properties, of the underlying space or object. This project on metric
geometry and functions on bounded variation contributes to this goal by
exploring interconnections between the geometry of the underlying metric space
equipped with a measure, and the properties of sets of minimal surface areas.
The study of objects here are metric spaces equipped with a measure that is
doubling (that is, measure of a ball is comparable to the measure of a
concentric ball of double the radius) and such that the variance of a Lipschitz
continuous function on a ball can be controlled in terms of the average value of
its energy (computed using its local oscillation) on that ball. In this setting,
this project aims to study properties such as rectifiability, porosity, shape,
and natural dimension of sets of locally minimal surface
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Analysis on metric measure spaces arose from many
sources; the study of complex analytic functions, differential equations
governing fractures in mixed material and associated mappings of finite
distortion, control theory in engineering and associated Carnot-Caratheodory
spaces, the study of the famous Poincare conjecture, are some of the roots of
this field of study. However, unlike in the Euclidean situation where structural
properties of minimal surfaces (surfaces with smallest surface energy) are well
understood, in the non-smooth setting that arise in nature and in control theory
problems of physics and engineering, the structure of minimal surfaces is poorly
understood. This project seeks to explore such structures and expand our
knowledge of minimal surfaces in a non-smooth setting. The results of this study
will be useful in further understanding the change in the behavior of objects
that are transformed due to natural effects such as heat and pressure. In
addition to advancing our knowledge of non-smooth objects, the study conducted
in this project will also contribute to the ongoing development of the theory of
analysis on metric spaces; a great benefit of this developing theory is that
since much of the structural tools available in classical Euclidean analysis are
not available in the non-smooth setting, new tools and methods have necessarily
to be developed, making the theory more accessible to a wider audience.