* 1200017
* Ultra-precise Coordinate Metrology of Three-dimensional Objects at Micrometer and Nanometer Scales
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Chia-Hsiang Menq, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 04/30/2017
* USD 465,036.00

The objective of this award is to investigate and develop enabling technologies
for achieving ultra-precise coordinate metrology of 3-dimensional objects at
micrometer and nanometer scales. These enabling technologies will then be used
to realize a three-axis probing system capable of measuring undercuts and free-
forms of objects whose critical dimensions of surface form are scaled down to
sub-100nm. The approach consists of four phases. First, a systematic approach to
the design and prototyping of active three-axis reorientable probing systems is
proposed to achieve two distinguishing features: (i) the orientation of the
probe and the position of the probe tip in the scanning plane are actively
controlled, and (ii) the tip-sample interaction forces in two axes are actively
controlled. Second, tip motion control and stability analyses are proposed to
enable stable scanning of sub-100nm three-dimensional objects having unknown
geometry and large geometric variation. Third, real-time calibration of
actuation gain and compensation of thermal drift are proposed to significantly
reduce the effect of the system's time variance for simultaneously achieving
ultra-precise and high-throughput coordinate metrology. Fourth, two-axis force
sensing and force control schemes are proposed to enable precise control of the
tip-sample interaction in the scanning plane.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
technologies will enable precise control of 2-axis deflection and of 2-axis tip-
sample interaction force simultaneously, both of which are very important for
probing vertical and re-entrant features using the proposed probing system. If
successful, the enabling technologies created from this award will lay the
foundation for realizing active 5-axis probing systems and will lead to
transformational changes in three-dimensional coordinate metrology at micrometer
and nanometer scales. Specifically, the probing system will not only have
significant impact on coordinate metrology at micrometer and nanometer scales,
but also on advanced instrumentation in a wide range of fields including
biology, chemistry, medicine, and physics.