* 1200515
* Transformative Skin: Controlled Electromechanical Instability on Polymer Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2012,11/30/2014
* Xuanhe Zhao, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 11/30/2014
* USD 375,563.00

The research objective of this grant is to elucidate the fundamental mechanism
of novel polymer systems capable of dynamically transforming their surface
patterns and roughness under the control of electrical voltages. These so-called
transformative skins are based on a new mode of surface electromechanical
instability recently discovered by the PIs. The instability leads to a rich
variety of surface patterns ranging from randomly oriented creases and craters
to aligned lines with tunable feature sizes from millimeters to tens of
nanometers. The proposed project will integrate a suite of experimental,
theoretical, and computational tools to systematically understand the surface
electromechanical instability. Specific goals include the development of 1) an
experimental system to simultaneously generate instability patterns and
characterize their three-dimensional topography under voltages, 2) a non-linear
field theory to analyze the formation of the instability patterns, and 3)
coupled-field models and numerical methods to simulate the formation and
evolution of the instability patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this
interdisciplinary collaborative effort will lead to the first systematic
understanding of surface electromechanical instabilities, with the potential to
significantly expand the use of functional surfaces and electrical polymers. The
novel transformative skins have a broad range of important applications,
including on-demand super-hydrophobicity, adaptive optics, controlled adhesion,
transfer printing, and antifouling. Conversely, surface electromechanical
instabilities can trigger electrical breakdowns and failures of various polymers
in energy applications, including insulating cables, organic capacitors, polymer
actuators, and generators. The current project will provide a theoretical
foundation for judicious design of electrical-polymer systems by either
harnessing or eliminating the same instability for different applications.
Graduate and undergraduate students will receive training in both numerical and
experimental methods related to soft and active materials. This grant further
includes a coordinated effort to recruit students from underrepresented
populations in science and engineering to enter into this exciting new field of
research.