* 1200850
* Large-Scale and Predictable Organization of Nanocrystal Homo- and Heterojunctions through Polymer-Directed Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Andrea Tao, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2015
* USD 474,808.00

The research objective of this project is the scalable fabrication of plasmonic
nanojunctions, the nanometer-sized gaps created between high-curvature metal
surfaces that produce intense electromagnetic ?hot spots.? In this project,
metal nanocrystals will be self-organized to form precise nanojunctions by
carrying out phase segregation within a nanocrystal-polymer composite.
Nanocrystals will be assembled with respect to shape and orientation to create
homojunction (similar) and heterojunction (dissimilar) nanocrystal pairs.
Molecular simulations will be used to deduce the global phase diagram of the
multicomponent nanocrystal-polymer mixtures and to predict the mechanisms and
kinetics of large-scale nanocrystal assembly. Guided by simulations,
nanocrystals will be chemically modified by polymer grafts with tailored chain
lengths, grafting density, and charge. Detailed morphology studies of the
resulting nanocomposite will provide insight into how the chemical nature of the
nanocrystal surface can be used to tune the key intermolecular interactions that
regulate orientation and arrangement of the plasmonic
nanojunctions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will facilitate
the successful fabrication of large-area, non-close-packed plasmonic
nanocrystals arrays that are currently inaccessible by top-down fabrication
methods. These nanomaterials will be designed for integration into optical
device platforms for applications such as subwavelength focusing, surface-
enhanced Raman spectroscopy, and electromagnetic transparency. This work will
also provide a fundamental understanding of the general mechanisms governing
polymer-directed nanocrystal assembly. By establishing a close collaboration
between experiment and theory, this work has the potential for the discovery of
novel self-assembly pathways and mechanisms for achieving new and complex
nanomaterials architectures. In addition, this research project will contribute
to the education of pre-college, undergraduate, and graduate students in the
field of nanoengineering. This includes the design of new laboratory modules and
research-based coursework for undergraduates as well as outreach activities that
will increase the overall diversity of the undergraduate engineering population
at UCSD.