* 1200799
* Sustainable Biocover System for Methane Oxidation in Landfills
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Jean Bogner, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 02/29/2016
* USD 362,000.00

The objective of this research project is to develop a new low-cost, practical,
and sustainable soil system amended with biochar to effectively mitigate
landfill methane emissions. Municipal solid waste landfills are the third
largest anthropogenic source of methane emissions in the US. There is an urgent
need to develop cost-effective innovative cover systems that can mitigate
methane emissions from landfills. An integrated research program, consisting of
controlled laboratory batch and column experiments, mathematical modeling, and a
field demonstration, will be undertaken to investigate: (1) the physical,
geochemical and geotechnical properties of biochars and biochar-amended soils;
(2) the transport and enhanced adsorption of biochars and biochar-amended cover
soils for methane and oxygen; (3) the rates of methane oxidation in biochars and
biochar-amended soils; (4) the factors controlling the simultaneous competing or
synergistic interactions between adsorption and oxidation of methane under
various conditions (biochar properties, soil composition, methane
concentrations, moisture contents, and temperatures); (5) the development of a
mechanistic model for methane oxidation within biochar and biochar-amended
landfill covers; and (6) the performance in a full-scale field demonstration to
verify the validity of the research findings and viability of practical
application. In addition, a guidance manual will be prepared for the design of
biochar and biochar-amended soil cover systems for landfill applications. This
project will determine the fundamental mechanisms responsible for stimulation of
soil microorganisms in biochar, including the contribution of porous structure
and high surface area to gaseous adsorption, moisture retention, and
colonization by methanotrophic populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will result in a creative, low-cost, sustainable biochar and biochar-amended
soil cover system to mitigate methane emissions at landfills and protect the
environment and public health. Two graduate students will have the opportunity
to gain research experience through this project in emerging field of
sustainable geo-engineering. Research skills and instrumentation developed for
this project will enhance classroom instruction at the undergraduate level, the
graduate level, and for K-12 teachers in the "Teachers as Scholars" Program. A
teaching module "Engineering with Biochar" will be developed and incorporated
into the existing Landfill Engineering and Sustainable Engineering courses. The
project results will be widely disseminated by: (1) organizing a workshop for
practicing and regulatory professionals, (2) publishing refereed
journal/conference papers, and (3) participating in the Illinois and US Biochar
Groups.