* 1200506
* Design and Stiffness-Damping Optimizatino of Hybrid Coomposite Laminated Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Marwan Al-Haik, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2015
* USD 180,000.00

This project aims at developing, optimizing and validating laminated hybrid
composites that possess excellent damping and stiffness properties. The hybrid
composites comprising both commercial carbon fibers and surface-grown carbon
nanotubes (CNTs) offer attractive alternative to fiber reinforce composites
(FRPs) and cheaper alternative to pristine CNTs composites. The hybrid
composites also incorporate vanadium oxide (VO2) that exhibits a negative
stiffness behavior in thermal environments induced by vibrations. We anticipate
the hybrid composite to acquire high specific stiffness due to the CNTs?
elevated stiffness (TPa level) while gaining enhanced damping through the
negative stiffness of VO2 together with the inherent matrix viscoelastic damping
properties. Finite element methods and multi-objective optimization environment
will be employed to optimize the topology of the hybrid composites to yield
superior stiffness and damping properties. To validate the hybrid composites?
dynamics performance, laboratory controlled vibration tests will be carried out
to exploit their responses to specific excitations. The analysis of data from
these tests will be used for characterization and identification of the
vibrating system parameters (damping, stiffness and nonlinear
parameters).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vibrations can compromise the safety and
durability of structural components FRPs. Despite their attractive mechanical
properties, the low through-thickness mechanical properties of FRPs have
restricted their application in structures to mitigate out-of plane dynamic
loads. The developed hybrid composites with enhanced damping have an impact on
applications that utilize FRP such as commercial and military aircraft frames
(ex. Boeing 787 Dreamliner), ship vessels, auto industries, infrastructures and
sport goods. Considering the emerging applications of FRPs in civil
infrastcrtures (bridges, columns, etc..) the developed materials offer an
attractive and practical solution to mitigate random vibrations such as those
encountered in earthquakes also they can extend the fatigue life of these
structures. The educational components of the project will benefit three
departments in the Virginia Tech (VT) College of Engineering. One existing
graduate courses will be revised to include both theoretical and hands-on
modules based on the project tasks. One graduate student will participate hands-
on in the synthesis, fabrication,characterization, topological optimization,
vibration testing and parametric identification of the hybrid composites toward
a Ph.D. degree.