* 1200526
* Collaborative Research:  Using Cell Phone Data to Analyze the Continuum and Life Cycle of Disaster in Spatio-Temporal Movements
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* David Neal, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* David Mendonca
* 08/31/2015
* USD 71,571.00

Disasters create social disruption. As a result, everyday lives change severely.
The amount of social disruption reflects the degree an event is a disaster. One
way to capture the amount of social disruption is through the use of cell phone
data. Normal, everyday cell phone use will be compared to disaster and post
disaster use. As a result, it may be explained how much social disruption occurs
from the disaster. Also, the process and speed an area returns to "normal (i.e.,
the pre-disaster patterns)" may be seen. Two recent, but different disasters
(e.g., scope of area, speed of onset), will be selected for this
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project?s unique approach uses the expertise of
a civil engineer, sociologist, and a computer scientist. Math, computer science
and travel behavior research will be combined to understand disasters. This
project will improve how we understand social disruption as a disaster. It will
also show how indirect measures can be used to study these events. Also, it will
lay the foundation for using other measures to capture the idea of "social
disruption." This project will also suggest that emergency managers can use
these types of data to improve their emergency management capabilities.