* 1200271
* Moduli of abelian varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2019
* Ching-Li Chai, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2019
* USD 325,058.00

The focus of this project "Moduli of Abelian Varieties" is on the Hecke symmetry
of these moduli varieties over a field of positive characteristic p. Over fields
of characteristic zero the Hecke symmetries govern modular forms and their
higher dimensional generalizations, and p-adic properties are often reflected in
the geometric properties of these symmetries in characteristic p. Hecke
symmetries which fix a given point in a moduli space give rise to the local
stabilizer subgroup of the given point. The action of this group on the local
moduli space contains crucial information about the Hecke symmetries in general.
However it was unclear how to extract these information in the case of positive
characteristic p. Recently the PI made some progress in the first non-trivial
case of the above general problem, and found what can be thought of as an
asymptotic expansion of the action of the local stabilizer subgroup in the case
of two-dimensional Lubin-Tate space in characteristic p. The PI proposes to
extend such asymptotic expansion to other moduli spaces, and to show that every
Hecke orbit of a point in the generic open Newton stratum is dense in certain
modular varieties associated to unitary groups. The latter problem is known as
the Hecke orbit conjecture, which was inaccessible before. This proposal also
contains two projects related to Hecke symmetries over fields of characteristic
zero. One of them continues the PI's prior supported research on CM lifting; the
other is related to another supported research on aspects of the Andrea-Oort
conjecture.

The concept of symmetry originated from our basic aesthetic sense and is of
fundamental importance in modern science. In mathematics the major source of
symmetry is crystallized by the abstract definition of a group. The main object
of study in this proposal is a certain families of systems of polynomial
equations admitting a large collection of symmetries, called Hecke symmetries;
they are of fundamental importance in number theory. In the proposal, the PI
establishes an approach which will reveal certain hidden pattern about the Hecke
symmetries not previously known. It is expected that these patterns will enable
us to solve many cases of an open problem known as the Hecke orbit conjecture.
This approach to a qualitative understanding of these symmetries is completely
new since the work of Lubin and Tate in the middle 1960's.