* 1200971
* The Interplay of Ergodic Theory, Additive Combinatorics, and Harmonic Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Bryna Kra, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 12/31/2016
* USD 315,000.00

The investigator proposes a research program in problems that lie at the
intersection of egrodic theory, additive combinatorics, and harmonic analysis. A
basic problem in this area it to understand the long term behavior of systems
whose dynamics is too complicated or too chaotic to be understood locally.
Specifically, the PI proposes to build on past results in multiple recurrence
and convergence, further understanding the connections to nilpotent groups and
the dynamical systems that can be defined on their homogeneous spaces
(nilsystems). Such systems play a key role in understanding the limiting
behavior of multiple ergodic averages and the PI proposes research to extend our
knowledge of their role. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed is at the
interface of several interrelated branches of mathematics. While most of the
problems proposed are within ergodic theory, this area has strong relations to
problems in combinatorics, number theory, and harmonic analysis. The PI will
continue to explore these deep links, developing applications of ergodic theory
to these other areas and making use of recent advances in these other areas to
address problems within ergodic theory. The PI is actively involved in
conference organization, mentoring, and advising. She plans to to continue being
involved in education of researchers in fields with links to ergodic theory,
organizing interdisciplinary meetings and lecturing on ergodic theory for
researchers in the related fields of number theory, combinatorics, and harmonic
analysis. The PI will continue work with the graduate and undergraduate programs
at Northwestern University, directing undergraduates and graduates in research,
and running a mentoring group for women at all levels within the Mathematics,
Statistics, and Applied Mathematics departments at Northwestern University.