* 1200685
* Equivariant Cohomology: Positivity, Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Richard Rimanyi, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2016
* USD 125,000.00

The singularities of a function in one variable are the points where the
derivative of the function vanishes. The relationship between singularities and
global aspects of the function, such as minima and maxima, is only the tip of
the iceberg. Rimanyi studies singularities of functions between higher
dimensional spaces, and their relations with global aspects of the spaces. A key
notion of his research is the equivariant cohomology class represented by a
geometrically relevant variety. Natural infinite series of these classes often
display remarkable properties. The PI proposes a new approach to prove a
positivity result for an interesting set of equivariant classes, the so-called
quiver polynomials. He also plans to study the positivity of another class: the
Thom polynomials of Morin singularities, in connection with the Green-Griffiths
conjecture on the holomorphic maps to projective varieties. His new approach is
based on the flexibility of Iterated Residue descriptions of equivariant
classes. Another area the PI proposes to study is the very promising interplay
between equivariant cohomology, differential equations, and physics. Namely,
equivariant classes often satisfy physically inspired differential equations.
Based on earlier works with Varchenko, Rimanyi proposes to find the topological
aspects of quantum Knizhnik-Zamolodchikov differential equations, and study why
equivariant cohomology classes satisfy them. As an application quantum Selberg
type integrals with topological ingredients are
expected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the physical sciences, one very challenging
problem is the understanding of sudden changes caused by smooth alterations of
parameters. Rimanyi is working on the mathematical aspects of these physical
phenomena. An essential aspect of his proposal is its educational component.
Rimanyi proposes to continue a Geometry Learning Seminar for the graduate
students at UNC, providing a critical source of communication between faculty
and interested graduate students. By continuing to involve some bright Chapel
Hill high school students in mathematics research, the proposer is creating new
opportunities and new channels of communication between different institutions.
He also proposes to broaden participation of undergraduates in the mathematical
life of the department by advising students as they begin their honors theses.
He will continue running a weekly problem solving/competition preparation
seminar for undergraduates---where the students get not only math olympiad type
training, but experience research firsthand. He continues to advice master and
PhD student. Rimanyi proposes to set up an online Thom polynomial portal, where
scattered results of Thom polynomials would be collected and organized for the
benefit of scientists.