* 1200987
* Reducing Vibration and Wind Loads in Tall Buildings Using Fluidic-based Aerodynamic Modification (FAM)
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Chris Letchford, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2015
* USD 210,787.00

This research aims to develop a revolutionary approach to the shaping of tall
buildings to reduce their wind loading. The concept is to use Fluidic-based
Aerodynamic Modification (FAM), where wind flow is modified around the building
by the injection of fluid flow in strategic locations, to improve the
aerodynamic 'shape' of a structure. These fluid interventions will modify the
local flow such that the building experiences reduced wind loads. Active Flow
Control is now being widely used in the aeronautical world to improve flow
characteristics over airfoils; its application to bluff bodies, such as
buildings, to reduce response is novel. The objectives of the proposed research
are to demonstrate the feasibility of the FAM approach in reducing response; to
investigate the fundamentals of jet/flow and flow/structure interaction both
through their impact on the loading on the building and on the flow patterns
around it; and to assess the efficiency of steady and periodic forcing of the
injected flow in terms of their response reduction and invested energy. The
research will build on industry funded wind tunnel tests undertaken at the
Center for Flow Physics and Control (CeFPaC) at Rensselaer for FAM on
streamlined bodies such as airfoils on planes and wind turbines. This project
will provide proof of concept of the approach and whether FAM has the potential
to improve tall building design.

By 2050 it is anticipated that the World's population will have increased by 50%
to around 9 Billion and that the majority of that increase will occur in urban
areas. The current pressure on urban land has led to tall buildings being the
dominant building form in densely populated cities and has stimulated urban
regeneration in the last two decades of the 20th Century. However, the majority
of new urban developments, especially with respect to tall building typologies,
have not followed principles of environmental and/or sustainable design. While
the development and increased use of light-weight and high-strength materials in
the construction of these buildings has provided them with reduced mass, it has
increased their susceptibility to dynamic wind load effects. Thus the gains
afforded by incorporating these new materials into tall buildings are countered
by the need to focus much more attention on their habitability under strong wind
conditions. For most tall, slender buildings the design is governed by both the
strength and serviceability (human habitability).

The significance of controlling the aerodynamic performance of a structure
solely by the manipulation of the flow over its surface with fluidic
intervention has huge potential impact on global energy and resource
consumption. Extending the definition of a body beyond the solid edge boundary
of geometry to include the fluid around it, will redefine other dynamic
relationships between engineered structures and the flow they are immersed in,
and impact heat and mass (humidity) transfer, potential energy harvesting,
pollutant capture, noise reduction, indoor air management, etc. This will allow
tall buildings to become adaptive to their external environment and provide a
safer and a healthier indoor environment, while decreasing construction costs
and energy expenditure. A team of four faculty members, two each from
engineering and architecture will work together on this project. The educational
plan proposes strengthening STEM for 6-8 graders through extending the focus on
airflow to the urban scale by designing a city based on wind flow studies within
the framework of the national Future Cities Competition.