* 1200581
* Convex Bodies in Algebraic Geometry and Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Kiumars Kaveh, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2015
* USD 129,999.00

Kaveh will work on problems in the interface of algebra, geometry and
combinatorics. The central theme of the proposal is to associate convex bodies
to projective algebraic varieties such that important information about the
geometry of the variety can be read off from the associated convex body.
Introduced in passing by Okounkov, this construction generalizes the well-known
and extremely rich correspondence between geometry of toric varieties and
combinatorics of convex polytopes. The proposal will apply this technique to
prove new results and introduce new constructions and examples in areas such as:
symplectic geometry and integrable systems, non-commutative algebra and
algebraic geometry, and representation theory of reductive algebraic groups. The
strength of combinatorial techniques available for toric varieties makes them
very useful in several areas among which are mirror symmetry in mathematical
physics and computational algebra. The project, in particular, is hoped to
contribute to far extending the scope of toric
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algebraic geometry, one of the oldest and most
central areas of mathematics, is concerned with the geometric study of solutions
of polynomial equations in several variables. It interacts with many other
fields ranging from representation theory to topology, complex analysis,
combinatorics and number theory. It has important applications to problems in
areas as diverse as cryptography, coding theory and high energy physics. The
particular problems Kaveh will study involve interaction between
geometry/combinatorics of solids in space, and geometric objects defined by
systems of polynomial equations. He hopes this work will lead to development of
some valuable new techniques in algebraic geometry and related fields.