* 1200321
* Physical Design and Feedback Control of Hybrid Mechanical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Todd Murphey, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 08/31/2016
* USD 349,858.00

The aim of this award is to develop computationally tractable methods for
designing and controlling systems that experience impact. Impacts introduce
discontinuities into the equations of motion, making traditional techniques in
control theory difficult to employ. However, if a system can specify its
configuration during impact a form of feedback control may be utilized. The work
will use a combination of variational analysis for mechanical systems, shape
optimization, and control theory to synthesize embedded controllers for a class
of impacting systems with guarantees on stability, optimality, and computational
complexity. The work will start with a simple example of a two-legged robot
walking on terrain; later examples will include numerical models of high degree-
of-freedom robots walking on uneven terrain and a biomechanical model of a human
hand interacting with objects. Deliverables include mathematical proofs of
algorithm properties, a software implementation of the feedback synthesis
techniques in a variety of documented examples, articles describing the
techniques, and training for students in control engineering and biomedical
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impacts are present in applications ranging
from robotic locomotion and grasping to manufacturing and even human
prosthetics. Computer control of these systems depends on incorporating impacts
into algorithms that stabilize motion. If successful, the proposed techniques
will make practical regulation of many impacting systems as straightforward as
regulation of non-impacting systems. Moreover, the techniques will provide an
improved understanding of the role that contact plays in human neuromuscular
control. The project will leverage international collaboration through NSF
Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE) Global Venture Fund (GVF)
co-funding to develop long-term collaboration with researchers in Germany.
Software developed as part of this work will be incorporated into an ongoing
clinical study of hand rehabilitation at the Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago
and will be freely available to the public. In addition to enabling important
technologies, the work will be highlighted in a museum, and student will
participate in outreach with an urban high school in Chicago.