* 1200180
* Collaborative Research: Engineering Design of Oxygen Rich Surfaces for Bioelectrodes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Emanuela Andreescu, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2016
* USD 202,725.00

The research objective of this grant is to elucidate the fundamental processes
of the oxygen transport, permeability, and release in porous, metal oxide
supported biofunctionalized membranes, as materials for bioelectrodes and
biofuel cells. The research project will study the catalytic, redox, and oxygen
storage and release properties of metal doped and mixed metal oxides within a
porous tridimensional network that will be used to fabricate "oxygen-rich"
surfaces that are able to operate under physiological and ambient temperature
conditions. A suite of spectroscopic, electrochemical, and scanning
electrochemical microscopy methods will be used to facilitate understanding of
the oxygen transport mechanism at the enzyme/doped metal oxide interface in the
porous layer and to establish correlations between composition, morphology, and
corresponding bioelectrocatalytic performance. This research will improve oxygen
availability and permeability at surfaces, enhancing the overall performance of
bioelectrodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this interdisciplinary
collaborative effort will enable development of a new generation of materials
and surfaces that can be used in oxygen restrictive conditions. This research
introduces a unique technology in the field of bioelectrochemistry and biofuel
cells for facilitating oxygen mobility and providing storage/release
capabilities. This research project will promote innovation and development of
critical thinking skills in all aspects of student training to develop a
foundation of knowledge that will enable future discoveries. Graduate and
undergraduate students, especially minorities and women, will participate in
this research. K12 students and teachers will be exposed to this research
through established mechanisms at the two collaborating institutions.