* 1200730
* Topological Combinatorics of Posets, Totally Nonnegative Varieties and Crystals
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Patricia Hersh, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

This project focuses on (1) stratified spaces coming from such areas as
combinatorial representation theory and algebraic statistics; (2) the
combinatorics of their closure posets; and (3) algebraic analogues with
applications to geometric group theory, representation theory, and enumerative
combinatorics. Building on the PI's past work studying the homeomorphism type of
the totally nonnegative part of the unipotent radical of an algebraic group, the
PI now will study the totally nonnegative part of the Grassmannian, in
collaboration with Lauren Williams, with the long-range goal of determining the
homeomorphism type of the totally nonnegative part of more general flag
varieties; such topological analysis inevitably reveals a great deal of
combinatorial and representation theoretic information in the process -- for
example, to understand the nonnegative part of arbitrary flag varieties would
very likely require a vast generalization of Postnikov's theory of reduced and
nonreduced plabic graphs. Another focus of the project is on the development of
new techniques and the streamlining of existing ones in poset topology,
specifically building upon the PI's past work on discrete Morse theory for poset
order complexes. The motivating application is to obtain, in collaboration with
Cristian Lenart, a better understanding of the combinatorial structure of
crystal graphs, guided by questions about their poset topology which will enrich
and expand upon in new directions the local structure uncovered by Stembridge.

Combinatorics is the mathematics of how to organize discrete data in ways that
make it manageable to analyze. Topological combinatorics focuses on geometric
data. For example, the set of solutions to a system of equations, such as one
might encounter in an engineering problem, often can be split in a natural way
into smaller pieces called cells that are much easier to understand. Topological
combinatorics, the focus area of this project, can be used to understand how
these cells fit together, focusing on finite data that can be used more easily
in calculations. Specifically, partially ordered sets, or posets, are a
combinatorial tool for describing incidences among these pieces. A long-term
project of the PI is to develop efficient techniques for studying these
partially ordered sets by a method called discrete Morse theory, which allows
one to analyze the geometric object by building it over time, attaching its
pieces in succession, and recording what happens at the moments in time when
fundamental changes in the structure occur.