* 1200475
* Applications of Non-Commutative Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Paul Baum, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2015
* USD 203,571.00

A recurrent theme in nineteenth and twentieth century mathematics has been the
interaction of analysis and topology. "Analysis" is mathematics based on
calculus (i.e. differentiation and integration), which developed from the
pioneering work of Newton and Leibniz. "Topology" is the most basic form of
geometry and was founded by such eminent nineteenth century and twentieth
century mathematicians as Riemann, Poincare and Lefschetz. Riemann and his co-
worker Roch stated and proved one of the true gems of nineteenth century
mathematics: the Riemann-Roch theorem. This remarkable theorem asserts that
certain numbers assigned by an analytical method to a mathematical structure
known as a "divisor on a Riemann surface" are, in fact, topological. The
Riemann-Roch theorem gives a topological formula for these numbers. This
Riemann-Roch phenomenon (i.e. certain numbers which are analytically defined are
in practice determined by a topological formula) has continued with astonishing
vigor throughout twentieth century mathematics. Examples are the Lefschetz
fixed-point formula (which led to the A. Weil conjectures) and the Atiyah-Singer
index theorem for elliptic operators.

The mathematics of this project continues this trend. Thirty years ago the
investigator and A. Connes conjectured that an analytic invariant (the K-theory
of the reduced C*-algebra of a locally compact Hausdorff topological group) is,
in fact, topological. The conjecture has drawn wide attention and has been the
subject of papers, conferences, lectures, Ph.D. theses, and books. The
conjecture is unusual in that it cuts across several different areas of
mathematics and reveals connections between problems which previously were
thought to be completely unrelated. The main objective of the project is to take
the examples (e.g. all reductive p-adic groups) where the conjecture is now
known to be true and to develop the implications. This gives a new and different
approach to well known problems and issues. Equivalently, the project uses the
new point of view known as non-commutative geometry to study classical problems
in geometry-topology and representation theory. The non-commutative geometry
point of view has led to some startling conjectures and results. In the
representation theory of reductive p-adic groups a totally unexpected geometric
structure has been revealed. This greatly simplifies the representation theory
and links Baum-Connes to the Langlands program. For the index of geometrically-
arising Fredholm operators, the non-commutative geometry point of view leads to
the surprising conclusion that formulas like the Atiyah-Singer index formula
apply well beyond elliptic operators. Thus ellipticity is not the essential
point needed to obtain a topological formula for the index of such operators.