* 1200087
* Collaborative Research: Computational Foundations for Learning, Verifying, and Applying Model Simplification Rules
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2012,01/31/2017
* Dana Nau, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 01/31/2017
* USD 264,932.00

The objective of this award is to develop feature-based simplification of
computer-aided-design models, specifically to accelerate and automate downstream
finite-element-analysis. In particular, the research will create algorithmic
foundations for learning conservative feature suppression rules from
demonstrations performed by human experts. The effect of simplification on
simulation accuracy will be formally characterized and this understanding will
be used to create robust algorithms for feature suppression within computer-
aided design models. Research findings will be integrated into graduate and
undergraduate curriculum. The research will ultimately lead to a framework to
automatically learn, validate, and apply context dependent model simplification
rules that can be audited by human experts, and deployed to automate the model
simplification task.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the research will
significantly speed up model simplification, and enhance the automated use of
engineering analysis tools in the design process. Potential applications include
design of heat exchangers, aircraft structures, and semi-conductor equipment.
The planned research and education integration activities and outreach
activities will familiarize graduate, undergraduate, and high school students
with the use of model simplification technologies in challenging engineering
design projects. This project will also increase awareness among practicing
engineers about the potential usage of automated model simplification in complex
engineering design projects. Students working on this project will also
participate in Badger Camp and Engineering Expo events at the University of
Wisconsin campus and Maryland Day at the University of Maryland to enhance the
public understanding of the science and technology.