* 1200639
* GOALI:  Adaptive Degradation-Based Prognosis with Application to Vehicular Electrical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Nagi Gebraeel, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2017
* USD 379,658.00

The research objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) award is to use real-time performance-/condition-based sensor
signals to characterize component-to-component degradation interactions in
multi-component systems, and use this characterization to improve sensor-based
prognostics of complex engineering systems. The general approach used for
modeling component interdependencies within a given system has traditionally
focused on investigating the effects that a component's failure has on the
remaining surviving components. In contrast, this project's approach addresses
this challenge at a much more fundamental level by focusing on the effects of
gradual and partial degradation of system components rather than the effects of
their failures. This will be achieved through a combined stochastic and
statistical modeling framework, which will be used to develop adaptive
prognostic models for components with interdependent degradation processes.
Deliverables for this project include a software with prognostic algorithms,
documentation of research results, validation on industrial platform, and
engineering student education.

The success of this project will have a direct impact on improving human safety,
and reducing maintenance and warranty costs of the American automotive industry.
Specifically, this GOALI project is conducted in close collaboration with
General Motors. It aims to apply the prognostic methods on key components of the
Vehicular Electric Power Generation and Storage (EPGS) system. Findings of this
research will also benefit many other industrial sectors, including the airline
industry, the power generation industry, manufacturing sector, and domains of
the service sector. The research agenda will serve as the foundation for the
doctoral dissertations of two Ph.D. students, providing them with a rich
training experience that combines theoretical and industrial work as well as
internship opportunities. Research findings will be incorporated in a
Prognostics graduate course. Dissemination will include conference presentations
to the academic communities as well as industrial seminars and workshops.