* 1200237
* Self-Centering Truss Moment Frames with Resilient Earthquake Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Matthew Eatherton, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 03/31/2015
* USD 305,748.00

An innovative new self-centering truss moment resisting frame (SC-TMRF) is
devised to make building frames more resilient to earthquakes and reduce
associated damage. The SC-TMRF consists of a truss with an assembly of
concentric tubes at the bottom chord that creates restoring force in conjunction
with post-tensioning strands. Conventional seismic force resisting systems use
inelasticity in structural members and connections to dissipate seismic energy
and protect buildings against collapse. However, the structural damage
distributed throughout a building and related permanent residual drifts can make
a conventional structure financially unreasonable to repair following a large
earthquake. Recently developed seismic systems that mitigate residual drifts
suffer from difficult or complex field construction, large cost premiums, and
challenges associated with deformation compatibility. The unique configuration
of the SC-TMRF solves many of these problems. Furthermore, steel plates with
cut-outs leaving butterfly shaped links act as structural fuses, dissipate
seismic energy, and can be readily replaced if necessary. The research project
will develop the SC-TMRF concept through component testing, large-scale system
experimentation, computational simulation, and the creation of proven set of
design guidelines that will allow the application of the SC-TMRF concept in
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SC-TMRF uses common materials in an
innovative configuration. Preliminary design and analyses suggest that the SC-
TMRF virtually eliminates permanent drifts, concentrates structural damage in
structural fuses that can be easily replaced after severe earthquakes, can be
shop fabricated allowing conventional field construction methods, and utilizes
approximately the same amount of steel as conventional moment resisting frames.
Because the SC-TMRF is a self-centering seismic force resisting system that is
expected to be competitive with traditional systems, the SC-TMRF is a
transformative new technology that has the potential to significantly reduce the
economic losses due to earthquakes through a competitive building system that
may not require structural repair after most earthquakes.