* 1200839
* Dynamic Bio-Mechanical Properties of Ligand-Receptor Bonds
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2012,04/30/2018
* Ian Suni, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 04/30/2018
* USD 360,000.00

The research objective of this award is to characterize, investigate, and
understand the dynamic mechanical properties of ligand-receptor adhesion bonds
through non-contact, cell-free experiments, with a special emphasis on "catch"
bonds. Catch bonds are non-covalent ligand-receptor bonds whose dissociation
lifetime counter-intuitively increases with increasing tensile force applied to
the bond. In other words, catch bonds become stronger upon elongation. However,
wide variations in the published data on the mechanical properties of catch
bonds suggest that current experimental approaches are inadequate. Studies
conducted under this award hypothesize that compressive force and nonlinearity
in stiffness play a role in bond properties, particularly during bond rupture.
This hypothesis will be tested by experimental investigations of (i) the effects
of external forces not only in tension, but also in compression, on ligand-
receptor bonds; (ii) the dynamic adhesion and mechanical stiffness properties of
these bonds at various time-scales; (iii) and the level of stiffness
nonlinearity in these bonds and its relation to bond lifetime. The long-term
goal is to understand the ligand-receptor adhesion mechanisms required for the
development of higher-order models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, these
studies will add significantly to the field?s understanding of the mechanical
properties of ligand-receptor adhesion bonds, including catch bonds. In addition
to their potential to increase our fundamental understanding, precise
characterization of ligand-receptor bonds may also lead to innovative
technologies such as targeted drug delivery, cancer diagnostics, methods for
cell sorting, improved tools for computational simulations, and novel classes of
sensors and detectors. The project will be conducted by a multi-disciplinary
team including faculty from Mechanical Engineering, Chemical and Biomolecular
Engineering, and Biology. The educational plan includes course development in
the disciplines of the respective Principal Investigators (PIs), participation
in the Research Experience for Teachers (RET) program, and incorporation of
their results into an ongoing NSF Nanotechnology Undergraduate Education (NUE)
project.