* 1200231
* Atomistic Simulation Based Crack Evolution Models for Crystal Plasticity FEM of Crystalline Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Somnath Ghosh, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2016
* USD 301,977.00

The research objective of this grant is the development of physics-based crack
evolution models in polycrystalline metallic materials for use in crystal
plasticity finite element models. The unified deformation-fracture models will
be developed by upscaling variables from atomic-scale, molecular dynamics
simulations with explicit depiction of the atomic structure and deformation
mechanisms. Upscaling will provide a framework for cohesive laws and associated
evolution laws for deformation variables along specific slip systems. A
systematic approach will be undertaken, encompassing the following tasks: (i)
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of 3D crystalline lattice systems to
simulate the evolution of ductile and brittle crack evolution under a variety of
force fields, (ii) development of accelerated MD methods to simulate longer time
scales consistent with experiments, (iii) characterization and identification of
crack tip deformation mechanisms, followed by quantification of the local atomic
structure and evolution, and (iv) development of energy-based laws governing
crack growth in the process zone by partitioning the total energy corresponding
to different physical mechanisms.

Benefits to the scientific community will be accomplished through the
establishment of novel crack evolution models of critical importance in analysis
and design of materials for better fracture toughness and ductility. Advancement
in accelerated molecular dynamics modeling will allow modeling at strain rates
of realistic experiments. Collaboration with Sandia and Brown Deer Technology
will enable technology transfer of deliverables for broader utilization.
Students will have strong interactions with eminent researchers at Sandia
National Laboratories and a small-scale development company to see the direct
impact of their work.