* 1200792
* CAREER:  Novel Query Processing Techniques for Distributed Probabilistic Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/29/2011,08/31/2017
* Feifei Li, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2017
* USD 529,356.00

Data are increasingly generated, stored, and processed distributively.
Meanwhile, when large amounts of data are generated, ambiguity, uncertainty, and
errors are inherently introduced, especially in a distributed setup. It is best
to represent such data in a distributed probabilistic database. In distributed
data management, summary queries are useful tools for obtaining the most
important answers from massive quantities of data effectively and efficiently,
e.g., top-k queries, heavy hitters (aka frequent items), histograms and
wavelets, threshold monitoring queries, etc. This project investigates novel
query processing techniques for various, important summary queries in
distributed probabilistic data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadly classified, this
project examines both snapshot summary queries in static (i.e., no updates)
distributed probabilistic databases, and continuous summary queries in dynamic
(i.e., with updates) distributed probabilistic databases. A number of techniques
are explored to design novel, communication and computation efficient algorithms
for processing these queries.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A distributed probabilistic
data management system (DPDMS) prototype is implemented based on the query
processing techniques developed in this project. This DPDMS is released to and
used in practice by scientists and engineers from other science disciplines as
well as industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and undergraduate students,
including those from minority groups, are actively involved in this project.
Findings from the project have been integrated into different courses, demos,
and educational projects. For further information, such as publications, data
sets, source code, and education initiatives, please visit the project website
at http://www.cs.fsu.edu/~lifeifei/dpdm.