* 1200451
* Synthetic Integration of Inorganic-Organic Functionality in Hybrid Semiconductors based on Chalcogenide Clusters
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Pingyun Feng, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 07/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By integrating synthetic and structural
principles from several fields including metal chalcogenide cluster chemistry,
coordination chemistry, and nanoporous solids, this research supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program seeks to employ complex multi-
component and multi-step co-assembly processes to create a new generation of
supramolecular chalcogenide clusters and their organized assemblies with organic
functional moieties. Specifically, the proposed research seeks to utilize
structural and functional diversity of organic molecules to control structures
of chalcogenide clusters and extended frameworks and to enhance their
electrooptical properties and functionalities. To minimize the possibility for
phase separation common in multi-component systems, inorganic and organic
components will be chosen so that each component plays a unique role that is
complementary to other components, The PI will also seek to pursue metal
chalcogenide cluster research in a direction towards the modular synthesis, by
developing methods to create pre-designed discrete chalcogenide clusters. The
use of pre-assembled supramolecular units not only simplifies the co-assembly
process, but also allows the use of milder synthetic conditions to access
metastable phase domains, which is particularly desirable for co-assembly into
topologies with open architecture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Through this proposed research, new
areas of cross-disciplinary research bordering various fields such as
semiconducting nanoparticles, chalcogenide molecular clusters, coordination
polymers, and traditional zeolites will be developed. New materials developed in
this project will include crystalline high-surface-area semiconductors with
potential applications in various energy and environmental science related
areas. UC Riverside has the most diverse student population among UC campuses.
Undergraduate research is highly supported in the PI's group. The PI is actively
involved in various educational and training programs for undergraduate and high
school students. The proposed project can be used to infuse a wide and highly
diverse student audience with enthusiasm for careers in materials chemistry. The
project combines diversity in materials types and various measurement techniques
and aims to develop new materials for energy or environmental science related
applications. It will therefore provide excellent training opportunities for
students in synthesis, structural characterization, and property measurements
and prepare them for a challenging, but rewarding career in science.