* 1200544
* GOALI: Synthesis, Composition and Thermal Properties of Metal Nano-Particles for Printable Conductive Media
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Dale Barkey, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2016
* USD 450,000.00

This grant provides funding for an academic/industrial collaboration to optimize
the heterogeneous structure, size and composition of silver and silver-metal
composite nanoparticles for photovoltaic manufacture. The project will include
synthesis of homogenous alloy and core-shell composite nanoparticles by solution
phase and electrodeposition methods as well as structural and functional
characterization of nanoparticles using combined techniques, including
aberration-corrected Scanning Transmission Electronic Microscopy and
synchrotron-based Extended X?ray Absorption Fine Structure (EXAFS) spectroscopy.
These particles will be used to prepare screen-printable conductive inks. The
inks will be optimized for printing onto silicon wafers and formation of
conductive layers by low-temperature fusing. The nanoparticle synthesis
technology will be scaled-up and optimized for efficient large scale production
in a continuous stirred tank reactor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal contacts are
essential components of silicon photovoltaic cells, and their formation is a
major efficiency-limiting and cost-determining step in solar cell processing.
Screen printing has been adopted as a rapid, cost-effective, and simple
technique to print silver contacts in large-volume photovoltaic cell production.
However, the thin film fired or frit silver inks used in current processes
contain large silver powders, which require high-temperature fusion to produce a
conductive layer, resulting in a loss of efficiency. The proposed nanoparticles
inks will enable lower-temperature fusing processes, better uniformity, and
higher conductivity than the current powders used in frit ink. This project will
be carried out in partnership with Conductive Compounds LLC, a manufacturer of
conductive materials including screen printable conductive inks. If successful
the research will result in cost-effective nanoparticle-based inks. The project
outcome will directly support the nation?s effort to diversify its energy supply
and help to reduce the global carbon footprint. Curricula based on the research
results will be produced and internships will be provided for students at
Conductive Compounds.