* 1200701
* Degenerate Elliptic Problems in Analysis and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Ovidiu Savin, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 06/30/2017
* USD 198,874.00

This project focuses on qualitative properties of solutions to certain
degenerate elliptic partial differential equations arising in different areas of
mathematics. Some of the problems under investigation include fourth-order
Monge-Ampere-type equations, nonlocal free boundary and phase transition
problems, and degenerate fully nonlinear equations of concave type. One
recurrent question is the smoothness of the solutions or their level sets and
their behavior near singular points. For example, the project will investigate
the smoothness of Lipschitz thin free boundaries and the dimensions of their
singular sets, the boundary behavior of solutions of Monge-Ampere equations with
degenerate boundary conditions, and the rigidity of level sets in nonlocal phase
transitions.

Partial differential equations are used to describe a large variety of physical
phenomena. At the same time, they contribute to the development of different
branches of mathematics such as differential geometry, topology, probability,
and algebraic geometry. In particular, Monge-Ampere equations occur naturally in
the mathematical formulation of optimal transportation problems, many of them
within the realm of our daily lives: traffic network planning in cities,
internet traffic optimization, blood vessel branching in the human venous
system, and meteorological fluid dynamics. Such equations also frequently turn
up in other areas of mathematics, like Riemannian or conformal geometry.
Nonlocal free boundary and phase transition problems appear in several areas of
science, including fluid mechanics, plasma physics, and semiconductor theory.
Thin free boundaries are relevant to our understanding of flame propagation and
also in the propagation of surfaces of discontinuities. The final purpose of
this project is to gain the correct perspective on interesting "degenerate"
equations in order to be able to introduce innovative tools and methodologies to
tackle them.