* 1200815
* CR Manifolds and Singular Integrals
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Jennifer Brooks, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2015
* USD 96,565.00

Much of modern complex analysis is concerned with the study of the tangential
Cauchy-Riemann (CR) operator. This operator arises by restricting the classical
Cauchy-Riemann operator in complex Euclidean space to a hypersurface or to an
appropriate class of manifolds called CR manifolds. This operator is not
invertible. Thus to understand it, we must understand a related singular
integral operator, the Szego projection operator, which is the orthogonal
projection of the space of square-integrable functions on a manifold onto the
null space of the associated tangential CR operator. The Szego projection is
relatively well-understood for boundaries of pseudoconvex domains of finite
type. Comparatively little is known if one relaxes the finite-type hypothesis,
and even less is known if one relaxes the pseudoconvexity hypothesis. Exploring
these contexts systematically is the goal of the current project. More
specifically, Halfpap and her collaborators will analyze explicit expressions
for the integral kernel associated with the Szego projection for several classes
of hypersurfaces and CR manifolds. The goals are 1) to determine the locations
and sizes of the singularities of the Szego kernel, 2) to determine how these
are connected to the geometry of the underlying manifold, and 3) to understand
the mapping properties of the projection operator itself.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In general, the study of partial differential equations
(PDEs) is important because PDEs give a language for describing relationships
among changing quantities; some model heat flow, some wave propagation, and some
are simply objects of study in their own right. For a general PDE, several
fundamental questions arise: Can one solve for the unknown function in terms of
the given data? Is the solution unique? If the data are known to have certain
special properties (e.g., smoothness or square-integrability) what can be said
about the solution? Often one seeks a so-called ``fundamental solution" -- a
kernel function against which one may integrate the data to obtain a solution of
the original PDE. Theorems relating properties of the solution to those of the
data thus require detailed information about the associated integral kernel
function. Frequently, the kernel function has singularities. In these cases one
obtains a singular integral operator. This is the larger context in which the
current project is situated, and thus the results of the current project have
broader implications for other areas in which PDEs and singular integral
operators arise. This mathematics research project also has the potential to
increase diversity within mathematics; Halfpap is an active advisor of graduate
students (as well as an effective teacher and mentor of undergraduates) at a
university serving a largely-rural state.