* 1200315
* Collaborative Research: Design Principles for Parallel Simulation Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Shane Henderson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 06/30/2016
* USD 250,515.00

This award provides funding to advance the design of algorithms for solving
simulation-optimization (SO) problems on parallel computing platforms. SO
problems are optimization problems where the objective function and constraints
can only be observed through a stochastic simulation. Virtually all current
algorithms for solving SO problems assume a single processor as the computing
platform. However, the trend in computing devices is towards multi-processor
computers, not just at the laptop/desktop level, but all the way up to cloud
computing environments. This research will explore how to design algorithms for
solving SO problems that exploit such environments, to attempt to return high-
quality solutions at a reasonable cost and within a reasonable amount of time.

If successful, the results of this research will lead to a new line of research
- parallel SO - with ensuing improvements in the design and implementation of SO
algorithms on parallel computing platforms, thus making this currently
computing-intensive technology much more accessible and effective. SO already
holds an important place in application fields, as evidenced by the variety of
SO problems in an existing testbed <www.simopt.org>. The proposed research will
provide further opportunities for major impact through reliable solution of
important SO problems. This research is part of a continuing thrust to enhance
the implementability of SO by creating methods, theory, and computational tools
to facilitate the automatic solution of larger and more realistic SO problems.