* 1200358
* Biomechanics of Arterial Tissue Failure at Multiple Length Scales
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Xiaomin Deng, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 07/31/2015
* USD 398,875.00

The research objective of this award is to advance our understanding of
mechanical failure mechanisms in arterial tissue, focusing on atherosclerotic
plaque failure. Arterial tissue failure leads to several life-threatening
clinical conditions, including atherosclerotic plaque rupture and aortic
dissection. Arterial tissue has structural similarities to fiber-reinforced
composite materials used for engineering and manufacturing applications. In this
project, theoretical and analytical approaches developed to describe failure of
reinforced composites will be extended to interpret the results of experimental
studies of plaque failure in atherosclerotic mice, which develop plaques
comparable to those seen in humans. The research will combine experimental
studies of the structure and biochemistry of the interface between tissue layers
in atherosclerotic mouse arteries with development of theoretical and
computational models of delamination mechanisms at both macroscopic and
microscopic length scales. The models will be used to simulate controlled
peeling/delamination experiments on atherosclerotic mouse arteries using both
cohesive zone and micromechanical approaches. The validated models will then be
used to predict those conditions that result in arterial tissue failure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The continuum and micromechanical modeling approaches
developed in mouse studies can be readily modified to understand tissue failure
processes in human diseases. The proposed effort has potential to positively
impact patient management, while guiding the development of successful
interventions. The models developed will also be applicable for analyzing
failure of non-biological composite materials having similar structure and
material properties. The insight gained into mechanisms of arterial tissue
adhesion and failure is expected to prove useful to the biomedical device
industry, for example in the development of improved biomimetic surgical
adhesives. The educational and outreach aspects of the project include
undergraduate training in biomechanics, outreach to high school teachers in STEM
subjects through Project Lead the Way, and strengthening the new Biomedical
Engineering Program at the University of South Carolina.