* 1200284
* Applications of the motivic Becker-Gottlieb transfer
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Roy Joshua, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2016
* USD 131,365.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1200284, Principal Investigator: Roy Joshua

The PI, together with Gunnar Carlsson at Stanford, has been involved in a
research program over the last three years with the goal of constructing and
setting up a motivic variant of the Becker-Gottlieb transfer and using this to
study several problems in motivic cohomology and algebraic K-theory with finite
coefficients. This collaborative work over the last three years has already
resulted in two preprints, where such a transfer has already been constructed
and a basic framework for subsequent work established. The goal of the present
research proposal is to explore applications of this transfer to motivic
cohomology and algebraic K-theory with finite coefficients with several such
applications expected. The corresponding classical notions in algebraic topology
have played a key role in settling important problems like the Adams?
conjecture, where the use of the transfer provided a sophisticated version of
the splitting principle. A leading theme of the proposed research is that other
more sophisticated applications of the same principle accounts for several of
the deeper results in algebraic K-theory: for example, the reduction of
Thomason's well-known result on cohomological descent for mod-l algebraic
K-theory with the Bott-element inverted to Hilbert's theorem 90, and the
reduction of rigidity properties of mod-l algebraic K-theory to Picard groups.
However, in the absence of an analogue of the Becker-Gottlieb transfer, these
reductions have been rather long and difficult, requiring the development of
customized elaborate machinery. There are also currently several open problems
to which similar techniques seem to apply: for example, Carlsson's conjectures
relating the algebraic K-theory of fields with certain equivariant K-groups
associated to the Galois group of the field and also several open questions on
the motivic cohomology of the classifying spaces of algebraic groups.

Motivic cohomology and motivic homotopy theory are relatively new applications
of well-established techniques from algebraic topology to algebraic geometry.
Classically cohomology and homotopy methods are used to distinguish between
topological spaces and to analyze their properties. Algebraic geometry, on the
other hand, deals with special spaces arising as zeroes of polynomial equations.
It is only in recent years, after the solution of an open problem called the
Milnor conjecture using homotopy methods that the relevance and usefulness of
such techniques in algebraic geometry have come to light. Considering that the
Becker-Gottlieb transfer is one of the most versatile tools in algebraic
topology, it is reasonable to expect much progress using a variant of it in the
motivic context. The importance and relevance of this project stems from these
observations.