* 1200086
* Efficient Energy Release Rate Computations for Cracks with Arbitrary Location and Geometry
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Philippe Geubelle, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2017
* USD 323,719.00

The goal of this fracture mechanics project is to utilize the topological
derivative to approximate the energy release rate (ERR) field associated with a
(small) crack of arbitrary parameterized geometry. The proposed method is
radically different from, and substantially more efficient than, conventional
finite element method (FEM), generalized FEM and extended FEM treatment of
fracture problems. Indeed, it eliminates the need to discretize the cracked
structural component. Rather it provides an approximation of the ERR for a crack
of arbitrary geometry located anywhere in the solid by simply evaluate the
stress field present in the loaded un-cracked component. This analysis needs to
be conducted only once and with a finite element mesh substantially coarser than
that needed to model the cracked specimen (since there is no need to capture the
stress concentration at a crack front). Moreover it uses conventional FEA
methods and thereby it eliminates the need for specialty elements. Ultimately it
will be used to generate finite element contour plots that illustrate critical
crack geometries throughout the body. Whence, potential failure locations and
critical inspection sites can be readily identified. In this proposal, the
preliminary results that are limited to 2-D homogenous isotropic linear elastic
structures will be extended to heterogeneous, anisotropic, nonlinear three-
dimensional structures. Moreover, the first-order approximation will be extended
to achieve second-order accuracy.

The successful completion of this project will lead to a novel computational
design tool that is substantially more efficient than conventional. By
substantially facilitating the fracture-based analysis of structural components,
the method is expected to have a major impact in all industries for which the
design of structural components is dictated by the presence of critical flaws.
The method will also be incorporated in the graduate course on fracture
mechanics that attracts students from across the College of Engineering. Through
the office of Engineering On-Line Education at the University of Illinois, this
course will be made available outside the University, and especially to Minority
Serving Institutions (MSI).