* 1200406
* Collaborative Research:  Combining Infrared Spectroscopy and Mass Spectrometry on a Nanophotonic Platform for Chemical Sensing
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Robert Opila, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 03/31/2015
* USD 245,315.00

The research objective of this award is to explore on-chip infrared spectroscopy
and mass spectrometry for sensitive detection and identification of gas
molecules. Both detection mechanisms will be studied using a photonic crystal
device which serve simultaneously as a nanophotonic cavity and a nanomechanical
resonator. Using this photonic crystal structure, the proposed research will
study cavity-enhanced optomechanical resonance phenomena and infrared light-
molecule interaction mechanisms in the nanoscale. In this program, new material
systems, photonic device designs and fabrication technologies will also be
investigated for the strategically important mid-infrared wave
band.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chipscale, dual-mode sensor created in this
program will have an immediate impact in the fields of nanophotonics,
nanomechanics, and chem/bio sensing if successful. Synergistically combining
nanomechanical and nanophotonic detection methods on a common device platform
will overcome the specificity and sensitivity bottlenecks limiting on-chip
sensing technologies: the dual-mode sensor measures molecular weight and
characteristic infrared absorption fingerprints of analyte, thus enabling
recognition and quantification of chemical species with high accuracy; cavity-
enhanced interactions in the nanoscale also lead to improved limit of detection
potentially down to a single-molecule level. In addition, innovations in mid-
infrared materials and devices made through this program will fill the missing
link in long-wave integrated optoelectronics critical to imaging, spectroscopy,
and free-space communications. The participating undergraduate and graduate
researchers will benefit from the cross-cutting collaboration between the two
groups and summer exchanges with national laboratories to extend their technical
experiences. The program will also expand K-12 initiatives at both participating
universities through high school student mentoring and new optical science class
module development.