* 1200340
* Mechanical Behavior of Polymer-Fullerene Blends for Photovoltaic Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Mohammed Zikry, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 04/30/2016
* USD 369,811.00

This grant provides funding to study relationships between the mechanical
behavior and optoelectronic performance of polymer-fullerene blend films for
photovoltaic device applications, i.e. solar cells. The principle investigators
will consider how morphological features of the blend film affect both the
mechanical and electrical properties of the active layers, and how these
properties are coupled and modified through material selection and processing
conditions. A focus will be on characterizing the mechanical properties and the
physical mechanisms of performance variation in devices for different
deformation modes. To analyze this system, a combination of experimental and
computational investigations will be conducted. The experimental research will
combine thin-film mechanics and optoelectronic device measurements along with
detailed morphological characterization. A micromechanical model will be
developed based on a multi-phase model consisting of pure polymer and fullerene
phases, and a miscible phase. A non-linear finite element method will then be
applied to integrate the component models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic solar
cells based on polymer-fullerene heterojunctions are a promising technology to
provide renewable energy that is cost competitive with fossil fuel sources.
Critical to the commercial success of this technology is the ability to flex the
solar cell during both fabrication and operation. If successful, this research
will help guide the development of highly flexible and durable organic solar
cells with improved performance over current state of the art devices.
Determining the fundamental relationships between the mechanical and electrical
properties of the polymer-fullerene film will also provide new insights into the
role of film morphology in the energy conversion process and suggest processing
strategies that maximize device performance. In addition to the research
findings, graduate students involved in the grant will be trained in a highly
interdisciplinary research environment. The principle investigators will also
contribute to an engineering summer camp for high school students that focuses
on solar power technologies.