* 1200994
* The Corona Problem:  Connections between Operator Theory, Function Theory and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Ronald Douglas, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Loredana Lanzani
* 01/31/2013
* USD 18,000.00

The award provides support to defray the expenses of US participants in "The
Corona Problem: Connections between Operator Theory, Function Theory and
Geometry", which will be held June 18-22, 2012, at the Fields Institute for
Research in the Mathematical Sciences in Toronto (Canada). The Corona Problem is
a fundamental question in complex analysis that has connections with operator
theory, function theory and geometry. A version of the problem asks for
necessary and sufficient conditions for a collection of bounded analytic
functions on a domain to generate the whole algebra as an ideal. Even though it
is an abstract mathematical question, this problem has found interesting
connections with questions in engineering via control theory.

NSF funding for this conference will be used to pay for the expenses of US based
participant support, with priority given to graduate students, post-docs,
younger faculty, members of underrepresented groups, and those without their own
source of funding. This meeting will bring together researchers in operator
theory, function theory, complex geometry and several complex variables to
discuss recent advances related to Corona Problem and in particular the overlap
between these areas of analysis. The workshop will be an opportunity to attract
some of the leading experts in function theory, several complex variables and
harmonic analysis together to discuss this question and related research
questions of interest. This workshop will create an environment in which
students and early career researchers could profit from the interaction with
such top experts.