* 1200196
* Collaborative Research: Stochastic Nonlinear Dynamic Simulation for Prediction of Seismic Ground Motion
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Kallol Sett, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 02/28/2014
* USD 222,069.00

Existing approaches for prediction of seismic ground motion and its associated
uncertainties mostly rely on fitting to a recorded motion (usually at the
surface) with known earthquake and site characteristics. However, application of
such obtained probabilistic ground motion to geotechnical engineering problems,
such as free-field probabilistic site response analysis or probabilistic soil-
structure interaction analysis, double counts the uncertainties and non-
linearities of the soil medium. The goal of this project is to develop a new,
physics-based methodology and an attendant computational tool to obtain a
complete probabilistic description (probability density function) of site-
specific ground motion time-history for a future seismic event by (1)
characterizing and quantifying uncertainties in bed-rock motion at a site during
future seismic event (right hand side (RHS) uncertainty), (2) characterizing and
quantifying uncertainties in site-specific soil properties (left hand side (LHS)
uncertainty), and (3) propagating the uncertain bed-rock motion through the
uncertain soil. The ability to obtain such probabilistic description of site-
specific ground motion time history will not only help in accurately assessing
performance of any civil infrastructure object, but also help in critical
decision-making process by the project owners, policy makers, and insurance
agencies. For example, if the predicted ground motion is too uncertain, then the
project owner may ask the following question: what step can be taken to reduce
that uncertainty? In answering that question, a process for evaluating the
relative contributions of RHS (source and path) and LHS (soil properties)
uncertain parameters to overall uncertainty in seismic motions will be
demonstrated as well. This will assist the project owners in mobilizing
resources for increase understanding of the most significant contributor of
uncertainty (source? site? path?), reduce the knowledge uncertainty, and
subsequently reduce the overall ground motion uncertainty. In addition, the
proposed development of theoretical capability to systematically propagate
different sources of uncertainties through the governing equation of mechanics
will greatly benefit the empirical modeling community in developing attenuation
models especially for the regions where there are limited or no data (for
example, eastern United States). Even for western United States, it will help
the empirical modelers in better constraining their models. Further, the
proposed technique will also provide insight in understanding spatial variation
of ground motion and its associated uncertainties (covariance structure), which
are under renewed interest in the research community, especially due to their
effects on seismic performances of lifeline structures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine the state-of-the-art stochastic
calculus with the principles of mechanics in developing a finite element based
stochastic computational framework to propagate random waves through random non
--linear heterogeneous media. It, to best of our knowledge, is the first attempt
to simulate wave propagation through nonlinear (elastic--plastic) heterogeneous
medium in the stochastic space considering both LHS and RHS uncertainties. Since
uncertainties in material properties and external forces are present in all
fields of engineering, the impact of this project will be much wider than just
in the area of geotechnical engineering. In order to ensure future of
developments from this project, high school science and mathematics teachers
will be involved (via RET supplement) through summer workshops so that they can
transmit their experiences to high school classrooms. The objective here is to
emphasize the importance of mathematics and physics in modeling physical
phenomena such as earthquake and plant an early seed among the future engineers
to seek a career in this field.