* 1200788
* Reliability-based Design and Manufacturing of Cellular Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* David Rosen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 07/31/2016
* USD 374,999.00

The research goal of this award is to enable a more effective multi-scale and
multivariate modeling process for the design of components comprised of
cellular, mesostructured materials by advancing our understanding of how
uncertainties at different scales affect product realization. This research will
explore fundamental theories and computational tools to cascade uncertainties
among meso- and macro-scales, manufacturing processes, and operating
environments. Specifically, the new method will resolve the imperative issue of
the need of accurate stochastic modeling across multiple length scales while
ensuring the link between stochastic models and physical realities. Deliverables
include, 1) the implementation of reliability-based synthesis methods to realize
robust systems by incorporating the effects of stochastic dependencies in
material, manufacturing, and various scales, 2) the experimental
characterization and model building of the cellular structures via additive
manufacturing technologies, and 3) the demonstration of the integrated design
synthesis method on aerospace components comprised of risk mitigated
mesostructured materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the research will
have a broad impact on the mechanical and materials engineering community, as
well as other research, education, and industrial programs by developing new
computational models and tools that can be used to design robust meso-structured
materials for aerospace or automobile components. A significant benefit to
society is expected by providing examples of parts that utilize material much
more efficiently than currently possible, leading to improved fuel economy for
cars and planes, among other benefits. The research experience for the graduate
and undergraduate programs will foster creative and statistical thinking among
an interdisciplinary group of faculty and students. Incorporating reliability-
based design and hands-on experience into the existing mechanical engineering
courses will help better education and train a new generation of engineers who
are better prepared to address the challenges in the future.