* 1200259
* Collaborative Research:  Highly Nonlinear Transducer Arrays for Structural Health Monitoring
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Piervincenzo Rizzo, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2016
* USD 244,772.00

This propoject will investigate the fundamental properties and applications of
novel arrays of nonlinear actuators for the nondestructive evaluation (NDE) and
structural health monitoring (SHM) of civil structures and materials. The
investigators will also explore the ability to use the nonlinear actuators for
focusing and harvesting elastic energy, and for imaging bulk materials. The
arrays of nonlinear actuators included in this study can generate highly
nonlinear solitary waves (HNSWs), which are compact non-dispersive stress waves
with a finite spatial dimension. The spatial dimension of these pulses is
independent of the wave amplitude and dependent only on the nonlinear material's
geometry. HNSWs hold promise to improve current NDE/SHM devices because of their
ability to support non-oscillatory, high amplitude signals that rely exclusively
on mechanical excitations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a fundamental level, the
investigators aim at understanding the behavior of arrays of highly nonlinear
actuators adjacent to different neighboring solid media. In particular, they
will: (i) study the ability to focus nonlinear waves as a function of the
properties of the adjacent media, (ii) design and implement methods to improve
transmission of the signal across the interface between the actuators and the
adjacent media; (iii) determine the limitations of signal power and the
degradation of performance due to failure of the highly nonlinear actuators.
From a purely applied perspective, the project will be devoted to the
application of HNSWs for the NDE/SHM of structural materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides the impact to the nonlinear dynamics scientific
community, the proposed research will have strategic importance to a broad range
of engineering applications. The NDE/SHM component of this research enables to
increase the safety of existing civil and aerospace structures. The ability to
harvest focused elastic energy has the potential to create new, sustainable
means to power small electronic devices and sensors. This research outcomes will
enable the development of novel transducers arrays for acoustic imaging, the
successful outcome of our research could impact the biomedical imaging
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some of the research outcomes and experiments
will be integrated into the investigators' teaching portfolio and into outreach
activities. This research will provide multidisciplinary training for all
participating students. As the submission of at least one patent application is
forecast, potential marketing opportunities will be explored. Finally, the
research results will be broadly disseminated through the submission of journal
articles and through the presentation at conferences of international audience.