* 1200521
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Wind Turbine Blade and Tower Health Monitoring and Failure Prognosis
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2016
* Valeria LaSaponara, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 03/31/2016
* USD 302,938.00

The overarching goal of this research is to derive a probabilistic structural
health monitoring and failure prognosis methodology that is applicable to wind
turbine structures. Specifically, the research activities will validate an in
situ sensing technology for damage detection in composite materials, utilize
experimental data for updating numerical models, and characterize structural
demand for failure prognosis of critical elements within wind turbine
structures. The study will embed thin films capable of spatial strain sensing in
fiber-reinforced composites for detecting localized damage at critical hotspots
within the blade structure. Instrumented scaled wind turbine blades will be
tested in the lab under static and dynamic load configurations. Subsequently,
data from full-scale field will be obtained using an existing wind turbine test
bed at the University of California-Davis campus. Damage estimates will be used
to update the resistance model of the structure based on the finite element
method. Finally, failure prognosis will be performed as a risk assessment step
in which global vibrations of the structure are used to update aero-elastic
analysis models and then used for estimating structural demand. This research
will yield risk levels that will provide a rational basis for wind turbine
maintenance, enhance structural safety, and reduce downtimes with ultimate goal
of lowering cost of wind energy. The results will be useful for understanding
wind turbine performance and the implications of varying input loads have on the
demand on the entire structural system. The methodology developed can be
applicable for failure prognosis of other large structures.

Wind turbines represent an important investment in sustainable energy
production. Large and geographically remote wind farm facilities require robust
and reliable information regarding the condition of individual turbine
structures to assure efficient and safe operation. Successful completion of this
project will lead to early-warning structural health monitoring systems that
will warn operators when damage to turbine blades poses a risk of structural
failure, and quantifies failure risks in term of probabilities. This project
integrates and advances disparate fields of composite structures, aero-elastic
structure interaction theory, structural dynamics, and nanotechnology-based
sensor application. Insights gained through the execution of this project will
also be applicable for failure prognosis of other engineered systems subjected
to random loadings. It will provide a link between damage detection and risk
analysis that will provide a basis for decision making to protect structures and
the public from danger. Educational broader impacts will also be achieved by
integrating the design and construction of scaled wind turbines with the
undergraduate mechanical engineering Capstone design courses. Underrepresented,
female, and economically disadvantaged students will also be recruited from
various campus groups for participating and actively contributing to this
project.