* 1200455
* Quantified dynamics of nonlinear dispersive PDE
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Justin Holmer, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2016
* USD 287,541.00

Nonlinear dispersive wave equations,in particular the nonlinear Schrodinger,
nonlinear Klein-Gordon, and Korteweg-de Vries equations, can exhibit coherent
and stable solutions called solitons, as well as solutions that experience blow-
up in finite time. The principal investigator will prove rigorous results that
give quantitative descriptions of solutions to these equations in a number of
scientifically relevant contexts. Among these are results describing the effect
of a small random external field on the dynamics of solitons or blow-up
solutions, the effect of interaction forces between multiple solitons on their
dynamics, the stabilizing influence of a rapidly oscillating nonlinear
coefficient on a soliton, and the extent to which a strong confining external
field can reduce the effective dimension of the dynamics. The principal
investigator has previously developed new techniques based on symplectic
projection, and its relation to the Hamiltonian structure of these equations, to
study related problems. He will continue to refine and extend his methods to
address these more sophisticated problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The equations
studied in this project arise as important physical models. Solitons appear as
well-localized stable structures, while blow-up is associated with a sharp
focusing of a wave and ultimate break-down of the physical model. For example,
the nonlinear Schrodinger equation is the wave function for a collection of
ultracold atoms in a Bose-Einstein condensate. Since its Nobel-prize-winning
realization in the laboratory in 1995, further experiments have produced
solitons and finite-time blow-up, and there is now a large body of physics
literature motivating many of the problems this project will consider. This work
brings together pure mathematics, numerical analysis, and physics. The principal
investigator collaborates with faculty at several institutions in the U.S. and
overseas and supervises several graduate students on work related to the
project. Certain aspects of the project can be adapted to be accessible to
undergraduates, especially those components involving computer simulation and
the production of web demonstrations.