* 1200465
* Effect of Inhomogeneous Deformation on the Response of Shape Memory Alloy Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Stelios Kyriakides, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2018
* USD 389,289.00

Shape memory alloys (SMA) like NiTi are increasingly being used in a range of
applications including damping and energy absorption, biomedical devices, MEMS,
morphing of structures, etc. The goal of this project is to study the role of
localized deformations associated with stress induced phase transformation in
SMAs on the response of such structures. Modeling the response of these
structures to bending, torsion and tension/compression loadings requires
material models capable of capturing differences between tension and
compression, multiaxial loadings and the potential for localized inhomogeneous
deformations. Although some aspects of SMA behavior can be captured by modern
constitutive models, localized deformation is not. A combination of experiment
and analysis will be used to bridge this gap. Experiments on simple SMA
structures like bending of tubes, axial crushing of shells, and lateral crushing
of clusters of tubes will be used to illustrate how localized deformations alter
the structural response. To support the modeling of such nonlinearities a
material characterization effort will be undertaken in parallel to form the
basis of adding the missing features to constitutive models. This involves
measuring the material behavior under tension, compression and biaxial loading
histories at different temperatures and rates. The results will form the basis
for calibrating a multi-scale modeling effort to include the missing features in
robust three-dimensional constitutive models. The models will in turn be tested
by implementing them in finite element models to simulate the structural
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves a collaboration between
an experimentalist expert on material and structural instabilities and a
theorist expert on modeling of smart materials. The cooperation will generate
broadly trained researchers who can become future leaders in multidisciplinary
research in academia and industry. Undergraduate participation in the project is
used to attract them to graduate school. Laboratory demonstrations to high-
school pupils including a significant Hispanic representation are used to expand
their interest in engineering and science.