* 1200841
* Collaborative Research: Inverse-Consistent Determination of Effective Young's Modulus for Human Lung
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Olusegun Ilegbusi, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2016
* USD 299,208.00

The research objective of this award is to use a combination of computational
tools, radiological imaging and image processing methods to determine consistent
effective elastic properties of human lung in a non-invasive manner. Such data,
which do not currently exist, will enable accurate simulation of lung dynamics
for targeted radiotherapy. Studies conducted under this award will reproduce
lung geometry from computed tomography imaging, simulate by means of
computational and image processing tools the airflow and spatial deformation of
the lungs, and iteratively estimate the effective tissue elasticity for known
values of airflow and deformation predicted using the computational tool. The
estimated tissue elastic properties will be validated by comparison with manual
landmark tracking established by a clinical expert.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research, if successful, will significantly improve knowledge base on
biomechanical properties of human tissue structures, and establish a property-
performance relationship between the tissues and a wide range of clinical
procedures. The approach could be used in a radiotherapy clinical workflow
designed to track tumor motion and develop improved radiotherapy treatment that
ultimately improves patient's treatment outcome and reduces overall cost. The
knowledge gained from this study could be extended to other anatomical sites
including biomechanical stress-induced plaque rupture in cardiovascular disease,
estimation of cardiac tissue elasticity, and to address variations in imaging
modality. This award is multidisciplinary, involving collaboration among
scientists, engineers and clinicians at three institutions. The education plan
focuses on nurturing the next generation of scientists and engineers by
providing them with an opportunity to work on challenging problems of practical
importance across disciplines. Undergraduate and graduate students will be
engaged in the research, and will benefit from integration of research findings
into classroom instruction and the multidisciplinary training in diverse fields.