* 1200857
* Mechanics of Nanoporous Metal Foams
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Antonia Antoniou, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 08/31/2013
* USD 75,000.00

The research objective of this award is to experimentally study, via
nanomechanical tests, the effect of internal geometry on the mechanical
properties of nanoporous metal foams. The ultimate goal is to provide
understanding of the extent to which the mechanical properties can be enhanced
via intelligent material design of nanoporous foams. Nanoporous metal foams
consist of an interconnected network of nanosized struts and show great promise
in a variety of applications including batteries, fuel cells, sensors, etc. due
to their large surface to volume ratios. Due to their unique synthesis technique
by dealloying that results in distinct geometrical structure with nanosized
features, nanoporous metal foam properties cannot be simply inferred from the
properties of bulk metal foams or other nanostructured materials. Successful
completion of the proposed research will establish a deeper understanding of the
structure-property relation of these novel materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
majority of the experimental work will be performed by graduate students who
will gain invaluable experience in nanotechnology research. Through Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program the PI will attract undergraduate
students to work on parts of this project. The PI will also work with local
high-school teachers through the Georgia Intern-Fellowships for Teachers Program
(GIFT) to introduce results from the proposed work into demos/experiments that
introduce nanotechnology and energy concepts to pre-college students.