* 1200385
* Scalable Capillary-Driven Assembly of Asymmetric Nanoparticles via Inkjet Printing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Christopher Li, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2015
* USD 250,001.00

This grant provides funding for the investigation of capillary-driven self-
assembly of asymmetric nanoparticles in inkjet printing of colloidal suspensions
for scalable nanomanufacturing. Low-cost inkjet printing for the delivery of
solution-processed functional materials onto flexible substrates has become a
revolutionary technology for roll-to-roll processing of electronics and
photovoltaics. However, the current technology is incapable of producing
nanosized features and well-controlled patterns due to the well-known coffee-
stain effect. Asymmetric nanoparticles can break the symmetry during capillary-
driven self-assembly and may lead to improved feature resolution during
printing. Janus nanoparticles (JNPs), which refer to colloidal particles with
two regions of different surface chemical composition, will be used in this
study to facilitate particle assembly due to the orientation-dependent
interactions. The project that combines novel nanoparticle synthesis, multiscale
modeling, in-situ observation, and advanced characterization will focus on the
fundamental understanding of orientation-dependent interactions of JNPs with a
moving contact line and a liquid-vapor interface away from equilibrium.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will lead to
several technology advancements. Using JNPs as solid surfactants, the deposition
of JNPs can be better controlled to avoid coffee-ring patterns commonly
encountered in inkjet-printed structures. Using JNPs as tunable building blocks
will lead to a large class of dynamically switchable micro-devices and smart
surfaces. The proposed work will help establish important correlations between
the assembly and deposition of JNP-based inks from evaporating colloidal drops
and thin films, as well as the JNP design, ink formulations, processing
conditions, and substrate properties. Such knowledge will potentially enable
environmentally-benign, large-area inkjet printing, spray deposition, and slot-
die coating processes for high-throughput production of next generation flexible
electronics. This project will build an exciting interdisciplinary
collaboration, enable new course materials, and directly benefit undergraduate
researchers and K-12 teachers via Drexel?s REU and RET sites, as well as women
and under-represented minority students.