* 1200647
* Collaborative Research:  PIM/GMM--Micro-Manufacturing of Ceramics by Combining Powder Injection Molding and Green Micromachining
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Burak Ozdoganlar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 04/30/2016
* USD 307,513.00

This award supports research on fabrication of micro-scale ceramic structures by
combining green-state micro-machining and powder-injection molding processes.
The research objective is to gain fundamental knowledge on the combined process
through integrated experimental and modeling studies. The specific research
approach will include (1) analyzing the green micromachining process for
different ceramic materials, powder and binder characteristics, and process
parameters to determine their effect on process characteristics, including
geometric quality and productivity, and (2) characterizing and modeling
mechanical and geometric characteristics of parts fabricated using the combined
process. The research will include aluminum-nitride and silicon-carbide as
sample systems, and will demonstrate the effectiveness of findings by
fabricating industrial ceramic parts. The educational objectives include
enhancing the future manufacturing workforce, and improving existing
manufacturing curricula, and attracting students to manufacturing through pre-
college outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of
this research will lead to rapid, predictable, reproducible, low cost, and
accurate manufacture of ceramic parts with micro-scale features. Ceramics offer
many advantages such as high-temperature strength, chemical stability, thermal
conductivity, and electrical insulation. Although the prevailing micro-
fabrication technologies have been effective in creating micro-electronics
components and sensors from semiconductor materials, we currently do not an
effective micro-manufacturing technique to create three-dimensional micro-
structures from ceramics. This approach will provide and effective way to make
ceramic components with micro-structures, thereby facilitating exciting
technological and scientific advances. Micro-scale ceramic devices and parts
will benefit many industries, including medical devices, electronics/lighting
systems, and clean energy technologies. The knowledge gained from this work will
provide in-depth understanding of green micromachining and powder-injection
molding processes to facilitate fabricating parts in a predictable fashion.
Collaboration with industry and national laboratories will enable rapid transfer
of research findings and our technology to industry, thereby impacting the
advanced manufacturing industry. This research is also critical for the United
States in its efforts to gain back the manufacturing leadership through advanced
manufacturing efforts.