* 1200597
* Concurrent Design for Functional Reliability and Failure Prognosis of Complex Engineered Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Pingfeng Wang, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 04/30/2016
* USD 329,407.00

The research objective of this award is to create a new system design paradigm,
referred to as resilience-driven system design, which enables concurrent
developments of reliable system functions and accurate prognosis of function
failures of complex engineered systems under uncertainty. Resilience implies the
ability to sense and withstand adverse events, and to recover from the effects
of the adverse events. This research will quantify engineering resilience with a
rigorous mathematical formula, develop new methods for predictive resilience
analysis, and further create a new design paradigm that offers a unique
framework to consider prognosis of system failures and failure
mitigation/recovery activities in the early system design stage. The research
findings will be validated and demonstrated using benchmarking design problems,
as well as practical design applications addressing the critical demands in
aviation systems and sustainable energy systems based on the research
collaborations with two leading industry partners.

If successful, this research will lead to a design paradigm shift from
conventional design for reliability to design for resilience by developing new
design theory and tools. The research results will promote the understanding on
preventing system failures through designing resilience into engineered systems.
The new system design paradigm will likely stimulate growth in several high
technology industries such as the multi-billion dollar green energy generation,
general aviation, automobile, and more which suffer from catastrophic system
failures and high maintenance costs at the post system design stages. This
research will also offers unique research and educational experiences for
researchers across the fields of engineering design, health monitoring and
failure prognosis, and will train students in an interdisciplinary learning
environment. A wide range of dissemination and outreach programs will be
accomplished, with emphasis on promoting data sharing, attracting students to
engineering career and research opportunities, and participation from women and
underrepresented groups.