* 1200247
* Collaborative Research:  Laser-Assisted Orifice-Free Fabrication of Viscous Alginate Microspheres
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2012,10/31/2012
* Douglas Chrisey, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 10/31/2012
* USD 286,422.00

The objective of this collaborative study is to test the hypothesis that
encapsulated microspheres with a uniform size can be controllably fabricated
from a highly viscous fluid system using a novel process not based on the use of
an orifice. Orifice-based techniques limit the flexibility in rapidly producing
different size microspheres from viscous fluids. The laser-assisted orifice-free
fabrication technique, utilizing a metallic foil as the dynamic release layer,
will be especially suitable for fluids with a viscosity on the order of 100
mPa's or higher. Key research activities include 1) demonstrating and optimizing
the proposed laser-assisted forward transfer technique using the process
dynamics knowledge gained from a time-resolved imaging study and mathematical
modeling; and 2) elucidating the fluid dynamics of the laser-assisted
fabrication of encapsulated microspheres. Sodium alginate will be used as a
model fluid to encapsulate living cells. In particular, rat endothelial cell
suspension will be added to the sodium alginate solutions as a representative
active ingredient to be encapsulated. The fabricated microspheres will be
experimentally evaluated in terms of physical and biological
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Success in this research will expand the
knowledge for viscous microsphere fabrication using metallic-foil assisted laser
forward transfer. The precise control of viscous encapsulated microsphere size
is of great manufacturing importance since the size distribution can determine
the success in most microsphere applications such as tissue engineering and drug
delivery. Broader impacts also will include a pipeline of well-trained students
ready to undertake careers in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
disciplines. With the new knowledge gained from this study, Biomedical
Manufacturing and Processing of Biomaterials courses will be further developed
to expose students to state-of-the-art advances in manufacturing technologies.