* 1200120
* Collaborative Research: Automatic Behavior Monitoring for In-depth Analysis of Construction Fatalities and Injuries
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Feniosky Pena-Mora, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* elise miller-hooks
* 04/30/2015
* USD 68,328.00

The objective of this research is to explore computer vision-based monitoring
methods, enabling the automatic and constant observation of construction workers
for in-depth safety analysis. Taking into account the fact that the number of
fatalities in construction remains the highest among all industries, and that
approximately 80 to 90 percent of accidents are strongly associated with
workers' unsafe behavior and acts, the automatic capture and systematic
understanding of unsafe behavior has great potential to contribute to the
reduction and prevention of injuries and fatalities in construction.
Specifically, using video and image sequences, the proposed system estimates the
2D location of a human skeleton, computes the 3D location of body joints, and
identifies the worker?s unsafe motions using machine learning techniques. To
investigate the feasibility and potential of the proposed methods for behavior
monitoring, several representative motions in traumatic (e.g., falls) and
ergonomic (e.g., overexertion and repetitive motions) injuries are tested as a
case study.

If successful, the findings of this research could lead to the prevention of
injuries and fatalities in the construction industry by providing an in-depth
understanding of human behavior and actions in terms of safety. Further, the
motion analysis techniques developed in this project can be applied to diverse
industries (e.g., manufacturing and shipbuilding) where labor is an important
resource, providing a means to automatically collect data on human behavior and
thus enabling its effective understanding. In addition, the education plan
(e.g., the course that deals with understanding human behavior in safety, and
the workshop planned for industry professionals and students) will provide
effective education of future managers and engineers, both of whom will improve
safety in the US workplace. Further, female and underrepresented students will
be recruited and integrated into the planned research and education activities
(e.g., safety seminars and workshops and interdisciplinary research
participation opportunities).