* 1200834
* Nuclear Rigidity Scales with Tissue Elasticity and Directs Cell Fate
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Dennis Discher, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 04/30/2015
* USD 375,000.00

The research objective of this award is to elucidate a potential relationship
between the mechanical and biochemical properties of the nucleus in a tissue
cell to the mechanical microenvironment of different tissues. For example, brain
tissue is soft while bone is far stiffer, raising the question as to whether
mechanical differences between tissues are reflected in mechanical differences
between nuclei in these tissues. A combination of single cell mechanical tools,
modern biochemical characterization tools, and statistical mechanics tools will
be developed in application to a range of human and mouse tissues thru isolated
nuclei. The nucleus confines, protects, and regulates the genome that is common
to the roughly 200 different cell types in the adult. The nucleus also possesses
an assembly of structural proteins called lamins that are likely to have a key
mechanobiological role, but biochemical analyses will extend to a more complete
set of nuclear proteins. Cultured cells in which the level of a given component
is varied will be studied with fluorescence-coupled micro-aspiration methods to
determine the impact on mechanical properties, and stem cell cultures will
ultimately provide insight into the impact on differentiation processes. In
parallel, nuclear assemblies will be simulated with an increasing level of
molecular detail by coarse-grained statistical mechanical methods developed for
simple cells such as red blood cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies could
add significantly to the field's understanding of tissue and nuclear mechanics
in relation to lineage-dependent gene expression, i.e. differentiation, and they
could benefit developmental physics, and regenerative medicine among other
fields. The educational plan focuses on development of a course on stem cells
and proteomics from a soft matter perspective. Local high school science
teachers will assist in nuclear isolations as well as nano- and micro-
mechanical characterizations, with the aim of dissemination, while outreach
through research experiences for undergraduates will help to encourage students
to pursue higher degrees.