* 1200820
* Deconstructable Systems for Sustainable Design of Steel and Composite Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Jerome Hajjar, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 06/30/2017
* USD 264,400.00

This project explores a new design approach, Design for Deconstruction that has
emerged to facilitate future reuse of materials. The objectives of the proposed
research are to develop new structural system concepts and establish
comprehensive life-cycle assessment for deconstructable steel and composite
steel/concrete construction. Design for Deconstruction coupled with the use of
recycled materials will facilitate sustainable construction. Composite
steel/concrete floor systems, by far the most ubiquitous type of structural
steel framing for commercial and institutional buildings, is a key focus of this
work. These floor systems currently require monolithic construction to ensure
adequate performance. While these floor system materials may be recycled,
currently they cannot be refabricated and reused in buildings. The proposed
system maintains the efficiency benefits offered by composite action of steel
and concrete construction, including reduced steel beam sizes and flexible floor
framing patterns, while directly addressing the need to reduce waste in the
construction industry. The research includes quantification of deconstructable
connection behavior through conducting full-scale component tests of clamping
connections, and conducting full-scale tests and corroborating analyses of the
proposed deconstructable composite floor system to validate the integrity of the
system. The project includes advancement of the methodologies for conducting
environmental life-cycle assessment of deconstructable systems, and developing
design strategies for deconstructable steel framing systems.

The proposed research is expected to establish fundamental strategies for
predicting the behavior and design of sustainable steel structures through
combining prefabrication strategies with Design for Deconstruction to achieve
direct reusability of composite floor systems. Coupled with advancement in life-
cycle assessment strategies for deconstructable steel framing systems, this
research is expected to provide fundamental knowledge towards encouraging and
codifying a reduction in material use and associated environmental impacts in
the steel construction industry. Since building construction accounts for a
significant portion of all environmental impacts associated with buildings,
reusing composite floors will have significant environmental benefits.