* 1200318
* Tool Temperature Measurement during Diamond Turning of Steel
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Thomas Dow, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 06/30/2016
* USD 495,830.00

The research objective of this award is to measure the temperature at the
tool/workpiece interface during precision machining for depths of cut less than
10 micrometers to an accuracy of 5 degrees Celsius. To make this measurement, a
number of important sensors will be added to a precision lathe that already has
3-dimensional force sensors. Visual and infrared microscope systems will be
added to view the material flow in the chip at small depths of cut. These will
provide an overall view of the temperature distribution in relation to the
chip/tool interface. In addition, a unique elliptically shaped, light-guiding
diamond tool will be fabricated to focus the infrared radiation from the tool
tip into a spectrometer and improve the sensitivity of the peak tool temperature
measurement. A unique wear measurement technique will be used to compare the
tool wear with changes in material, depth of cut, temperature and cutting
distance. Keeping the tool edge sharp and avoiding degradation with time are key
factors in machining materials like steel where chemical wear due to temperature
dominates. Models of the machining process are available to calculate tool
temperature, but measurements are needed to corroborate these results. If
successful, the benefits and impact of this research will be improved knowledge
of precision manufacturing processes and education of scientists and engineers.
The proposed temperature measurement is needed to 1) corroborate models of the
machining process and 2) predict tool wear when machining important structural
materials like steel. Optical and precision mechanical systems play a pervasive
role in modern life in the US and require nanometer-scale fabrication processes
to yield the required performance. There is a critical need to improve these
manufacturing processes, to visualize new processes and to educate the next
generation of students needed to create them. The technical results will be
published in engineering journals and integrated into university courses. The
graduate and undergraduate students involved will develop expertise in key areas
like machine design, control, materials response, dynamic systems and precision
manufacturing.