* 1200560
* Experimental and Modeling Study of Risk from Ember Storms
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Nigel Kaye, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 200,448.00

Spot fires in wildfire environment are caused by embers lofted into the
atmosphere and blown well ahead of the main front of the wildfire. The objective
of this research is to establish an experimentally verified stochastic model for
ember flight in wildfires. The research program will build on existing
deterministic models for ember flight and develop analytical and numerical
models that account for the inherently stochastic nature of the problem. The
models will include parameterizations of the probability distribution functions
for ember size and shape, fire size and intensity, and the turbulent velocity
fluctuations in fire plume and the atmospheric boundary layer. The models will
be verified through a series of ember flight experiments conducted in a large
scale boundary layer wind tunnel. The experiments will measure lofting height
and downwind transport distance for a broad range of sizes, shapes, and wind
conditions. This will provide experimental measurements of the flight distance
for lofted embers. The experimentally verified numerical model will be used to
perform parametric sensitivity studies to establish those parameters that most
greatly influence the downwind risk of ember spotting and starting fire.
&lt;br/&gt;The spot fires can cause significant property damage and can endanger
the lives of home owners and firefighters. Understanding the mechanics of how
embers are lofted up into the atmosphere and then blown downwind will greatly
enhance our ability to predict the risk of spot fires and improve our response
to such threats. The project will transform the way that ember flight is modeled
by addressing the random nature of the processes involved. The ultimate goal is
to mitigate property losses caused by spot fires in wildfire environment. The
research team will develop a public outreach program to educate school students
about the risks from wildfires, and to encourage students to pursue careers in
science and engineering. The outreach program will be focused on South Carolina
schools through demonstrations of the tests and videos and other materials that
will be made available on the web.