* 1200089
* Medial Zones: Foundations and Engineering Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Horea Ilies, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 08/31/2016
* USD 375,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop a fundamentally new approach
to understand and establish spatial properties of mechanical parts in terms of
simple interacting constructs related to part functionality and manufacturing
processes. In the context of engineering design, the novel concept of a medial
zone provides an explicit representation of the correspondence between
mechanical/functional characteristics and spatial properties. More precisely,
medial zones provide topologically valid and parameterized initial design
solutions. Due to the fact that the medial zones fuse some of the critical
geometric and topological properties of both the domain itself and of its medial
axis, reformulating problems in terms of medial zones affords the ?best of both
worlds? in a variety of applications such as shape synthesis in conceptual
design, robotic and autonomous navigation, and design automation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will provide
the first combinatorial model of a part that can be used to explicitly represent
the correspondence between mechanical/functional characteristics of shapes and
their spatial properties. This, in turn, provides a powerful paradigm for
automatically synthesizing topologically correct, and functionally valid
mechanical designs. Furthermore, this new framework will stimulate critical new
avenues of interdisciplinary research at UConn and beyond. The intuitive nature
of geometric skeletons will be used as a vehicle to illustrate non-intuitive
engineering behavior during targeted outreach activities to K-12 students,
teachers and local school district serving groups that have traditionally been
underrepresented in engineering.