* 1200038
* Functionally-Active Reinforcement in Metal Matrix Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Yongmei Jin, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 04/30/2016
* USD 305,681.00

This grant provides funding to develop a modeling, processing, and fabrication
protocol for the creation of a structural, multifunctional metal matrix
composite designed for both strength and damping effectiveness. Damping refers
to a material?s ability to suppress mechanical and acoustic vibrations. It is
important as a means to improve material performance, extend a component?s
lifetime, and reduce unwanted noise during device operation. Specifically, this
study will explore methods to fabricate composites that contain dispersed
structural reinforcements that are capable of exhibiting ferroelectric behavior.
If properly prepared, when placed within structural metallic materials, such
reinforcements can be actuated in ways that will improve a component?s ability
to dissipate unwanted vibrations. Implementation and optimization of this
beneficial effect will rely on the ability to successfully process
microstructural architectures in appropriate phase states. This will necessitate
the adaptation of a low temperature electroforming process capable of preserving
the ferroelectric and/or piezoelectric characteristics of the reinforcement
through manufacturing. Phase field modeling will be employed to provide robust
sensitivity- and benefit-analyses that will guide the highly-sensitive
processing-structure-property-performance relationships that are possible in
these material systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will
provide the manufacturing foundation for new damping-effective structural
composites. Additionally, the project will exemplify a successful implementation
of the advanced and broader design concept of material multifunctionality,
wherein traditionally-passive microstructural constituents are instead
incorporated in ways that enable an active (or ?smart?) response to a particular
application need. Future development of new multifunctional material systems
will most likely proceed in a similar manner; that is, through the innovative
development or adaptation of new processing techniques as guided by advanced,
physically-faithful, computationally-intensive modeling and predictive
methodologies.