* 1200019
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Deciphering the Mechanisms of Wear to Enable High Performance Tip-Based Nanomanufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* John Carlisle, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2016
* USD 446,103.00

Tip-based nanomanufacturing (TBN) is a promising and scalable platform for
fabricating nanostructures en masse with high precision. All TBN processes hinge
on the availability of nanoscale atomic force microscope (AFM) tips that can
survive the long-lasting and harsh conditions of TBN processes without
substantial changes in composition or geometry. However, the scientific
understanding of nanoscale wear, particularly under the extreme conditions
encountered as TBN processes are scaled up, is lacking. This grant provides
funding to rigorously develop the fundamental science of nanoscale wear that is
needed to realize robust probes for high-performance, high-rate TBN processes.
The integrated, interdisciplinary research plan consists of advanced atomistic
simulations integrated with continuum models, and innovative experiments that
include in-situ wear studies combining AFM with electron microscopy. The
research will focus on understanding the performance of ultrananocrystalline
diamond (UNCD) AFM probes manufactured by the industrial partner, Advanced
Diamond Technologies (ADT), as well as conventional commercial probes based on
silicon. Interactions with additional industrial collaborators pursuing
commercial TBN processes will be leveraged to select relevant conditions for the
studies, and to optimize the design of scalable TBN processes and probes based
on the research findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will
transform a broad range of TBN methods from bench-top prototype processes to
commercially-viable applications. This will be achieved by realizing new
approaches to minimize tip wear in scaled-up TBN processes. The understanding of
wear that is developed will apply to the design and fabrication of reliable
probes for a broad range of TBN methods. Tangible outcomes will include the
deployment of UNCD probes for high performance TBN, and the establishment of
operating conditions for achieving improved performance in commercially-viable
TBN. The education and outreach activities will lead to a new short-course on
TBN aimed at industry audiences, research experiences for high school science
teachers, and the advanced training of students.