* 1200484
* Netshape Gradient Aerogel Articles Reinforced By Hybrid Molecules and Polymers
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Sadhan Jana, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 04/30/2016
* USD 351,575.00

This research bridges the gap between manufacturing capability of current
technology and the need to manufacture flexible, netshape gradient silica
aerogel articles. Potential uses for these porous gel materials include
insulation for cryogenic fuel tanks, for example, or filtration media for
removal of particulates or volatile organic compounds from air. The fundamental
mechanisms of aerogel reinforcement by hybrid molecules and conformal coating of
polymer crosslinks are investigated with the ultimate aim to manufacture
stronger silica aerogel articles with negligible changes in density and porosity
and strong control of hydrophobicity. This research utilizes a novel method for
homogeneous reinforcement of aerogels using chemical reactions between small,
optimal quantities of molecularly mixed, very small (approximately 1 nanometer)
size hybrid organic-inorganic molecules or silane-endcapped polyurethanes with
the silica particles. The research also develops a new ?one-pot? manufacturing
method for aerogel articles of complicated shapes; the steps of gelation,
chemical reinforcement, and drying are all carried out sequentially in the same
mold to dramatically reduce the manufacturing time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of this research are expected to yield understanding of manufacturing of
complex shapes of mesoporous, netshape aerogel specimens with gradients of
density, porosity and surface energy. Given the large investment in research on
aerogels and significant development of understanding of chemistry of aerogel
reinforcement in batch processes over the past decade, this systematic program
dissecting the source of structure and property generation in aerogel system
will benefit a wide range of scientists and engineers in the field. It is
anticipated that several derivatives of the proposed research work will be soon
developed by other researchers to accommodate inorganic aerogels derived from
alumina or organic aerogels derived from polymeric sources. Several outreach
functions will be carried out in this research to attract minority and female
students to STEM education.