* 1200800
* High-Resolution 3D Topology Optimization via Multi-Density Higher-Order Elements
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Xiaoping Qian, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 08/31/2015
* USD 0.00

The research objective of this award is to create an efficient computer method
for high-resolution topology optimization of structures in three-dimension (3D)
so that fine details in 3D can be topologically optimized. The new approach aims
to improve the efficiency and resolution of topological design by decoupling the
topology representation from the analysis elements. More specifically, we will
create a new method: using efficient higher-order elements for analysis and
embedding multiple density variables in each element for high-resolution
topology representation. Our research objective is thus to understand how the
order of the analysis elements and the distribution of density variables within
each element affect the resulting design resolution, the analysis efficiency and
optimization stability, and upon which to further develop a formal method that
enables efficient and stable high-resolution 3D topology optimization.

Successful completion of this research would result in both theoretical
breakthroughs and practical advances in topology optimization. Theoretically,
this research would offer a new method for topology optimization: the use of
higher-order multi-density elements. It represents a significant shift in
topology optimization methods where traditionally only single-density linear
elements are used. Practically, this research would lead to an efficient method
for high resolution topology optimization of 3D structures, which is
prohibitively expensive with existing methods. This research would positively
impact a host of industries ranging from automotive, aerospace to manufacturing
industry where topology optimization of 3D structures are urgently needed. The
resulting method, when applied to multiphysics systems in hybrid-vehicle
development, would provide a key enabling technology for the advancement of
modern vehicle systems. The method would also enable the utilization of additive
manufacturing capability to cost-effectively fabricate previously difficult to-
manufacture, topologically optimized geometries for substantial performance
improvements in aviation and transportation industry.