* 1200787
* Spider Orb-Web Inspired Cognitive, Fault-Tolerant Fiber Optic Sensor Network for SHM under Harsh Conditions
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Hai Xiao, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 10/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

The research objective of this award is to learn the sensor fabrication method,
the optical cross-connecting architecture, the network framework topology and
the system autonomy that is required to create a cognitive and fault-tolerant
fiber optic sensor network for structural health monitoring under harsh
conditions. The approach is to examine and learn from the unique sensing
features of the spider orb-web, formulate the critical sensor and network
parameters, and apply this knowledge to the design and demonstration of a robust
fiber optic sensor network. Specifically, a new method will be derived for
fabrication of robust fiber Bragg grating sensors using high repetition rate
femtosecond laser pulse trains. A new lossless cross-connector will be designed
to enable the meshed sensor network. The theoretical model of the optical
network topology will be established to obtain a fault-tolerant network
management methodology for multiplexing and organizing a large number of
sensors. The interactions between the pump and probe signals will be studied to
find a time-domain technique for fast and fault-tolerant sensor interrogation.

If successful, the research will result in an enabling sensing technology for in
situ monitoring of the health status of critical civil infrastructure under
harsh conditions. The studies will enrich the knowledge base of monitoring
technologies for safe operation of the nation?s civil infrastructure, especially
for improving mission-critical services and emergency responses during extreme
events such as earthquakes. The research will also be integrated into academics
through various educational and outreach actives such as undergraduate and
graduate course enrichment, support of senior design projects, hands-on
workshops for 7th/8th grade students, and outreach to high school students.