* 1200117
* Transforming Robust Design Concept into a Novel Geotechnical Design Tool
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Charng Juang, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2016
* USD 406,664.00

In traditional factor-of-safety-based or reliability-based geotechnical
engineering design, safety requirements are first satisfied, and then a design
with lowest cost is usually selected as the final design. However, the lowest
cost design may become unsatisfactory if the actual variation of "noise factors"
(i.e., "hard-to-control" factors such as soil parameters) greatly exceeds the
level of variation assumed during the design phase. The cost optimization
becomes irrelevant if the "robustness" of the design against noise factors
cannot be assured. A more rational approach is to achieve design robustness
which can ultimately reduce the cost. To this end, a "Robust Geotechnical
Design" methodology will be developed, which considers robustness explicitly, in
addition to the cost and safety requirements. This project will then transform
the Robust Design concept into a novel, computer-aided geotechnical engineering
design tool. Robust design aims to minimize the effect of uncertainty on the
"system" without actually eliminating the sources of uncertainty. The specific
objectives of this research are to (1) develop a Robust Geotechnical Design
methodology to achieve design safety, robustness, and efficiency, (2)
demonstrate the applicability of this new methodology in braced excavations in
urban areas, (3) disseminate the new methodology to the engineering profession,
and (4) develop human resources by training highly qualified personnel for the
geotechnical field. Robust Geotechnical Design is implemented in a fully
automated framework through the Markov-Chain Monte Carlo technique. The
intellectual innovation of the project includes the development of a new
geotechnical design tool that is expected to have a broad positive impact on
geotechnical practice. In addition to the novelty of Robust Geotechnical Design,
the research addresses an important need in urban construction, namely,
improving the safety of braced excavations. Adopting this new design methodology
can reduce the effects of "noise factors" and thus, reduce or eliminate the
possible adverse social and economic impacts caused by excavation failure and/or
excavation-induced damages to the adjacent structures. Open-source computer
codes for Robust Geotechnical Design methodology can be a useful learning and
development aid to other investigators and engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; If
successfully executed, this research can refresh geotechnical engineering
solutions with the newly developed Robust Geotechnical Design methodology. This
research stands to positively impact the design and construction of braced
excavations in particular, and geotechnical engineering design practice in
general. Improved design methods can benefit society by eliminating or reducing
the chance of excavation failure that may cause an adverse social and economic
impact. The developed Robust Geotechnical Design methods can potentially be used
in related fields beyond geotechnical engineering. Broader impacts are achieved
through dissemination of the developed database of case histories, robust design
methodology, open-source computer codes, research findings, integration of
research and education with special attention to recruiting and nurturing
research assistants from underrepresented groups.