* 1200065
* Efficient Simulation of Risk and Performance Measures, With Applications to the Design and Operation of Nuclear Power Plants
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Marvin Nakayama, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2016
* USD 205,000.00

This award provides funding for the development of efficient simulation methods
for estimating risk measures and other performance metrics. A primary focus of
the research is on variance-reduction techniques (VRTs) for estimating a
quantile and constructing confidence intervals for it. &lt;br/&gt;Quantiles are
commonly employed to measure risk in a diverse range of application areas. For
example, Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) regulations sometimes specify that
risk is measured using a "95/95 criterion," which requires computing a 95%
confidence interval for a 0.95-quantile. To satisfy the NRC requirements,
practitioners currently resort to crude Monte Carlo, which can be hugely
inefficient, so the research on constructing confidence intervals for quantiles
with VRTs has the potential for altering the way uncertainty and safety analyses
are performed in the nuclear industry. In finance, where a quantile is known as
a "value-at-risk," there are banking rules for capital requirements given as a
function of a 0.99-quantile. Other fields in which the research on efficient
quantile estimation can be applied include project planning, telecommunications,
manufacturing, supply chains, and computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, the research will yield new simulation methodologies to increase
efficiency, sometimes by orders of magnitude, of estimators of quantiles and
confidence intervals for them. The construction of confidence intervals when
applying VRTs will involve developing new estimators for the variance constant
appearing in the VRT quantile estimator?s central limit theorem. Moreover, other
techniques for building confidence intervals for quantiles also will be
investigated.