* 1200940
* Improving Sustainability of Atomic Layer Deposition: a Hierarchical Systems Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Chris Yuan, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2016
* USD 475,752.00

This research project is to study and improve the sustainability performance of
Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD) through a hierarchical systems approach. ALD is a
key enabling nanotechnology that has been adopted in the semiconductor
manufacturing industry. Currently ALD is under rapid development for a broad
array of industrial applications including solar cells, fuel cells, lithium-ion
batteries, medical devices, sensors, etc. However, ALD has significant
sustainability issues due to its heavy use of toxic chemicals, potential
generation of nano-particle emissions, and intensive use of energy. The goal of
this project is to research mathematical models and analytical tools for
reducing the environmental impact and economic costs of ALD nano-manufacturing
for industrial-scale applications. This project will be carried out in a
systematic manner that integrates both mathematical modeling and experimental
investigations. Specific research goals of this project are: (1) mathematical
modeling and experimental investigations of ALD process emissions (2)
thermodynamic flows and energy modeling of ALD nano-manufacturing system (3)
sustainable scale-up of ALD nanotechnology for industrial productions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the models and results developed in this
study will allow ALD and associated industries to address the long-term
environmental and societal implications of ALD nanotechnology. The models and
results can also be used in sustainable management and improvement of similar
bottom-up nanotechnologies. The research results of this project will be broadly
disseminated through academic journals, professional conferences, and internet
media. As a result, this research will improve our understanding of the
potential environmental impacts of ALD nano-manufacturing and assist in
development of a sustainable infrastructure for ALD productions in various
industrial sectors.