* 1200838
* Modeling, Identification, and Control towards Adaptive Personalized Glucose Management for Insulin-Deficient Diabetes
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Qian Wang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 12/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop modeling and control
algorithms for personalized adaptive insulin therapy. The algorithms can be used
in the artificial pancreas for type-1 diabetes, but also would be useful for
glucose management for insulin-dependent type-2 diabetes. This research will
characterize patient-specific glucose dynamics by data-driven models with time-
varying parameters that can be adjusted for the effects of food intake, physical
activity and emotional tone under natural living conditions. This research will
also develop adaptive control algorithms that enable a better control of
hyperglycemia and prevention of hypoglycemia. Robustness issues will be
addressed with respect to uncertainties in estimation of carb content, uncertain
time-delay of meal intake, and variations in insulin and carb sensitivities.
Deliverables include easy-to-implement real-time parameter estimation algorithms
for insulin-glucose kinetics, adaptive control algorithms for insulin delivery,
evaluation and validation via a FDA-approved simulator for type-1 diabetes,
documentation of research results, and engineering student
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will
facilitate the development of a mechanical artificial pancreas by means of
providing a control algorithm used to close the loop between glucose sensing and
insulin delivery in the artificial pancreas. Patients with type-1 or type-2
diabetes will benefit from the results of this research by lowering the risk of
many of the devastating long-term complications. After testing and evaluation
through FDA-approved simulation platforms, the results are transformable to be
used in insulin pumps for clinical tests. Engineering students will get involved
in this research through senior design projects as well as projects in
undergraduate- and graduate-level control courses, e.g., design of user-friendly
tools in aiding the control of diet and improvement of control algorithms.