* 1200747
* Analysis of non-linear partial differential equations in Kinetic theory and related fields
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Robert Strain, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

This project proposes to develop new methods in the mathematical analysis of
nonlinear partial differential equations. The objective is to gain a deeper
understanding of global-in-time existence and uniqueness theorems for kinetic
equations with initial data from three different categories. The first category
is nearby vacuum initial data. The second category encompasses spatially
homogenous equations with initial data that do not have a size restriction.
Building on that, the third category of initial data will be those that are
large but weakly inhomogeneous (i.e., the solution starts out sufficiently close
to some large homogeneous solution in a suitable Banach space). Another goal of
the project is to determine the large-time convergence to equilibrium of these
solutions. This research will lead to a deeper understanding of partial
differential equations, which in turn introduce novel techniques that are
expected to be useful for future mathematical and physical
developments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project pursues a multifaceted approach
to physical questions arising in nonlinear partial differential equations from
kinetic theory and related fields. The research vision includes developing new
tools to study analytical problems about fundamental mathematical models; these
tools are expected to be generalizable to a wide array of problems in applied
mathematics. The results of the project will be disseminated through publication
in journal articles, will be posted on the principal investigator's web site,
and will be presented at international conferences. The principal investigator
plans to bring together experts in areas related to this proposal. The project
will involve graduate and undergraduate students from the University of
Pennsylvania and other universities. The principal investigator is committed to
help foster the training and education of these students through a variety of
means, including directed studies and seminars related to the project. He will
actively seek out students from diverse backgrounds to work on the project.