* 1200242
* Advanced Switching Control Techniques for Switched Systems Subject to Physical Constraints
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Fen Wu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2016
* USD 250,000.00

The goal of this project is to advance switching control theory and to develop
competitive nonlinear control techniques. There are many switched systems
emerging recently in engineering practices that involve interactions between
continuous time and discrete event dynamics. Switched systems provide a useful
mechanism to model complex dynamics that are subject to abrupt parameter
variations and sudden changes in system configurations. Using multiple and
conjugate Lyapunov functions, this effort will investigate new switching control
techniques with different switching rules to improve controlled performance and
expand control design capability. Another focus of the research is to generate
computationally efficient algorithms tailored to an important class of non-
convex problems arising from switching control designs. This research will make
fundamental contributions by developing switching control schemes to handle
modeling inaccuracy and actuator nonlinearity and generating effective
computational tools from combined deterministic and probabilistic
perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The application of the projected switching
control techniques and software tools to hypersonic aircraft could realize the
full potential of ultrahigh speed aircraft flight, which has critical
implications for both defense and commercial applications. The outcome of the
research would have significant commercial, defense, and national security
impacts. The success of this project can serve as a catalyst for the widespread
use of theoretically sound and practically useful switching control approaches
in engineering applications. The educational and outreach activities will
enhance North Carolina State University's educational program by generating
undergraduate research opportunities and facilitate university-industry
collaboration and technology transfer.