* 1200160
* Near-natural amino acid mutagenesis for the study of protein function
* MPS,CHE
* 02/14/2011,04/30/2014
* Thomas Cropp, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 04/30/2014
* USD 386,351.00

The Chemistry Division and the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences,
both at the National Science Foundation, support a collaborative research
project between Professor Thomas A. Cropp of the University of Maryland and
Professor Alexander Deiters of North Carolina State University. These
researchers will chemically synthesize a series of photocaged near-natural amino
acids, incorporate these caged amino acids into proteins using an engineered
orthogonal aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase/tRNA pair, and finally, test the ability of
these amino acids to precisely modulate enzymatic function, elucidating reaction
mechanisms. The project hopes to address some of the fundamental problems of
using near-natural amino acids as probes for protein structure and function. The
approach, if successful, can provide a general tool for inserting near-natural
amino acids specifically into proteins of interest. The goals of this study are
to understand the H-bonding network of glutathione-S-transferase, green
fluorescent protein (GFP), and the catalytic mechanism of choline
oxidase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Chemistry Division and the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences provides support for a unique and
cross-disciplinary combination of skills between Professors Cropp and Dieters
that involve protein engineering and synthetic chemistry, which will offer
fantastic training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students at both
schools. The interactions between students from the two groups will be
electronically assisted by the use of a dedicated Wiki-based website. To engage
the general public, the Cropp and Deiters labs will invite high school teachers
to conduct summer research on near-natural amino acid mutagenesis. The
information gained from working with non-scientists on this research will be
used to implement near-natural amino acid mutagenesis experiments in an upper-
level undergraduate course. In addition, the developed research tools will
benefit, and be disseminated to, enzymologists and protein chemists. Most
importantly, these tools can be applied in any laboratory with standard
Molecular Biology equipment and expertise, and thus will have a significant
impact on the understanding of enzyme mechanisms, not possible with any other
methods. From an applied perspective, some of the amino acids created in this
work may expand protein function giving rise to better and more stable
catalysts. &lt;br/&gt;