* 1200489
* Conformation and Alignment Control in Scalable Graphene Film Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Micah Green, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2015
* USD 259,300.00

This project focuses on the characterization and control of graphene dynamics
during liquid-phase processing. Graphene has outstanding mechanical, thermal,
and electrical properties with a wide range of electronic and aerospace
applications. However, conformation (internal configuration) and alignment
(orientation) have a strong influence on the practical properties of graphene-
based films. This project combines simulations with experimental studies of
graphene dynamics during film processing. Two approaches are utilized: (1)
Brownian Dynamics/Particle Tracking simulations are utilized to model graphene
conformation during various film processing flows. This technique simulates
graphene conformation as a function of space and time in a pre-computed dynamic
flow field. (2) The same flows are experimentally utilized to produce conductive
graphene-based thin films and graphene/polymer composite films. The effects of
processing flow type and strength are quantified on both macroscopic film
properties and nanoscale graphene conformation and alignment. Graphene
conformation is quantified as a function of stabilizer type and sonication
energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, these novel simulations and
experiments will fill a critical need in the engineering community to provide
fundamental scientific insight into the prediction, characterization, and
control of graphene morphology in solution. The simulations and experiments
identify the processing parameter space where flow forces promote the desired
microstructure and properties for a given application; for instance, extensional
flow forces can promote a flat, aligned graphene conformation for transparency
and conductivity in thin films. This work has broad impacts for industrial
processing techniques including (1) inkjet printing and roll-to-roll coating of
transparent, conductive, thin films for use in electronics and (2)
multifunctional nanocomposite coatings for reinforcement and sensing. These
research tasks will be integrated with graduate and undergraduate education,
with a heavy emphasis on curriculum development and independent undergraduate
research training, in addition to outreach activities for undergraduates and
K-12 students.