* 1200014
* EAGER:  Multifunctional devices based on coupled phase transitions in antiferromagnetic semiconductors
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2014
* Leonid Rokhinson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 02/28/2014
* USD 104,611.00

Intellectual Merit of the project is to demonstrate key technology toward
development of novel multifunctional devices based on antiferromagnetic (AF)
semiconductors. The proposed devices will combine non-volatile magnetic memory
with electronic transistor functionality in a single device, thus resolving
current dichotomy between logic circuitry and memory implementations. For
operation devices will utilize phase transitions which, combined with sup-ps
intrinsic magnetization dynamics, will offer THz speeds in both functionality
domains. The devices will also have a potential to improve on basic transistor
switching characteristics if gate-induced coupled phase transitions are
realized. Finally, these magnetic devices will have no fringing fields, thus
allowing high density packaging. The proposed devices are metal-oxide-AF-
semiconductor field-effect transistors, MOS(AF)FET, where mobile carriers are
induced into an AF semiconductor by electrostatic gating. This functionality
will enable electrical detection of the magnetization axis in collinear AF
materials for the first time. At high carrier concentrations we expect a
succession of metal-insulator, antiferromagneticferromagnetic (AF-FM) and
structural phase transitions, which will allow electrostatic control of both
electrical and magnetic properties of the AF host. Of a special interest for
fast memory recording is a possibility to rotate the magnetization axis in
multi-axis collinear AF by means of AF-FM phase transition, where magnetic
torque will be generated by a few tesla intrinsic exchange fields. For prototype
demonstrations we will focus on NiO. NiO is a technologically relevant room
temperature collinear AF semiconductor which can be epitaxially grown on readily
available MgO substrates. The focus of EAGER proposal is to fabricate and
characterize NiO?based MOS(AF)FET and to demonstrate electrical detection of AF
magnetization axis.

The broader impact of this project will be development of the enabling
technology for the investigation of electrostatically-induced AF-FM phase
transition, study of fundamental physics of coupled phase transitions, and
analysis of magnetization dynamics in AF semiconductors. A student working on
the project will be involved in a truly interdisciplinary research, bridging
fields of material science, semiconductor physics and magnetism. The PI is
developing a new graduate course on physics of magnetic semiconductors which
will be disseminated to a wider audience using NSF-sponsored nanoHUB.org
facility at Purdue University.