* 1200152
* Control design of power electronic interfaces for optimal performance of renewable energy systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Tingshu Hu, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2017
* USD 372,409.00

Objective: The objective of this project is to develop advanced nonlinear
control design methodologies for power electronic interfaces in renewable energy
systems with battery/supercapacitor hybrid energy storage. Multiple power
converters will be utilized to coordinate the energy flow between the batteries,
the supercapacitors, the load, the utility grid and/or the renewable energy
sources. Efficient models will be developed to faithfully describe the complex
nonlinear dynamics. Based on these models, nonlinear control strategies will be
designed for highly efficient, reliable and long lasting energy systems.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: Power systems with pulse-width-modulated
converters are intrinsically nonlinear, and subject to strict input/state
constraints and various uncertainties. For systems with hybrid energy storage
devices and multiple power converters, the dynamics is more complex. Most
existing methods use linearized models and neglect the constraints. This project
will develop faithful and tractable nonlinear models, apply advanced nonlinear
systems techniques, and develop new theoretical and computational tools for the
design of control laws for all the power electronic interfaces involved. Design
considerations include safe charging/discharging current/voltage for the
batteries, stability, transient dynamics, power factor, total harmonic
distortion, ripple reduction, etc. Experimental systems will be constructed to
validate the design methods. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Control design
methodologies developed in this project will help the power and energy industry
to construct renewable energy systems with improved efficiency, reliability,
longer lifetime and lower cost. The research results will be disseminated in
publications in power and energy communities as well as in control systems
community. Undergraduate and graduate students will be trained to construct
various power converters, to design and implement feedback laws for optimal
performances. They will be involved in the construction of an experimental solar
system, with multiple power electronic interfaces. One female student and one
African American student will be working on the project. They will be trained as
productive forces for the power and energy industry.