* 1200270
* Reduction of Polymerization Stress by Addition of Monomer Filled Silica Nano-tubes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Rahmi Ozisik, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2015
* USD 435,109.00

This grant provides funding for the development of experimental and theoretical
approaches to determine the extent to which monomer eluting from the inside of
hollow nano-tubes reduces stresses generated during polymerization. During
polymerization (curing of polymer), a process during which a liquid monomer
becomes a solid, the individual monomer units become more densely packed, and
the material takes up less volume. When this decrease in volume is prevented
because of constraints at the boundaries of the part, it causes the polymer
chains to exert stresses. These stresses can cause the polymerized material to
debond or induce failure of the part. Experiments and modeling will be performed
to evaluate the extent to which this curing stress is reduced with the addition
of nano-tubes. Nano-tubes of varying dimensions will be manufactured, blended
with two different monomers in different volume fractions, and tests will be
performed to determine the extent of reduction in polymerization stress.
Experiments will also be performed to determine the extent to which mechanical
properties are affected by the use of monomer filled nano-tubes. Modeling will
be conducted to understand the underlying physics in order to optimize nano-tube
dimensions and volume fractions to generate a maximum reduction in
polymerization stress.

If successful, the results of this research will lead to improvements in the
integrity of polymer-matrix and other composites while enabling their high speed
manufacture. The primary goal of this work is to determine how nano-tubes of
different dimensions added in varying volumes to neat resin contributes towards
a reduction in polymerization stress. A reduction in polymerization stress can
lead to improved dental fillings, and rapid manufacture of glass-fiber epoxy
layups, among other applications. Computational tools will also be developed to
enable modeling the development of polymerization stress and the extent to which
it can be reduced by the addition of nano-tubes.