* 1200397
* Collaborative Research:  Development of a Robust, High-Speed, High-Quality Laser-Assisted Nanomanufacturing System
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Xinwei Wang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2016
* USD 107,938.00

This collaborative research project is focused on understanding the fundamental
optical and plasma mechanisms in the laser-assisted tip-based nanomanufacturing
(LA-TBN) process, utilizing the understanding to identify the optimal conditions
for near-field radiation enhancement and plasma-mediated ablation at the sample
surface that allow the use of advanced control techniques to achieve robust,
high-speed, high-quality LA-TBN. The near-field radiation enhanced plasma-
mediated ablation effect and possibly associated thermal side effects during the
LA-TBN process will be clarified and distinguished through simulation and
experiments enabled by the use of advanced control techniques. The gained
knowledge will then be used to analyze and optimize the nanofabrication
conditions towards fabrication robustness and quality. The optimal fabrication
conditions will be achieved through the development and implementation of
advanced control techniques, which in turn, leads to high-speed and high quality
nanofabrication. The technique will be implemented and evaluated through the
fabrication of a maze-like complicated pattern in single crystal silicon.

The success of this project will not only significantly enhance the advantages
of the LA-TBN process over other nanofabrication methodologies, including low-
cost, ultra-high-resolution and versatility in materials that can be processed,
but willalso increase understanding of the fundamental mechanisms involved in
this intriguing process. As one of the first systematic attempts to overcome
critical barriers in the LA-TBN process, this project enables these advantages
for the productive implementations of this technique in strategically important
areas, such as semiconductors. The educational activities comprise curriculum
development, recruitment and retaining of under-represented students, and
outreach to K-12.