* 1200682
* RET in Engineering and Computer Science Site: Water Awareness Research and Education
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Tina Hohlfeld, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 06/30/2017
* USD 500,000.00

This award provides funding for a three year standard award for a Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site Program
at the University of South Florida (USF) entitled, RET in Engineering and
Computer Science Site-Water Awareness Research and Education (RET-WARE), under
the direction of Dr. Maya Trotz. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this three
year RET is to provide a proactive and well structured research, education and
professional development experience for at least 44 middle and high school
science and math teachers from the Hillsborough County Public Schools and pre-
service teachers from USF's College of Education. The research theme is framed
around three of the National Academy of Engineering's Grand Challenges (i.e.
management of the nitrogen cycle, provision of clean water, and urban
infrastructure improvement) and the role of formal and informal science
education in integrating marginalized, coastal community participants in
developing solutions to these grand challenges while broadening participation in
STEM fields. RET participants will interact with faculty mentors and their
research group in the Colleges of Engineering and Arts and Sciences at USF
through individual summer research projects, research seminars, social and
community activities, professional training sessions, and online media linked to
the RET website. The RET program will be integrated with 1) two USF courses
(Development of Technology-Based Instruction and Engineering Engagement: Beyond
the lab and the Drawing Board), 2) an ongoing project of the USF Engineers for a
Sustainable World student chapter (WARE in East Tampa, an Environmental
Protection Agency People Prosperity Planet Phase II award winner in 2009), and
3) ongoing faculty research and graduate training to ensure year long teacher
support in local area schools and communities, especially those marginalized by
high percentages of poverty and English as a second language barriers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The target audience includes teachers from historically
underrepresented groups in the STEM disciplines and those who teach in schools
characterized by a high level of poverty and a high percentage of minority and
English language learners. Therefore, the project is likely to increase the
exposure to and engagement in STEM research by underserved students. The program
will benefit from a strong infrastructure of K-12 education and outreach
programs already in place at USF (e.g., Engineering EXPO, Tampa
Interdisciplinary Environmental Research REU). A unique feature of this proposed
RET site is the emphasis on community engagement, as well as partnerships with
companies, non-profit organizations and government agencies which provides an
opportunity for participating teachers and their students to learn how STEM is
applied to solving important problems within societal, political and economic
contexts.