* 1200203
* Quantitative Prediction of Ductile Fracture Surface Roughness
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Alan Needleman, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 02/28/2015
* USD 335,113.00

The goal of this project is to elucidate the relation between a quantitative
measure of ductile fracture surface roughness and a material's resistance to
ductile crack growth. There has been a great deal of experimental work that has
shown that brittle fracture surfaces exhibit certain scaling characteristics.
The extent to which such scaling properties characterize ductile fracture
surfaces remains an open question. The focus in the proposed studies is on
ductile fracture in structural metals which takes place by the nucleation,
growth and coalescence of micro-scale voids. Calculations of ductile fracture
surface roughness will be carried out for a variety of material microstructures
and loading conditions using a framework that has given quantitative predictions
of overall ductile fracture behavior in a variety of circumstances. The proposed
study will involve a combination of mechanism based theoretical predictions
coupled with a comparison with experimental measurements using various
quantitative characterizations of fracture surface roughness. A variety of basic
issues will be addressed including: how does the fracture surface roughness
depend on material properties (e.g. yield strength) and on the mode (tensile,
shear or some combination) and rate of loading? How do quantitative measures of
the fracture roughness vary with key features of the material's microstructure
(e.g. the spatial distribution of the micro-void nucleating particles) and does
any such variation correlate with the material's crack growth resistance? Can
the material microstructure be designed to give a desired fracture surface
roughness? Can a quantitative characterization of fracture surface roughness be
used to identify the fracture origin?

The computed fracture surfaces will be made available on the web so that other
researchers can have access in order to use analysis tools that may be
subsequently developed to quantify and characterize the fracture surfaces. If
successful, the results of the proposed work can serve as a starting point for a
range of other endeavors including, for example, control of surface
characteristics in manufacturing processes and controlling the frictional
properties of surfaces along which sliding will subsequently take place.
Although the physical mechanism has significant differences from metal fracture,
the capabilities developed could also serve as a starting point for predicting
the roughness of fracture surfaces in the earth's crust where subsequent sliding
occurs during earthquakes.