* 1200552
* Collaborative Research: RET in Engineering and Computer Science Site: Research Experiences for Teachers Focused on Applications of ImagEs and SiGnals In High Schools (AEGIS)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Georgios Anagnostopoulos, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 07/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This award provides funding for a new collaborative Research Experiences for
Teachers (RET) Site focused on Signal and Image Processing at the University of
Central Florida and Florida Institute of Technology. Each year 13 high school
teachers from school districts in four Central Florida counties will participate
in research projects at the universities. The teachers will also develop modules
related to their research which they will implement in their classes in the
following school year. The teachers will organize annual science events to share
their work with the communities around their schools and they will participate
in the Florida Science Olympiad. Through participation in the RET Site the
teachers will have an enhanced knowledge base in engineering and computer
science and the skills to translate this into their classroom practices, thus
impacting their students and motivating them towards science, technology,
computing, and engineering disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project revolves around the expertise of the research team and
outstanding research environment in which the teachers will work. The research
projects are compelling and are in areas that are of current interest.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include substantial
impact on the area schools and dissemination to a broad community. Teachers will
incorporate new computing and engineering topics into their classes and develop
hands-on ways to impart these topics to secondary students. The teachers will
also engage in public outreach to convey the concepts and appreciation of
computer science and engineering to the public. Through this project, a long-
term relationship between the university and the schools will be forged and
cemented. The partners will work together to build a foundation of outstanding
computing and engineering education in the region.