* 1200847
* GOALI: Consolidation and Curing of Advanced Composite Parts Using Elastomer-Coated Tooling
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Daniel Walczyk, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 12/31/2016
* USD 352,033.00

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) grant
provides funding for the research and development of a new manufacturing process
for advanced composite parts called Press Curing with Rubber-coated Tooling
(PCRT). This is a new alternative to the standard practice of using a vacuum bag
to encase the composite part to enable it to be subjected to high temperature
and pressure in an autoclave for the final manufacturing step of consolidation
and curing. The PCRT process eliminates the autoclave from the process and
imparts the desired temperature and pressure through the use of a specially
designed rubber-coated mold. Research objectives include gaining a deeper
physical understanding of the process through extensive simulation and
experimentation, creating robust simulation tools for designing mold sets,
fundamental materials research on tooling, rubber masks, and interactions with
composite systems, and expanding process capabilities to allow for eventual
commercialization. The GOALI partner for this grant, Kintz Plastics, Inc. (Howes
Cave, NY), will help with all aspects of the research work and be the first
adopter of this technology.

If successful, the results of this research will fundamentally change how
composite manufacturers make small- to medium-size laminate and sandwich parts
requiring high consolidation pressure and temperature. It will eliminate one of
the major manufacturing bottlenecks facing the composites industry the autoclave
step in the process. A published study has shown that for a relatively complex
three-dimensional composite laminate part, PCRT provides orders of magnitude
reduction in preparation time, fixed and recurring costs and energy consumption
as compared to using an autoclave, while still providing parts of similar
quality. It is expected that similar results will be demonstrated for a wider
range of part shapes and material systems as a result of this work.