* 1201883
* Topological Electromagnetic Sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* David Jiles, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2017
* USD 311,008.00

Abstract:

The continuing evolution of sensor technology requires innovative approaches for
reducing power consumption and improving sensitivity, resolution & operating
temperature. The recent discovery of axion electromagnetic coupling in
topological insulators holds great promise for drastic improvement of
performance in sensor technology. This new class of materials has a bulk
insulating energy gap and gapless Dirac-cone surface states which are protected
by time-reversal symmetry. Unlike in traditional semiconductors, back-scattering
is prohibited because of unique spin transport on the surfaces, leading to
exciting non-dissipative applications. The striking electromagnetic coupling and
half-integer quantum Hall effects open up completely new and revolutionary
applications in nanoelectronics and spintronics. This project proposes to
exploit the axion electromagnetic coupling effect in topological insulators and
to build ultra-sensitive magnetic sensors that surpass the performance of
traditional magnetometers.

Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of this project includes (i) the
demonstration of the intriguing electromagnetic coupling effect in topological
insulators that has not yet been experimentally explored; (ii) the improved
understanding of material properties including magnetic doping of surfaces, and
the growth of heterostructures involving magnetic oxides in which the surface
gap is opened to invoke the coupling effect; (iii) the exploration of a novel
quantum capacitance approach for the detection of surface states at high
temperatures; and (iv) the invention of topological sensors operating at ambient
temperature with unprecedented sensitivity and spatial resolution. The
transformative concepts include the use of low-dissipation topologically
protected surface-states of topological insulators for electronic and spintronic
devices such as magnetic transducers, electrically tunable inductors, and
quantum computation systems.

Broader Impacts: The proposed project will lead to a new magnetometer technology
that exploits bulk properties and surface states of topological insulators. The
high sensitivity, high spatial resolution and low-dissipation performance can
satisfy the demanding requirements in sensor technology. The successful project
is expected to have potential applications in medical research such as brain
wave detection and in military surveillance with an enhanced magnetic
sensitivity at low fields. The development of this project can potentially
improve the competitiveness of the EPSCoR state #8722 (Iowa State) in the area
of magnetic sensor devices. Besides the technological impacts, the program has a
strong and comprehensive education component. Students will gain invaluable
research experience in this highly interdisciplinary area of electrical
engineering, physics, and materials science, leading to enhanced training and
ability to pursue innovations for the entirety of their careers. The PI will
create a multicultural environment by recruiting students from underrepresented
groups, particularly female students, through the existing outreach programs
"Science Bound" and "Program for Women in Science and Engineering" at Iowa State
University. Full tuitions, research assistances and resources will be supplied
for their education. The students can have ample opportunities to learn state-
of-the-art sensor technology and gain hand-on experience on topological
insulators. Such experience will broaden their scientific horizons and thus
become invaluable assets to their future careers. The outcomes of the program
will be incorporated into a course on sensor technology and disseminated in
conferences & through peer-reviewed publications. The PI will also actively
participate in the K-12 program at Iowa State and continue to offer mini-
lectures on nanotechnology and magnetism. Research frontiers of the topological
electromagnetic sensors can be included as interesting demonstrations, aiming to
stimulating students' curiosity, creativity, and enthusiasm in science and
technology.