* 1201372
* Random Holomorphic Sections and Complex Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Bernard Shiffman, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2016
* USD 274,000.00

The principal focus of the project is the interplay between complex geometry and
probability. In particular, Bernard Shiffman will continue his research on
applications of pluripotential theory and the Bergman-Szego kernel to the
statistics of random functions of several complex variables and more generally
of random sections of positive line bundles on compact complex manifolds. One of
the goals of the research is to refine our understanding of the distributions of
zeros and critical points of polynomials, holomorphic sections of ample line
bundles, and entire functions. A fundamental ingredient in the study of random
sections is the Bergman-Szego kernel, and this project involves using curvature
invariants to describe the off-diagonal asymptotics of this kernel for large
powers of the line bundle. Shiffman will apply the off-diagonal Bergman kernel
asymptotics to obtain optimal sup-norms for orthonormal bases of spaces of
holomorphic sections of powers of ample line bundles. He will also continue his
investigation of the distribution of random zeros of systems of polynomials, or
more generally random sections, in order to obtain central limit theorems for
the numbers of zeros in smooth domains as the degree increases. He will
investigate the zeros of random polynomials of increasing degree containing a
fixed number of monomial terms. Shiffman will also study point processes given
by critical points of random holomorphic sections.

In the physical sciences it is often necessary to handle disorder, where a
certain amount of randomness is inserted into a system. Random functions can be
used to model many systems, such as systems of atoms and molecules and their
component particles--protons, neutrons, and electrons. Quantum mechanics
describes these particles by wave functions, which are solutions of
Schrodinger's equation. The zeros and local maxima of wave functions give
important information on states of atoms and molecules; the zeros are known in
quantum chemistry and physics as nodal lines. Polynomials in several variables
can be used to study systems with several degrees of freedom, and those
polynomials of high degree correspond to wave functions for high energy states.
The mathematics of point processes--the spatial and/or time distribution of
random occurrences--has been used in many diverse fields such as signal and
image processing, quantum mechanics, epidemiology, seismology, astronomy, and
economics. This mathematics research project includes the development of
geometric methods to study the statistics of point processes arising from
mathematical equations with some random input.