* 1201917
* Core Math Tools
* EHR,DRL
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2013
* Christian Hirsch, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Ferdinand Rivera
* 12/31/2013
* USD 99,802.00

Math Core Tools is a project from Western Michigan University that meets the
urgent need of providing mathematical tools that students can use as they
explore and learn mathematical concepts that are aligned with the Common Core
State Standards in Mathematics (CCSSM). The developers have repurposed and
modified tools originally designed for an NSF-funded curriculum project (e.g.,
Core-Plus Mathematics), creating a suite of tools that supports student learning
of mathematics regardless of the curricula choice. The designers provide
exemplary lessons illustrating how the software can be used in the spirit of the
new CCSSM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to provide easy
access to core mathematical tools that help students visualize and manipulate
mathematical objects. The tools promote mathematical modeling, representing
ideas, calculating, decision making, and communicating mathematics related to
Algebra, Geometry, and Statistics. The tools are available to all learners and
teachers through the web site of the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics
(NCTM). The web site includes feedback loops for teachers to provide information
about the tools. By using the NCTM website, the tools can be downloaded for use
by teachers and students. The dedicated portal on the NCTM website allows
supervisors to use the tools in professional development, teachers to use the
tools as an integral part of a lesson, and students to use the tools for
exploring, conjecturing, and communicating mathematics.