* 1201058
* Understanding the Failure Mechanisims of Nanoelectrodes in Li-Ion Batteries: Integrating Multiscale Modeling with In-situ Experimental Studies
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Adri van Duin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 06/30/2016
* USD 388,264.00

The research objective of this award is to elucidate the mechanisms of electro-
chemically driven mechanical degradation in Si/C composite nanoelectrodes
through an integrated experimental/computational approach. The nanoelectrodes
consist of silicon nanocrystalline droplets deposited on the inner and outer
surface of single-walled carbon nanotubes. This research has four tightly-
integrated threads: i) develop first-principles based reactive force fields
(ReaxFF) for Li-Si-C systems that enable large-scale atomistic simulations with
quantum mechanical accuracy, ii) perform atomistic simulations with ReaxFF to
extract basic thermodynamic properties of lithiated CNY and silicon nanodroplets
as well as the kinetic parameters of lithium insertion, iii) develop an
atomistically informed front-tracking finite element method to simulate and
understand size-dependent morphological evolution, stress generation, and defect
growth in nanoelectodes, and iv) perform in-situ electron microscopy studies of
electrochemically driven deformation, defect nucleation, and growth at the
nanoscale.

This research will contribute both cutting edge numerical simulations and
nanoscale in-situ experiments of the complex, coupled electrochemical-mechanical
phenomena that occur in battery electrodes and lead to degradation and
ultimately loss of battery capacity. The research is highly interdisciplinary
and will involve interactions and visits with Sandia National Laboratories for
the participating students; this will expose them to cutting-edge experimental
facilities.