* 1201974
* Research at the Intensity Frontier with the LHCb Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Sheldon Stone, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 08/31/2015
* USD 3,040,000.00

The physics program at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN, Geneva,
Switzerland is in full operation, now delivering proton-proton collisions at 8
TeVcollision energy. The Syracuse group is a member of the LHCb experiment which
is currently in an intense data-taking phase for 2012, and which will segue into
an analysis and upgrade phase during the period 2013-2014. Afterward, operations
will resume at 14 TeV collision energy. The LHCb experiment is designed to study
beauty and charm decays at a hadron collider and the experiment and the Syracuse
group are well-positioned to: (1) make direct measurements of the production and
decay properties of these particles, and (2) simultaneously have sensitivity to
new physics at high mass scales through the attendant effects of such physics on
decay rates, CP violating asymmetries, or polarizations of certain vector states
in the beauty and charm particle decays.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Syracuse
contributes significantly to the physics program including: measurement of the
b-bbar production cross section, determination of b-hadron branching fractions,
discovery of a new semileptonic decays of strange neutral B mesons, including
first observation of CP Violation in the decay of the strange neutral B meson
into a J/psi and f meson. The group is aggressively pursuing these analyses and
measuring the CP violating angle gamma and lifetimes of strange neutral B
mesons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In technical and service responsibility to LHCb,
Syracuse participation has been very broad, with contributions to the Vertex
Locator, Trigger, and Ring Imaging Cherenkov detector testing, and ongoing LHCb
operations. The group is active in detector research and development with
emphasis on new technologies for the upgraded vertex detector and responsibility
for silicon based downstream tracking. The Syracuse group is active in the
research and development of highly radiation resistant semiconductor detectors,
capable of surviving the vigorous conditions expected at the High Luminosity
LHC, and in the development of diamond tracking detectors.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Throughout its research program, Syracuse has maintained an active
interest in broadening participation. The group has recently joined QuarkNet and
maintains an "Ask a Particle Physicist" website, so that teachers and other
members of the community can interact informally with the group. And the group
actively encourages and supports younger members of the research team to be
actively engaged in the high school classroom.