* 1201790
* Super-Turing Computation and Brain-Like Intelligence
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Hava Siegelmann, Missouri State University
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 06/30/2016
* USD 449,999.00

The objective of this research is to advance significantly Artificial
Intelligence by developing the first ever, brain-like Super-Turing system. The
approach is to build a computational system that is much more powerful (Super)
than digital computation. Alan Turing, a WWII code breaker, developed a
conceptual (Turing) machine that has been basic to the digital computation
revolution of the last 70 years. This project will develop a Super-Turing
mathematical model and implement it on an Optical Analog Neural Network
Computer. The project will focus on understanding system abilities and
differences between Super-Turing and Turing systems. Natural and artificial
time-series will be compared to those of Super-Turing models and modeled Super-
Turing processes will be compared with those of the brain. Intellectual Merit
Super-Turing Computation is a novel, transformative technology that will rewrite
computational limits and lay a new foundation for Artificial Intelligence.
Broader Impact Increasing the capabilities of machine intelligence will
profoundly influence society; Intelligent Super-Turing systems are expected to
be capable of improving quality of life, e.g. providing intelligent robotic
assistants, improving individualized education, creating new industries and
medical technologies producing great economic benefit. Further, a deepened
understanding of Super-Turing computation as it relates to living systems is
likely to bring new insights into brain function - fundamentally impacting
neuroscience and brain-related medical technologies. Graduate and undergraduates
will be trained in the interdisciplinary areas of advanced mathematics, physics,
and computer science.