* 1201915
* IRFP: Controlling the Order of Functional Polymers and Their Corresponding Blends
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Neil Treat, Treat                   Neil           D
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 08/31/2013
* USD 100,908.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award is co-funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering and by
the Electronics, Photonics and Magnetic Devices Program in the Electrical,
Communications and Cyber Systems Division.

This award will support a twelve-month research fellowship by Dr. Neil D. Treat
to work with Dr. Natalie Stingelin at Imperial College London in London, United
Kingdom.

One of society's challenges is to develop a clean, renewable, and sustainable
energy source. Organic photovoltaics (OPVs) offer great potential as a low-cost
solution to this need because of their ability to be solution processed over
large areas. Currently, OPVs are approaching the estimated 10% power conversion
efficiency needed to achieve economic viability, but further improvement and
large area utilization is predicated on a deeper understanding of how to control
their complex microstructure and how this affects the device performance. Thus,
gaining control over the blend microstructure is of utmost importance for the
continued technological development of OPVs so that they may be realized as a
renewable and sustainable energy source. This project is currently developing
strategies to control the microstructure of OPVs materials through the addition
of additives. This strategy provides a means to control the active layer
microstructure, which can be used to further both our fundamental and practical
understanding of this system.

Specifically, this project is using nucleating agents - additives that control
the microstructure of semicrystalline polyolefins - to control the ordering in
OPV materials and to correlate this change to their electronic properties. The
main goal of this project is to link the changes in the molecular ordering of
neat polymer based devices to the electronic performance and understanding how
the polymer architecture can influence the efficiency of nucleation and the
resulting electronic properties. The second portion involves extending this
understanding to develop processing strategies for large area coating. Indeed,
the use of nucleating agents is an unexplored, but potentially useful strategy
for controlling the microstructure of OPV materials.