* 1201121
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: Upgrading and Digitizing OTS Biological Field Station Herbaria
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Elizabeth Losos, Organization for Tropical Studies Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Roland Roberts
* 05/31/2015
* USD 173,734.00

The Organization for Tropical Studies (OTS) will create a unified, web-based,
digital herbarium database for its three regional herbaria in Costa Rica, using
the format developed for the Las Cruces Biological Station
(http://www.ots.ac.cr/herbarium). OTS will also upgrade herbarium equipment and
help process and digitize the more than 8,000 specimens that are currently
backlogged at the three biological stations. OTS herbaria collectively house
more than 13,000 specimens; however, much of the storage infrastructure and
equipment is obsolete, and only a fraction of specimens have been digitized.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The geographic areas represented by these herbaria
encompass the range of diversity and principal habitats in Costa Rica. The
project will provide significant benefits to the field of tropical biology by
enhancing current research capabilities at OTS field stations and their areas of
influence, and by creating opportunities for international collaborations with
US scientists in research and conservation. The digital herbarium will be a
critical information resource for US- and Costa Rican-based researchers and
students, and will play an important role as a teaching tool and in the
development of innovative student projects, given that more than 100 US courses
use OTS stations annually. As high-resolution scans of all specimens will be
available as on the web, the resource will be accessible anywhere there is
internet service, making this information available to the broader scientific
community.