* 1201564
* Graph C*-algebras, special subalgebras, and applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Sarah Reznikoff, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2016
* USD 156,595.00

Graph algebras provide a fascinating link between the fields of operator
algebras and dynamical systems. The proposed research explores this connection
in two different directions. The graph algebras, introduced by Cuntz and Krieger
in 1980, have been generalized and extended in a variety of ways to comprise a
large collection of interesting C*-algebras. The investigator, along with
collaborator Gabriel Nagy, has recently found a new proof of a generalized
Cuntz-Krieger uniqueness theorem. This work has led to their discovery of a
class of C*-subalgebras, pseudo-diagonals. One of the defining properties of
these classes involves pure state extensions, a topic that has seen a great deal
of interest since the Kadison-Singer Problem was first introduced half a century
ago. This proposal seeks to further investigate the relationship and parallels
between pseudo-diagonals and the other special Cartan-like subalgebras, as well
as to answer some related questions about state extensions. On the other hand,
one can define a shift space from a directed graph. The investigator intends to
analyze the corresponding graph algebras in order to shed light on the famous
Williams Conjecture of symbolic dynamics. This conjecture, which asserted that
the notion of matrix shift equivalence was a complete invariant for topological
conjugacy, was disproved by Kim-Roush and Wagoner in 1997. Their work leaves
open many questions and lines of enquiry. Graph algebras have been studied since
the early 1980s and appear in many areas of the field of operator algebras. The
theory of Cartan subalgebras of C*-algebras is an area with much potential, as
Renault's definition and major results on the subject appeared only two years
ago. The topological conjugacy problem is fundamental to the area of symbolic
dynamics and has been studied by a large number of experts; any progress on this
problem will be a breakthrough, and the investigator's operator-algebraic
approach is new.

Both parts of this research project will have broader impacts both within the
investigator's institution and in the mathematical community as a whole. The
investigator is a member of a mathematics department with a strong commitment to
mentoring graduate and undergraduate students. She is actively involved in a
number of activities, such as coordinating a math subject GRE preparation
workshop and running a seminar aimed at graduate students. The investigator will
supervise an undergraduate and a graduate summer research project on work
related to this proposal. Finally, the investigator's publications and lectures
at conferences on this research will strengthen the bridge between dynamics and
operator algebras and foster communication between the specialists in these
fields.