* 1201853
* Investigation of oxide nanophotonic devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Bruce Wessels, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 06/30/2015
* USD 360,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Electronics, Photonics, and Magnetic
Devices Program (EPMD) in the Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber
Systems (ECCS) and the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program (EPM) in the
Division of Materials Research (DMR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL: In this
research non-linear photonic crystal (PhC) waveguide devices are being
developed. Of particular interest are sub-terahertz PhC electro-optic modulators
(EOM). This work builds on our recent demonstration of non-linear PhC EOMs with
a bandwidth greater than 50 GHz. Based on recent device simulations non-linear
PhC waveguide modulators are being designed and fabricated for sub-terahertz
frequency and low-voltage (0.5V-mm) operation. To operate at low voltage, and
wide bandwidth, ferroelectric BaTiO3 with large electro-optic coefficients are
required. To minimize bandwidth limitations due to microwave losses, PhC and
slow light concepts are utilized. Devices are fabricated using vapor phase
epitaxial deposition, and both conventional photolithography and focused ion
beam milling. Factors limiting bandwidth including microwave loss,
optical/microwave velocity mismatch and device length are determined through
modeling and testing. Chip-scale integration of these PC devices with a single
platform is being pursued using epitaxial BaTiO3 on Si.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL: By using non-linear photonic crystals with
large optical non-linearities, significant improvements in bandwidth, operating
voltage, and size are expected compared to conventional electro-optic devices.
It is anticipated that these devices should have excellent photo and thermal
stability. The broader impact is the potential realization of sub-terahertz
bandwidth, sub-millimeter size optical devices and photonic circuits for optical
communications and information processing. The project will involve training of
undergraduates, and graduate students in the area of nanophotonics as well as
mentoring K-12 students. Outreach through industrial and government lab
internships of doctoral students is involved.