* 1201919
* 2012 IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging Travel Support Barcelona, Spain
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* William Karl, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 12/31/2012
* USD 15,000.00

Abstract

1201919, Karl

The IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging: From Nano to Macro
(ISBI) is a forum that has traditionally focused on the computational and
modeling aspects of biomedical imaging. It emphasizes methodologies that have
the potential to be applicable to multiple imaging modalities and to imaging at
different scales. Topics include physical, biological and statistical modeling
of biological and anatomical structures, image formation and reconstruction,
computational and statistical image analysis, visualization, and image quality
assessment. The meeting aims to facilitate cross-fertilization of methodologies
between different imaging modalities and scales, with applications ranging from
the nano, molecular and cellular levels through small animal imaging to
macroscopic and whole-body clinical systems. Whereas many medical imaging
meetings focus on particular modalities, ISBI includes a diversity of
methodologies applied to biological and anatomical imaging modalities, either
emerging or well established. Applications of interest include gene expression
mapping, drug discovery and delivery, molecular imaging, functional brain
mapping, computational neuroanatomy, cardiovascular imaging, and cancer imaging.
A principal goal of ISBI is to connect methodologies with important biomedical
applications, from microscopic to macroscopic scales.

ISBI 2012, to be held May 2-5 2012 in Barcelona, Spain, will be the ninth in a
series of meetings cosponsored by two IEEE societies: the Signal Processing
Society (SPS) and the Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBS). The
inaugural ISBI meeting was held in July 2002 and subsequent ones in April 2004,
2006 and 2007 and May 2008, June 2009, April 2010, and March 2011. The success
of the previous ISBI meetings bodes well for the future of ISBI. The success of
ISBI and its impact on the field, and indeed the future of the field itself,
relies on training young investigators to work with state-of-the-art
sophisticated computational or modeling tools and on informing the researcher
community of the latest progress in medical imaging protocols and modalities. In
addition, the inherently interdisciplinary nature of the biomedical imaging
field means that no single professional organization has the majority of
potential participants as its members. In this context, the tutorials series,
covering very diverse topics and offered on the first day of the symposium, is
an important component, which has been very popular in previous ISBI meetings.
This project will support the participation and attendance at the symposium by
students and new investigators (postdoctoral fellows and early junior faculty).

The International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging provides a forum where top-
notch students interact with leaders in the field and engage in intellectual
discussions with other superlative students in a wide array of bioengineering
disciplines. Students are able to view presentations on topics related to their
own fields of academic study and participate in didactic interaction. Without
the support of this NSF proposal, many students would be less likely to attend
the conference, thus missing an introduction to the world of knowledge available
at such professional meetings. In addition, this assembly provides a forum for
recognizing the talents of women and minorities in the field of bioengineering.

The International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging promotes not only education
within bioengineering disciplines, but fosters the next generation of
bioengineers by providing a unique opportunity for students to meet and network
with the leading biomedical professionals and scientists in the world.