* 1201656
* Carrier Transport in Scaled Charge-Trap NVSM and CMOS Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Marvin White, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 05/31/2017
* USD 337,780.00

Abstract Carrier Transport in Scaled Charge-Trap NVSM and CMOS Devices The
objective of the proposed research program is to study scaled charge-trap
nonvolatile semiconductor memory (NVSM) and CMOS devices. Our study will focus
on two hetero-insulator device structures: (1) metal and polysilicon gate,
high-K, nanoscaled CMOS transistors with fixed charge in the high-K dielectric
and (2) a nonvolatile, charge-trap, nanoscaled SINOS semiconductor memory device
with programmable charge storage. In particular, we will focus on the quantum
mechanical modeling and experimental characterization of carrier mobility
degradation due to remote Coulomb and surface roughness scattering, charge
transport and trapping and gate leakage in high-K CMOS devices. The charge trap
NVSM devices are SINOSlike structures with a gate dielectric comprised of a
tunnel oxide (O), a storage silicon nitride (N), and an overlying high-K
blocking oxide (I) as aluminum oxide and/or hafnium dioxide to increase the
dielectric constant of the film. We will fabricate and model experimental scaled
5V SINOS devices with an emphasis on Write/Erase, Retention and Endurance and
study the influence of stored charge in the nitride on the carrier mobility. We
have developed a novel technique to extract the low-field carrier mobility with
a two-terminal C-V and G-V measurement to permit the optimization of the hetero-
insulator gate dielectric. The SINOS devices offer a unique opportunity to
electrically place charge near the Si-SiO2 interface and to explore their
influence on carrier mobility. We will examine 1/f and RTS noise in these
devices with a focus on unifying existing theories through a consideration of
both trapped and free charge fluctuations. We will complement the electrical
characterization with material measurements on film thicknesses and
compositions, especially in the use of atomic layer deposition (ALD). In
addition, we will employ high-resolution transmission electron microcopy (HRTEM)
and angle-resolved X-ray photo spectroscopy (ARXP) to study film thickness and
structural properties and their relation to theoretical models.

The intellectual merit relies on an integration of research and education to
explore low-field, carrier transport in charge-trap NVSM and high-K nanoscaled
CMOS devices with a quantum mechanical treatment of mobility degradation, charge
trapping, gate leakage, and low-frequency RTS and 1/f noise. We examine mobility
with a simple two-terminal conductance/capacitance measurement to minimize the
need to fabricate complete three-terminal devices with ohmic contacts until an
optimized gate stack has been determined in the experiments. NVSM devices offer
a unique approach to electrically locate and position charge centers in the
vicinity of the Si-SiO2 interface to study their influence on carrier transport
and storage as well as gate leakage and low-frequency noise. Our theoretical and
experimental studies will be complemented with a variation of material
parameters and the use of advanced materials characterization techniques with
HRTEM and ARXPS to model nanoscaled NVSM and CMOS devices. The broader aspects
in our program will advance diversity in the nanoelectronics workforce and
provide intellectual technology transfer, integration of research and education,
and promotion of partnerships with the industrial sector of the economy. We have
developed excellent educational and outreach programs to increase diversity with
opportunities in nanoelectronics, especially silicon semiconductor devices an
important area to maintain US leadership and provide jobs for graduates in a
global silicon-based semiconductor industry. Our research offers an excellent
vehicle for minority student outreach, internships, and partnerships with
industry. The transformative nature of our research lies in (1) a new approach
to obtain low voltage, low power dissipation NVSMs with alternate high-K films
to maintain barrier height while increasing the dielectric constant, (2) a new,
quantum mechanical 1/f noise model, and (3) a novel method to model low field
transport with simple two-terminal C-V and G-V structures, which is easily
fabricated without extensive photolithographic equipment. The concept is
applicable to the study of carrier transport in a broad range of emerging
nanoscaled devices, not necessarily silicon, and will aid rapid and innovative
advances in the field of semiconductor technology.