* 1201095
* RET Site on Multidisciplinary Engineering Research for Rural Michigans Future
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Tolga Kaya, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2015
* USD 454,287.00

This award provides funding for a three year standard award for a Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site Program
at Central Michigan University (CMU), entitled, RET Site on Multidisciplinary
Engineering Research for Rural Michigan's Future, under the direction of Dr.
Tolga Kaya. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RET Site brings together the following
five specialized and successful entities to provide a strong and sustained
collaboration in support of rural Michigan youth and high school teachers for a
future focused on STEM education and employment. 1) CMU, long a leader in
teacher education and professional development is the host site. 2) Engineering
faculty in CMU's dynamic School of Engineering and Technology provide the
cutting edge, creative research and subject-matter expertise with a theme of
smart vehicles/robots. 3)Professional development staff within the Center for
Excellence in Education (CEIE) model and support best practices in curriculum
development, assessment, and teaching and learning strategies for participating
faculty and high school teachers and science education majors (pre-service
teachers). 4) Science and Mathematics Program Improvement (SAMPI) at Western
Michigan University will advise on and implement the comprehensive evaluation
plan. 5) The Science/Mathematics/Technology Center (SMTC) at CMU provides
extensive relationships with high school STEM teachers and administrators and
the personnel and practices to manage the RET Site and its projects. The three
year program will provide a research and professional development opportunity
for a total of 36 teachers, 12 each year, from the Iona-Montcalm, Clare-Gladwin,
and Gratiot-Isabella School districts and CMU science education pre-service
teachers. Each research team will include one in-service and one pre-service
teacher, one experienced engineering undergraduate student who will be
supervised by one engineering faculty during a six week summer research program.
The focus of the program is on interdisciplinary engineering research with an
emphasis on smart vehicles/robots that would allow teachers to link the research
to technology which high school students are relatively familiar with.
Individual research teams will study different aspects of smart vehicles/robots
such as sensors, motion manipulation, computer simulation and characterization,
mechanics, and data processing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CMU is located in the
heart of central rural Michigan where it is "the" university to which schools
turn for access to newly educated teachers and for professional development for
their current teachers. This RET Site will focus on teachers in these rural
areas and support them as they lift the STEM knowledge base of their students,
increasing their opportunities for employment and for becoming entrepreneurs.
Involving pre-service teachers in this program ensures that they begin their
careers well-trained and equipped with research experience and confidence to
take into their classrooms.