* 1201060
* Forming, Advancing, and Sustaining Teacher-Engineer Relationships (FASTER)
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2012,11/30/2015
* Raimondo Betti, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 11/30/2015
* USD 424,623.00

This award provides funding for a three year standard award for a Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site Program
at Columbia University entitled, Forming, Advancing, and Sustaining Teacher-
Engineer Relationships (FASTER), under the direction of Dr. Raimondo Betti and
Mr. Jay Dubner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Columbia University's Fu Foundation School
of Engineering and Applied Sciences will use all of the resources at its
disposal to develop an RET site which will provide pre-college science teachers
with a mentored engineering laboratory experience. The proposed RET site will
place ten public middle and high school teachers in Columbia's research
laboratories headed by faculty members with appointments in the School of
Engineering and Applied Science for 8 weeks in each of two consecutive summers.
An additional secondary school teacher will work in an environmental engineering
laboratory at James Cook University in Australia for 6 weeks. Nine of the ten
domestic placed teachers will be from the New York metropolitan area. The tenth
teacher will be from a secondary school in Singapore. Their research experience
will be enhanced through weekly pedagogical
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FASTER's primary goal is to facilitate long-term
collaborative partnerships between secondary school science teachers and
university researchers by involving teachers in engineering research and helping
them translate their new knowledge into classroom activities. The ultimate
recipients will be New York City area students whose population are largely
underrepresented in the sciences and engineering. Columbia University faculty
will provide teachers with opportunities to gain hands on experience with the
tools and materials of science and engineering in an environment attuned to
professional development. Thus, teachers understanding of engineering and their
ability to develop and lead inquiry- and standards-based science classes and
laboratories will improve. In addition, the teachers will be exposed to a new
perspective and a different professional culture which enables them to
communicate the vitality and dynamism of applied science to their students and
colleagues.