* 1201413
* Geometric and analytic issues of nonlinear equations modelling non-local phenomena
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Nestor Guillen, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 02/28/2015
* USD 102,000.00

The purpose of this project is to understand from the point of view of geometry
and mathematical analysis certain physical models that incorporate either free
boundaries or nonlocal (long-range) effects. In terms of the mathematics, most
of these problems consist of classical field equations from physics (e.g., fluid
mechanics, electromagnetism, elasticity, kinetic theory) and exhibit at least
one of two important characteristics. First, they might involve a "free
boundary," namely, an unknown submanifold (interface) along which the field in
question has a pointwise constraint (for instance, the temperature across along
the interface of a metal might depend on the curvature). These submanifolds have
as much physical interest as the other quantities, and their dynamics are
strongly coupled to that of the fields. The second characteristic these
equations might display is nonlocality, which arises when particles or "agents"
interact at large (noninfinitesimal) scales, for example, in the Boltzmann
equation or the quasigeostrophic equation. This always leads to equations
involving integro-differential operators, such as fractional powers of the
Laplacian. The specific models studied in this project present challenging
analytical problems that are especially attractive in that they highlight the
limits of our understanding of nonlinear partial differential equations. In
particular, they pinpoint difficulties such as the following: obtaining useful
pointwise bounds for solutions (without using comparison principles, or when
equations are supercritical); deriving a priori regularity estimates for
equations that are both nonlinear and nonlocal; understanding the physical
validity of solutions (well-posedness and breakdown); handling nonlinear effects
that dominate diffusion or dispersion (again supercriticality); analyzing
multiscales and disordered media (homogenization).

Nonlinear partial differential equations are ubiquitous in the natural sciences,
as is well known. For this specific project, the richness of nonlocal equations
and free boundary problems cover very diverse natural phenomena, for instance
nucleation of phases, surface tension effects in fluids, crystal formation in
metallurgy, droplet spreading, ocean-atmosphere interaction, and nonlocal
electrostatics. All of these phenomena are relevant to science and engineering,
for instance in materials science (composite design, dislocations),
nanotechnology (microfluids, droplets), bioengineering (martensite or materials
with memory), and biochemistry (nonlocal electrostatics, with great potential in
medicine). A sound mathematical understanding of the respective equations would
be highly beneficial to the development of these technologies.