* 1201943
* EAGER:   Development of a Geospatial Soil-Crop Inference Engine for Smallholder Farmers
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Scot Smith, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 12/31/2014
* USD 292,033.00

PI: Sabine Grunwald (University of Florida, Gainesville)

CoPIs: Scot E. Smith and K. Ramesh Reddy (University of Florida, Gainesville),
Suhas P. Wani, International Crops Research Institute for the Semiarid Tropics
(ICRISAT, India)

Collaborator: Balaji Venkataraman (Commonwealth of Learning, Vancouver, Canada)

This project aims to develop an inference engine to transform smallholder farm
production systems for resource optimization by utilizing spectral technology
and geospatial modeling. The intellectual merit focuses on fusing of innovative
sensor technologies into a holistic engine aiming to enhance conservation of
soil quality and optimize crop yield to support smallholder farmers. The
overarching goal is to build a Geospatial Soil-Crop Inference Engine (GeoSCIE)
that fuses ground-based and remotely-sensed spectral data with geo-referenced
observations to derive critical metrics for crop and soil management. Several
hypotheses will be tested in two smallholder farm settings in Karnataka and
Andhra Pradesh, India, to provide a proof-of-concept for a novel multi-spectral,
spatially-explicit engine that links research models to pixels of smallholder
farms. The objectives are to (1) develop and validate quantitative models that
relate analytically-derived measures of soil indicators including soil texture,
soil organic matter, macronutrients (nitrogen and phosphorus), micronutrients
(sulfur, boron, and zinc) and soil spectral data derived from diffuse
reflectance spectroscopy (DRS) (visible/near-infrared and mid-infrared spectral
ranges); (2) design and implement a three-tiered multi-spectral system using
ground-based spectral reflectance measurements, aerial sensors, and satellite
multispectral scanners for a sequence of cropping seasons that aims to identify
the optimal footprint or instantaneous field of view (IFOV) required for
accurate assessment of crop-specific properties and stressors in smallholder
farm settings; (3a) fuse soil DRS and remote sensing data into a GeoSCIE and
calibrate and validate the engine by estimating a suite of critical soil and
crop/vegetation-specific properties; (3b) use a genetic algorithm to derive
indices from fused spectral data to infer on soil quality, fertility, water
deficiency, and crop stress; and (4) translate results from GeoSCIE into
Reusable Learning Objects (RLOs) to provide training/learning material to
smallholder farmers and streamline GeoSCIE-based management recommendations into
the agricultural-oriented social network application and information system
AGROPEDIA used by smallholder farmers in India.

The research is expected to have broad impact by integrating research with
education and knowledge sharing activities. To foster advancing discovery and
understanding while promoting teaching, training and learning the project will
utilize the EcoLearnIT RLO System. RLOs are globally accessible and will not
only reach smallholder farmers in the selected study areas in India, but can be
also used for training by farmers elsewhere. Undergraduate students will be
explicitly engaged in the educational component of this project. The aim is to
create broad impact by engagement and networking activities which include
integration of research findings and RLOs into short courses taught by project
personnel at the UF-ICRISAT Education Center in India, which targets
underrepresented groups in South and South-East Asia, and other developing
countries in Africa. Research findings will be disseminated into a format easily
understood by smallholder farmers using audio and video recordings and a text-
based tool will be developed to disseminate GeoSCIE findings to smallholder
farmers via AGROPEDIA which is ideally suited to broaden participation of
smallholder farmers since it has been shown to be successful in linking farmers
with researchers.