* 1201385
* Nuclearity, group C*-algebras and II_1 factors
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Nathanial Brown, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2016
* USD 220,000.00

The primary thread of research will focus on emerging analogies between the
structure of II_1 factors and simple C*-algebras. For example, there are now
C*-analogues of McDuff's Theorem and Connes's "Injective implies McDuff" result
(which played a fundamental role in classifying injective factors). The
investigator hopes to explore these analogies with the ultimate goal of
classifying simple C*-algebras of so-called finite nuclear dimension. In another
direction, the investigator will continue working on C*-algebras associated to
groups and related spaces that were recently introduced in joint work with Erik
Guentner. Finally, we will continue our study of dynamical systems associated to
II_1 factors which arise from certain homomorphisms.

One very successful idea in mathematics is that we can learn about complicated
objects by approximating with simpler objects, then passing to a limit. For
example, in calculus we compute the area under a curve using rectangular
approximations, then refining the approximations over and over. Operator
algebras are (usually) infinite dimensional objects which provide the natural
framework for quantum mechanics, for example. Moreover, deep and unexpected
connections with other areas of mathematics such as geometry, topology and
probability were discovered over the years. As such, a solid understanding of
the structure of operator algebras is important. The general philosophy of using
approximations by simpler objects becomes especially relevant here since the
objects of interest are infinite dimensional. The investigator will continue an
established tradition of trying to use finite dimensional approximations to
better understand some fundamental infinite dimensional objects.