* 1201151
* GOALI: Portfolio of Renewable Energy Generation
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2016
* Diego Klabjan, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 03/31/2016
* USD 285,000.00

The main objective of this project is to develop a stochastic portfolio
optimization model to address the problem of renewable &lt;br/&gt;portfolio
selection for a business entity with large real estate properties, and to
develop algorithmic approaches for solving the underlying models. In addition to
considering various renewable options, the model also includes battery storage
since power storage can significantly increase the benefits of intermittent
renewable sources. If the decisions of renewables are fixed, the remaining
problem &lt;br/&gt;is a dynamic program with decisions of power distribution and
how much power to store or extract from batteries in each hour. A further
complicating factor resulting from a long time horizon is the requirement of
battery replacement after reaching their lifespan. The overarching optimization
problem minimizes the cost of installing renewable sources where the objective
function is the value function &lt;br/&gt;of the aforementioned dynamic program,
which depends on the installed renewable sources. Several algorithms will be
designed for &lt;br/&gt;solving this unique optimization problem by exploiting
the inherent structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to technological advancements
and fierce manufacturing competition, it is anticipated that many firms will
find a positive return &lt;br/&gt;on investment on renewable on-site sources.
Such on-site installations will directly benefit from the proposed models and
algorithms. First, the models will assist decision makers in selecting the best
options at a single site or across several sites. Second, uncertainties inherent
in the business - grid prices, renewable energy credits, technological
advancements, to name only a few of them&lt;br/&gt;will be directly incorporated
in the models, which will provide robust solutions. General Motors will provide
test cases of their existing renewable generation projects and those under
consideration. The modeling framework and methodologies do not include anything
specific to the automotive industry and thus can easily adopt by any entity
owing large properties.