* 1201168
* Experimental and Analytical Investigations of Shake Table Tests of a Reinforced  Concrete Structure at the E-Defense Shake Table Facility
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Wassim Ghannoum, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 09/30/2014
* USD 109,227.00

In December 2010, two full-scale four-story reinforced concrete building
structures were tested at the National Research Institute for Earth Science and
Disaster (NIED) E-Defense shake table facility in Miki City, Japan under
increasing multi-directional seismic excitations to near collapse. The principal
investigator and several U.S. researchers under NSF award 1110860 collaborated
with Japanese investigators to instrument the specimens and observe the
performance. Beams, columns, and slabs in the structure performed as expected.
However shear walls and beam-column joints showed severe damage and loss of
integrity even though designed according to current earthquake engineering
practice. The experimental program presents wealth of data to study the accuracy
of current analytical tools. Current analytical tools are calibrated based on
pseudo-static experimental investigations of individual structural components.
The structural engineering field has therefore resorted to a number of
extrapolations to form analytical models of complete structural systems. The
obvious consequence of such extrapolations is an inability to verify the
validity of system level analytical results. The recorded data of test series
presents a unique opportunity to study the accuracy of currently used analytical
tools, identify parametric assumptions, and improve on analytical method for
structural systems. Through this project critical guidance will be delivered on
formulating analytical models for this type of
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The shake table at the Japanese NIED/E-Defense
facility has no counterpart in the world in terms of capacities of testing full-
scale buildings for earthquake motions. The test series were performed on a
full-scale four-story reinforced concrete building structure that reflected
closely current U.S. practices for earthquake design. This test series is the
only one to date of a full-scale, modern, seismically designed reinforced
concrete structure subjected under controlled conditions to a real seismic
event. The performance of structures was worse than anticipated, which raises
serious questions about the adequacy of current seismic design and construction
practices. This project will uncover the causes of this performance and provide
recommendations for improvements in design practices. The research objectives
will be achieved in close collaboration with Japanese researchers. A report and
publications will be submitted to U.S. and Japanese journals to present key
results to a broad audience. The Principal Investigator will use this project to
strengthen ties with Japanese researchers and the E-Defense center. Graduate
engineering students the University of Texas will benefit through classroom
instructions and involvement in the research including travel to Japan to learn
from Japanese researchers at the forefront of the field of earthquake
engineering.