* 1201045
* Matching and Allocation Problems: An Axiomatic Approach with Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Jayachandran Sethuraman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2016
* USD 260,008.00

This award provides funding for the study of matching and allocation problems
with applications to a variety of emerging areas, including applications spurred
by the growth of the internet and electronic commerce, as well as non-standard
applications such as the design of exchanges for kidney transplants, the
assignment of students to schools in districts where there is school choice,
etc. Particular attention will be paid to the design of mechanisms in which
participants do not benefit from misreporting any private information (such as
their preferences) that is relevant to the allocation problem under
consideration. These problems will be studied in an axiomatic framework, which
seeks to understand mechanisms that satisfy many desirable criteria, whose
choice is motivated by the application under consideration. Minimal sets of
properties that uniquely determine commonly-used mechanisms will be identified.
Further, new mechanisms with compelling efficiency and equity properties will be
designed and their use in practice will be evaluated. Several classical flow and
matching models---traditionally studied in the operations research literature
from the point of view of computational efficiency---will be studied, taking
into account incentive constraints and equity objectives.

If successful, the project will result in new mechanisms for several real-life
matching and allocation problems. It will also result in the development of new
theoretical tools and techniques that may be broadly applicable in understanding
the interaction between equity objectives and (both economic and computational)
efficiency objectives in the presence of incentive constraints. This award will
support the development of a doctoral course focusing on the applications of
matching and allocation problems in practice, as well as the redesign of a
course that covers O.R. methods in the public sector. The award will also
support a graduate student and outreach activities such as the writing of
expository articles.