* 1201659
* ACOUSTO-OPTO-MECHANICAL SYSTEMS in PIEZOELECTRIC ALUMINUM NITRIDE NANOFILMS FOR RADIO FREQUENCY PHOTONICS
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Gianluca Piazza, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 06/30/2017
* USD 345,300.00

The objective of this research is to use on-chip acoustics and photonics to
produce miniaturized components that offer a very competitive approach for the
synthesis of low power radio receivers. The approach consists in developing
devices made out of piezoelectric aluminum nitride (AlN) thin films, in which
acousto-optic (modulation of optical signals via elastic waves) and opto-
mechanical (modulation of mechanical vibrations via radiation pressure) effects
are exploited in confined nanoscale resonant structures. The proposed radio
frequency (RF)-photonic receiver relies on an AlN piezoelectric micromechanical
filter to select the incoming RF signal (electromechanical effect) and modulate
the photonic signal (acousto-optic effect). It also uses the intrinsic non-
linearity of the self-sustained opto-mechanical oscillator (opto-mechanical
effect) to down convert the signal to baseband. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this proposal consists in addressing the engineering challenges that
limit the realization of compact RF-photonics receivers based on exploiting
electromechanical, acousto-optic and opto-mechanical effects in AlN films.
Scientifically, elasto-optic effects in thin AlN films and noise mechanisms in
nanoscale opto-mechanical devices will be understood. &lt;br/&gt;Beyond directly
impacting wireless communications, the proposed acousto-opto-mechanical platform
will benefit the broader field of photonics by enabling visible and deep
ultraviolet components that could be employed for medical applications.
Simultaneously, the high mechanical displacement sensitivity attained via
acousto-optic modulators can be transferred to inertial and pressure sensors to
enhance their resolution. More broadly, the knowledge generated by these
research activities will set the pathway for the synthesis of low power
distributed communication links and will enable new generations of sensor
networks.