* 1201348
* Descriptive Inner Model Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Grigor Sargsyan, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2015
* USD 129,060.00

The main open problem of inner model theory is the construction of canonical
inner models with large cardinals with supercompact cardinals being the main
target. In 60s and 70s, major progress was made towards the resolution of the
problem. In particular, such canonical models were constructed for many large
cardinals in the region of measurable cardinals and strong cardinals. However,
soon new obstacles were discovered and through a fundamental work done by
Martin, Steel and Woodin, it became increasingly clear that the ultimate
resolution of the problem has to incorporate ideas from descriptive set theory.
In late 80s and early 90s, Martin, Steel and Woodin, discovered many bridges
between inner model theory and descriptive set theory thus unifying the two
areas of set theory. Descriptive inner model theory is the theory that has
emerged through their work. Its main technical problem is the descriptive
version of the inner model problem, namely, the problem of constructing
canonical models capturing the truth. While many formal versions of this problem
are available, the one that has been publicized most is the Mouse Set Conjecture
(MSC) which conjectures that in models of determinacy, ordinal definability, the
most powerful form of definability, can be captured via canonical models of set
theory. Sargsyan, in his thesis, building on an earlier work of Woodin,
developed techniques for proving MSC and used these techniques to obtained some
partial results on MSC. These partial results then were translated into the
ordinary language of inner model theory, producing canonical models with large
cardinals. Sargsyan believes that the descriptive approach to the inner model
problem is the most promising route to the resolution of the 50 year old inner
model problem and he plans to pursue it further.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Set theory
is the language of mathematics. It provides the basic foundations above which
the rest of mathematics is build. One of the most basic problems in the
foundations of mathematic has been the reduction of all of mathematics into
basic set of axioms whose consistency can either be proven or convincingly
argued for. Gödel's celebrated incompleteness theorems imply that the first
option is impossible. However, because of major developments in the previous
century, the second option is possible via a class of axioms of infinity known
as large cardinal axioms which assert the existence of very large sets.
Virtually, as Gödel himself predicted, every know natural mathematical theory
has been reduced to some large cardinal axiom. The set theorists of the 21st
century inherited the problem of arguing for the consistency of such axioms
which is usually done by exhibiting canonical examples or rather models of such
axioms. The problem of exhibiting such canonical models for large cardinals has
been known as the inner model problem which is the main subject of the proposed
research.