* 1201636
* Very High-Speed, Infrared VCSEL-Array Light Wireless Links
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2016
* Mohsen Kavehrad, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Hao Ling
* 03/31/2016
* USD 359,999.00

Abstract (Proposal No.1201636)

Intellectual Merit: The objective of this research is to demonstrate feasibility
of using optical wireless communications and sensing technologies to implement
very high data rate, self-configuring, low-complexity and low-power in-building
multimedia networks, that will not require pointing, allowing the network to be
robust and portable-friendly. The intellectual merit of this work is in the
exploitation of the 10Gbps optical wireless transceivers along with fly-eye
optical receivers for data-rate-intensive, immersive and interactive audio-
visual applications for educational purposes, medical collaboration and
corporate presentation functions, whereas current high-definition multimedia and
video projection units that serve these purposes operate through wired
connections to a computer or a portable. The project will primarily focus on
faster and efficient modeling and categorization of a variety of indoor optical
wireless propagation environments, optimization and design of optical
transmitters and fly-eye receivers, and assessment of communications performance
measures, such as bandwidth and error rate performance. The anticipated result
of the research is a proof-of-concept optical wireless system for high-fidelity
video transmission.

Broader Impacts: The broader impact of this research is transformative in
several ways. Firstly, it will pave the way for broader commercialization of
optical wireless communication products, and serve as a pioneer for other
feasible optical wireless applications including wireless area networking.
Secondly, it will prove the feasibility of a product capable of delivering high-
quality multimedia-rich content to large classrooms and conference audiences. It
is anticipated that the high bandwidth, portable-friendly optical wireless
communication technology resulting from this research will leap-frog current
technologies, providing domestic leadership in the development and manufacture
of ultra-high bandwidth optical wireless network components. Thus the United
States of America as a whole will see financial benefits in the form of
exporting high tech products, training a more globally competitive workforce,
and other industries will benefit through increased competitiveness by making
early use of the new products. This new paradigm will be a breakthrough in high-
speed wireless frontier. Furthermore, this research will contribute to education
by being incorporated into lectures on optics and wireless communications
engineering, providing opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students to
obtain multi-disciplinary hands-on experience on issues related to wireless
optical communications system design and networking.