* 1201236
* Burning Invariant Manifolds: The Geometry of Front Propagation in Advection-Reaction-Diffusion Dynamics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Kevin Mitchell, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 08/31/2016
* USD 350,000.00

The objective of this award centers on the development of a geometric theory of
reaction front propagation in advection-reaction-diffusion dynamics. In
particular, work will focus on extending the well-known constructs of invariant
manifolds and Lagrangian coherent structures - valuable for passive advection -
to the case of front propagation in advecting media. The viability of such an
approach has recently been experimentally and theoretically demonstrated by the
existence of burning invariant manifolds (BIMs). BIMs generalize the concept of
invariant manifolds in passive advection to the case of front propagation.
(Here, burning refers generally to any kind of front propagation.) BIMs create
local barriers to front evolution, analogous to their advective counterparts. A
central objective of this award is thus to develop a comprehensive framework for
front propagation based on the BIMs. Specific consideration will be given to the
technique of lobe dynamics, to mode-locking of reaction fronts, to topological
dynamics, to three-dimensional fluid flows, and to time-aperiodic fluid flows
(utilizing finite-time Lyapunov exponents and Lagrangian coherent structures).
Furthermore, BIMs will be applied to the control of reaction fronts in chaotic
flows. The theoretical work under this award will benefit from a close
collaboration with the experimental group of Prof. Tom Solomon at Bucknell
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many physical processes combine fluid motion
with the propagation, or growth, of a front separating two different media.
Important examples include flame fronts in an airflow, chemical reactions in
microfluidic devices, plankton blooms in ocean currents, or even epidemics in
moving biological populations. The results of this research will improve the
geometric understanding of a broad class of such processes. A potential
application would be to study the growth of invasive plankton blooms in coastal
waters. Furthermore, by better understanding geometric constraints on front
propagation, one can engineer better control mechanisms. For example, mechanisms
derived from this work could be applied to control chemical reactions in lab-on-
a-chip applications. Through graduate, undergraduate, and postdoctoral research
experiences, this work will also help train the next generation of scientists
and help to nurture the newly established campus of the University of California
at Merced (UC Merced). UC Merced was opened in 2005 and has already made a
significant impact on the economy and education in California's Great Central
Valley, the agricultural heart of the state.