* 1201048
* Spectral and Transport Properties of Multidimensional Almost-Periodic Schroedinger Operators
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Ioulia Karpechina, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 08/31/2017
* USD 136,930.00

The Schroedinger equation with an almost-periodic potential is used to describe
aperidic crystals. Motion of electrons in such crystals is defined by so called
transport properties of the Schroedinger equation. Transport properties are
based on spectral properties. Thus, the study of the spectral and transport
properties of the Schroedinger equation leads to understanding of the mechanism
of electrical conductivity in aperiodic crystals. A phenomenon of the metal-
insulator transition is particularly important for applications. The metal-
insulator transition means that at near zero temperatures a material abruptly
changes its properties from an electrical conductor to insulator, when an
external parameter, controlling electrons energy inside the solid, passes
certain critical value. Metal-insulator transition can be described
mathematically in terms of spectral and transport properties of the
corresponding Schroedinger equation. The insulator corresponds to localized
eigenfunctions (localization) at low energies, while the conductor corresponds
to non-localized eigenfunctions extended states at higher energies. Conductors
and insulators also correspond to different types of transport. The goal of the
project is to describe extended states in the high energy region for
multidimensional almost-periodic Schroedinger operators and to investigate
ballistic transport in this region. Ballistic transport means that electrons can
move almost freely forming an electric current . Because of the lack of
periodicity the usual "periodic" techniques for the study of this operator no
longer work, and new techniques have to be developed. The PI will develop a new
modification (Multiscale Analysis in the Space of Momenta) of Kolmogorov-Arnold-
Mozer method to solve the problem.

There is a huge variety of solids in nature and they have different physical
properties: electrical and heat conductivities, elastic coefficients, etc. This
variety of properties can be explained by inner structure of solids: first, by
types of atoms constituting a solid, and, second, very important, by the
arrangement of atoms in a solid. For example, both diamond and graphite are
built from the same atoms of carbon, and their completely different properties
are due to different arrangements of atoms. A profound problem in Solid State
Physics is to explain the connections between micro structures of solids and
their macro properties. In our days, with the development of new industries,
which are able to produce materials with prescribed nanoscale or/and atomic
structures, understanding fundamental connections between inner structures and
macro properties becomes more important than ever, since it gives opportunities
for industries to produce more materials with desired properties. For a long
time all materials studied consisted of periodic arrays of atoms or were
amorphous. However, in the last decades a new class of solid state matter,
called aperiodic crystals, has been found. An aperiodic crystal is a long range
ordered structure, but without strict lattice periodicity. It is found in a wide
range of materials: organic and anorganic compounds, minerals, metallic alloys
and some proteins. It turns out such materials have properties which are quite
different from those of crystals and amorphous substances. They have a huge
potential for applications.