* 1201504
* Weights in multilinear harmonic analysis and partial differential equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Kabe Moen, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2015
* USD 102,629.00

Kabe Moen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to study the
theory of weights in harmonic analysis and partial differential equations. There
are two distinct main themes that share the theory of weights as a common
thread. The first theme aims to further develop the theory of weighted
inequalities in the multilinear setting. This theory, while still in its
adolescence, is expected to have significant ramifications to several
multilinear operators. For example it may be used to improve the known bounds of
the bilinear Hilbert transform and related bilinear maximal function; an
emphasis of study will be to develop multilinear extrapolation techniques. The
second theme focuses on the regularity of solutions to degenerate p-Laplacian
equations. Such equations arise naturally in the study of mappings of bounded
distortion (quasiconformal mappings) and more generally mappings of finite
distortion. Considering distortion functions that belong to certain classes of
weights allows one to work below the natural size assumptions, yet still obtain
interesting regularity results. The common thread between the two motifs is the
theory of weights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This mathematics research
project contributes to the long-standing synergy between the two fields of
harmonic analysis and partial differential equations, in particular to the study
of nonlinear quantities. In the present setting such nonlinear terms correspond
to mappings of finite distortion that are relevant within the pure mathematics
realm and also have far-reaching applications to other sciences, such as physics
and engineering; materials sciences; hydrodynamics; and medical imaging. Moen
will continue to establish fruitful collaborations both nationally and abroad,
and the outcomes will be disseminated through publications of research articles,
as well as presentations at professional meetings. Moen will integrate this
research project with education, mentoring, and community outreach. In
particular, he plans to continue his community involvement by establishing
outreach programs that will connect local grade schools with the University of
Alabama-Tuscaloosa.