* 1201245
* Influence of Oxidative Stress on Shear-Induced Mechanotransduction in Red Blood Cells
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* William Ristenpart, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 06/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

The research objective of this award is to answer the question: how does
oxidative stress affect the response of red blood cells (RBCs) to changes in
shear stress? Many chemical species are known to affect the "fluidity" of red
blood cell membranes and their corresponding ability to deliver oxygen
throughout the body. Little is known, however, about the dynamic response of
RBCs to changes in shear stress, such as the increased viscous stress present in
an atherosclerotic constriction. In particular, oxidative stress - the excess in
reactive oxygen species associated with many disease states - is known to cause
RBC membranes to rigidify. Strikingly, however, it is unknown how quickly
oxidative stress causes RBCs to rigidify, and it is unknown how quickly or to
what degree shear-induced mechanotransductive signaling is affected. Studies
conducted under this award will combine high-speed video and sensitive photon-
counting assays to investigate the behavior of RBCs moving through model
constrictions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, these studies will provide
the first hard experimental data regarding the mechanical and biological
responses of RBCs to changes in shear stress under varied amounts of oxidative
stress. The knowledge gained from these efforts will thus enhance the field's
ability to model and understand RBC behavior under more physiologically relevant
flow conditions, ultimately providing a more fundamental understanding of
several disease states associated with oxidative stress (e.g., diabetes and
pulmonary hypertension). The educational plan focuses on leveraging the
awardee's expertise in high-speed video at the elementary school level, by
collaborating with a local children's science museum to develop interactive
hands-on exhibitions. At the undergraduate level, the results of this research
will be incorporated into a seminar titled "The Mechanics of Blood," which will
focus on exposing students to research opportunities across campus and helping
attract undecided first-year students to science or engineering.