* 1201102
* Toughness by Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Guruswaminaidu Ravichandran, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 09/30/2015
* USD 412,252.00

The research objective of this grant is to understand and exploit the role of
heterogeneities in creating unique fracture properties. While the study of
brittle fracture has a long history, an understanding of the relation between
microstructure and overall toughness is incomplete. Recent work has shown that
there are exceptional opportunities to dramatically affect toughness by
exploiting well-defined complex heterogeneities. Specifically, preliminary work
suggests that well-designed heterogeneities can dramatically enhance the overall
toughness, and introduce a significant asymmetry where the resistance of a crack
front propagating from left to right is different from that of a crack front
propagating from right to left. Simultaneously, emerging methods of materials
synthesis including digital manufacturing and self-assembly are creating an
extraordinary new ability to synthesize materials and components with
arbitrarily complex but precise heterogeneities. The proposed research will
build on this by systematically examining critical issues in a series of
idealized but increasingly complex configurations. A range of theoretical,
overall characterization and advanced in-situ methods are proposed. The results
of these studies will be used to design and synthesize complex microstructures
using rapid prototyping. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the grant will
enable the design and synthesis of materials with prescribed toughness as well
as fail-safe components where a crack -- if it were to occur -- could either be
pinned in traps or be deflected into regions where it causes minimal damage.
This project will train a doctoral student in a highly collaborative setting
that combines theory, computation and experiment. This project will also create
research opportunity for an undergraduate student each summer. The results of
the research proposed here will be actively incorporated into the curriculum.