* 1201885
* Collaborative Research: Experimental and numerical studies of droplet formation and cell encapsulation in micro-channels for high-throughput electrical measurements
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2016
* Woo Jin Chang, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Mona Zaghloul
* 03/31/2016
* USD 106,205.00

The objective of the research is to investigate and promote the use of pico-
liter scale droplets for encapsulation and monitoring of bacterial growth,
mammalian cell growth, and PCR reactions. The approach is to ascertain both
experimentally and numerically, the device design, mechanisms of encapsulation,
and biological reactions inside the droplets. The research is expected to result
in increased understanding of the fundamental mechanisms as well as realization
of practical devices for point-of-care diagnostics and screening
applications.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the proposed work include the
development of novel numerical techniques for simulation of the cell
encapsulation process, obtaining fundamental insight into the process of cell
encapsulation in the droplets of cell media or buffer, examining the effect of
ionic liquid medium on the cells, a systematic experiment and simulation
approach to design the devices for optical capture, and whether single cell
reactions can be interrogated inside these droplets.&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of the proposed work is that a further understanding of the mechanism of
cell encapsulation process in micro-channels will directly guide the use of
droplets as reaction vessels for cells and molecules in biochemical
applications. Thus, the proposed study can serves as generic platform that
allows the biological activities to be monitored in real time using electrical
means resulting in compact devices. The devices would be used to demonstrate
fundamentals of microfluidics and bioassays to high school students in science
fairs at OSU and as part of a microfluidic module in a 2 week long summer school
at UIUC.