* 1201436
* EAGER - Nanoscale 3D Imaging of ice-embedded metallic structures
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Andrew Minor, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 02/28/2014
* USD 150,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The possibility of imaging metal-water systems at high
spatial and chemical resolution would provide unique and critical information on
the interfacial phenomena controlling the behavior and degradation of catalytic
and structural alloy systems while under service conditions. Existing approaches
to these questions currently focus on developing in-situ TEM holders or
spectroscopy techniques that can provide real time information. However these
techniques generally lack spatial and chemical resolutions that are necessary to
quantify the interfacial phenomena down to the atomic level. The objective of
this project is to develop a unique method to image metal/water interfaces in
three dimensions and at the nanoscale through unique cryo-preparation and cryo-
imaging capabilities at the University of California, Berkeley and at the
University of Michigan, respectively. It involves the development of specimen
preparation from samples of ice that are suitable for examination by atom probe
tomography (APT); focused ion beam (FIB) milling is the specimen-preparation
method of choice. The high pay-off of the proposed approach resides in the
versatility of the method that will allow not only metal-water systems to be
studied, but will also be applicable to interfaces between hard and soft
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This project will
develop a novel technique for imaging frozen solid-liquid interfaces. First,
miniature needles will be machined out of a frozen specimen. Secondly, the
frozen needle will be analyzed atom by atom to form a 3D image of the local
chemistry and atomic arrangement. The technique will be able to analyze solid-
liquid interfaces important for many scientific and industrial technologies. For
instance, this technique can address corrosion phenomena important for alloy
development that are currently understood only at a phenomenological level
because of the lack of high resolution characterization techniques such as the
one proposed here. The methods are expected to impact a large number of research
areas relevant to the development of energy materials (such as structural
materials for power plants, battery materials, nanoparticles for catalysis, and
organic electronic devices). An integrated research and education plan will
employ one or more undergraduate students to work with a post-doctoral
researcher and leverage existing University programs that emphasize the
recruitment of women and under-represented minorities.