* 1201981
* Florida - Georgia LSAMP 2012-2017
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2021
* Ralph Turner, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 09/30/2021
* USD 4,199,903.00

The Florida-Georgia LSAMP (FGLSAMP) is seeking to continue to employ its current
program model while enhancing and focusing upon critical junctures for
successful matriculation through the STEM academic pipeline. Given its mission
to significantly increase the number of baccalaureate degrees awarded to
underrepresented minorities in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
FGLSAMP will focus greater attention on utilizing effective models and best
practices for expanding the pipeline of community college students matriculating
into STEM disciplines at the university level. In conjunction with the emphasis
on community college students, two additional areas of focus include expanding
participation in international research experiences and enhancing means of
growing the number of students entering STEM PhD programs. These additions to
FGLSAMP will enable FGLSAMP to build upon its successful track record and will
allow FGLSAMP to achieve its goals for 2012-2017.

FGLSAMP proposes to significantly expand its STEM talent pool through greater
collaboration among the 14 partner institutions and enhanced practices that
result in: 1) student retention and graduation in STEM disciplines; 2)
effectively preparing and matriculating FGLSAMP community college students to
pursue baccalaureate degrees in STEM disciplines; 3) providing significant STEM
international research opportunities 4) preparation of FGLSAMP undergraduate
participants for STEM graduate education opportunities. FGLSAMP will augment its
current STEM socialization practices to achieve these key guide posts, which are
at the heart of all FGLSAMP academic enhancement and professional development
activities.

The targeted metrics for our five-year program period also include: - Expand the
talent pool of institutional underrepresented minorities awarded STEM
undergraduate and graduate degrees by 15% annually (2,247 baseline) - Place at
least 75% percent of FGLSAMP B.S. degree recipients into STEM graduate programs
- Maintain a STEM retention rate of greater than 80% among FGLSAMP
undergraduates at ASU, BCU, FAMU and FIU - Achieve 5 year time-to-graduation
rate of 85% - Place more than 20 annually students into international research
programs by 2014