* 1201198
* An Integrated Mobile Sensor System for Occupancy and Behavior Driven Building Energy Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2012,09/30/2014
* Bhaskar Krishnamachari, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 09/30/2014
* USD 383,256.00

The research objective of this award is to test the hypothesis that interactive,
sensor monitoring and online control can significantly reduce the energy
consumption of buildings (by 20 percent or more) while maintaining occupant
comfort. Through simulations and experimentation, inputs from a wide range of
modalities and platforms in a heterogeneous sensor system (including wired and
wireless sensors; mobile and static sensors; automatic and human-input-based
sensors) will be integrated and fused in order to measure and track indoor
climate, energy usage, as well as occupant location, activities, and preferences
with much higher accuracy and lower cost compared to homogeneous systems. The
research will encompass mathematical and empirical analysis and evaluation of
efficient online stochastic algorithms based on multi-armed bandit theory that
take the integrated sensor measurements as input to learn over time how to
automatically operate building controls, so as to minimize energy consumption
while maintaining occupant comfort, and quantify the gains in energy consumption
obtained in typical environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
research will establish a framework, where humans and building systems interact
ubiquitously in real time through an integrated mobile sensor and control system
for energy awareness and learning and energy efficiency in buildings. The
results will be disseminated through and contribute to the civil and
environmental engineering, electrical engineering and computer science
curricula, multiple conference talks, and publications. A public outreach and
energy education program is planned to raise public awareness on energy
efficiency in buildings. Targeting K-12 classrooms, this program aims to attract
minority students to the engineering profession in the greater Los Angeles area.
An interactive game, focusing on teaching K-12 students how they can conserve
energy in their daily life by modifying their behavior and habits will be
prototyped and tested.