* 1201354
* Variational Problems and Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Eric Carlen, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 05/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

The proposed research program is focused on the interplay of dynamics and
variational problems, with a special emphasis on quantitative stability
estimates for sharp geometric inequalities. Such estimates and inequalities
provide an effective means to derive properties of solutions of evolution
equations and likewise, evolution equations can be used to derive variational
inequalities. Exploiting this interplay has been very fruitful in the past work
of the investigator, who plans to approach various problems in this framework.
One is to prove new sharp non-local version of the Gagliardo-Nirenberg-Sobolev
inequalities that arise in connection with the fast diffusion equation and
porous medium equation. Such equations arise in the modeling of many phenomena,
physical to biological, and the analytic problems to be investigated are chosen
for their potential broader impact as well their intrinsic analytic interest.
Another such problem concerns quantitiative stability for the Brun-Minkowski
inequality and its application in the study of phase transitions. A similar
philosophy applies as well to certain problems in kinetic theory, where the plan
is to derive quantitative estimates on speed of approach to equilibrium for some
inhomogeneous master equations of Kac type that have recently been used to model
not only physical phenomena, but also phenomena in population
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many phenomena in science and technology can be
modeled by evolution equations. One example that is the object of research in
this proposal is the Keller Segel system, which models the aggregation, or the
absence thereof, in the motion of bacteria. Understanding the behavior of
solutions of these equations is both biologically and mathematically
interesting. In particular, it is often observed that systems of many
interacting agents (such as bacteria) or particles, either classical or quantum
mechanical, evolve toward an equilibrium, and they do this at a certain speed.
Determining the the speed of this process is vital to the understanding of many
such models. This proposal concerns research on obtaining themathematical keys
to such problems and their application in a broad range of fields. A central
focus is solving certain maximization problems, and proving theorems asserting
that any input that produces nearly maximal output must be close, in a an
appropriate sense, to input that gives the exact maximum. As recent research of
the investigator has shown, such theorems provide an effective means to unlock
the information in models of the type described above, and the research proposed
here will further this progress.