* 1201376
* Mod p local Langlands program for p-adic reductive groups and representations of Hecke algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Rachel Ollivier, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The Langlands program, initiated in the 1960s and successfully developed in the
last 15 years, is a set of conjectures predicting a unification of number theory
and of representation theory of groups: the Langlands correspondence provides a
way to interpret results in number theory in terms of group theory, and vice
versa. A decade ago, the question of a p-adic/mod p component of this program
was raised, motivated by natural questions of p-adic arithmetic geometry. As of
now, only very few cases are understood, but they have already had spectacular
consequences such as the proof of most cases of the Fontaine-Mazur conjecture.
Because of unexpected and poorly understood phenomena, statements of a general
p-adic/mod p local Langlands conjecture remain elusive. The proposal aims to
study the mod p representations of p-adic reductive groups in order to
understand the right terms of a mod p Langlands correspondence. The PI's
previous work has shown that studying mod p representations of Hecke algebras is
a promising approach, because it suggests that a mod p Langlands correspondence
does exist. The proposal outlines strategies to study families and complexes of
mod p representations of p-adic reductive groups and their associated Hecke
algebras. At the heart of this proposal is the wish to go beyond the (so far
most investigated) focus on irreducible objects and give a homological approach
to the representations. It goes along with exploring the possibility of a mod p
principle of functoriality and shedding a geometric light on the potential mod p
Langlands correspondence.

The p-adic/mod p Langlands program holds profound prospects for modern number
theory with deep ramifications in arithmetic algebraic geometry. It is a new,
fertile area involving tools and objects that were still completely abstruse a
few years ago. The proposal aims to give a geometric incarnation to the objects
that appear naturally in the mod p framework. The outcome of this work will most
likely be naturally connected to other areas of mathematics influenced by the
Langlands conjectures, such as the geometric Langlands program, and its links
with geometric representation theory. The proposal describes strategies towards
such connections.