* 1201498
* Operator Theory Arising from Systems Engineering
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* J. William Helton, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2016
* USD 286,640.00

This is a proposal for support of projects in parts of operator theory and
functional analysis mostly related to Linear Matrix Inequalities (LMIs) and
engineering system theory. Semidefinite programming, based on LMIs, is one of
the main developments in optimization over the previous 15 years with
applications ranging through most quantitative areas of science. A main thrust
of this proposal is: what is the scope of semidefinite programming? Problems
treatable with LMIs are convex, but conversely which convex problems are
treatable with LMIs? With collaborators the principal investigator is currently
making significant advances on the main aspects of this problem. Special
emphasis goes to LMI problems motivated by systems engineering. While numerics
for LMIs, is hotly pursued there is no systematic theory for simplifying or
analyzing matrix inequalities algebraically. Major parts of this proposal are to
develop such a theory. This produces a rich body of elegant problems in
functional analysis including those described as follows. A symmetric
noncommutative polynomial is called "free positive" provided that all of its
values when evaluated on matrices is a positive semi-definite matrix. "Free
convexity" is defined analogously. The set of all matrices solving a
noncommutative polynomial inequality is called a "free semialgebraic set."
Linear Matrix Inequalities concern conditions making a given linear pencil take
positive semidefinite values. 1. Which sets are the set of all solutions to some
LMI? 2. Can one change variables to achieve free convexity? 3. Find the convex
hull of a semialgebraic set? These can be built as projections of certain convex
sets, as was analysed by J. Nie and the investigator. Free convex hulls are very
intriguing. 4. Noncommutative real algebraic geometry: In another direction,
started by Hilbert's 17th problem, are algebraic certificates equivalent to
statements like one polynomial is positive where another one is positive? The
development of noncommutative analogs of this are going well and considerable
work is in progress. 5. A cornerstone of classical real algebraic geometry is
that projections of semialgebraic sets are semialgebraic. Recent theorems (by
the investigator and collaborators) imply this is (overwhelmingly) false in the
matricial world, producing a barrage of questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work bears on, semidefinite programming, a type of convex optimization
found in many branches of science and engineering. In particular what one sees
in linear systems engineering and control are problems with matrix unknowns.
Simplifying physical problems and converting them to convex ones is currently
done (in thousands of papers) by ad hoc algebraic tricks. The goal in the
proposal is to develop a theory (a noncommutative real algebraic geometry) which
might be used to systematize this. In addition the investigator's group are the
main providers of software (called NCAlgebra) for performing general
noncommuting algebra calculations in the software program Mathematica. An
emphasis now is on algorithms for treating noncommutative inequalities. Also the
group does numerical optimization based on a floor of noncommutative algebra
calculation. The project will engage graduate and some undergraduate students in
summer research and computational projects. This lab experience with
applications will broaden the training of students, many of whom get degrees in
pure mathematics.