* 1201338
* Computable Stability Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Uri Andrews, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2015
* USD 105,001.00

Andrews proposes a program of research spanning classical computability theory,
classical model theory, and especially the interplay between computability
theory and model theory. More specifically, the proposed research will develop
the emerging field of Computable Stability Theory, where the methods of
stability theory plays a key role is the study of effective properties of first
order theories. Stability theory is the part of model theory which focuses on
the underlying geometrical or structural nature of the mathematical objects.
Generally speaking, the more underlying structure the mathematical object
respects, the easier it is to compute information about the object. This forms a
back-and-forth relationship between stability and computability, and this
interplay is the focus of Computable Stability Theory. Questions arising from
Computable Stability Theory lead to new questions in classical model theory as
well as computability, which sheds light on both subjects. Among these questions
is when quantifier elimination to some level can be derived from geometrical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computable Stability Theory endeavors to
explore the basic statement that "structurally simple objects ought to be easier
to compute." Model theory, a branch of mathematical logic, offers tools to
analyze structural simplicity by studying objects in the context of their first
order language. The understanding of the language associated to an object or
class of objects can often be translated to a deeper understanding of the
objects themselves. Computability theory studies questions of computation and
relative computation with regard to mathematical objects. By combining tools
from both fields, Andrews will examine the question of when structural
simplicity does and when it does not translate into computational simplicity.