* 1201541
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: RAPID: Effects of Volcanic Activity on Demographic and Genetic Structure in Tuco-Tucos
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2013
* Eileen Lacey, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 11/30/2013
* USD 25,635.00

For the last 20 years, Parque Nacional Nahuel Huapi in Argentina has been the
site of a comparative study of ecology and genetics of two species of tuco-tuco,
a type of burrowing rodent. The June 2011 ongoing eruption of the Puyehue-Cordon
Caulle volcanic chain in southern Chile has created a time-sensitive opportunity
to assess the impacts of a major geological event on patterns and processes of
genetic diversification in natural populations of vertebrates. With extensive
pre-eruption data, the proposed post-eruption monitoring will capitalize upon an
unprecedented opportunity to explore the effects of a catastrophic environmental
event on the population genetics of free-living organisms. Therefore, this study
should lead to important new insights into the impacts, including long-term
impacts, of volcanic activity, or other catastrophic events, on genetic
diversity.

The proposed research supports student training, conservation, and local
outreach and education efforts. It will involve undergraduate volunteers from
Berkeley, Stanford, and the Universidad Nacional del Comahue in Bariloche,
Argentina, thereby providing significant student training. With regard to public
outreach, the PIs will maintain web and blog sites on the project, providing
quick public access to research methods and results. For the past 20 years, the
PIs have worked closely with Administracion de Parques Nacionales Argentinas and
other conservation organizations in Patagonia to develop sound, data-based
strategies for protecting one of the species of tuco-tuco, including development
of the current monitoring and management program. Data generated by the proposed
research will contribute to these ongoing efforts.