* 1201729
* Optical, Electrical and Magnetic Properties of Multi-Cation Diamond-Like Semiconductors: Intricate Semiconductor Systems for Physical Property Tuning
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Jennifer Aitken, Duquesne University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 05/31/2015
* USD 431,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;Multi-cation diamond-like semiconductors (DLSs)
provide an excellent opportunity for physical property tuning since the number
of potential compositions and chemical structures can be postulated using simple
valence electron principles and Pauling's rules. This project will pursue a
systematic approach to the synthesis and characterization of multi-cation DLSs,
with a focus on second harmonic generation and thermoelectric properties. The
multi-cation DLSs will be prepared by high-temperature solid-state synthesis,
polychalcogenide flux synthesis, as well as iodine vapor transport reactions.
The resulting materials will be characterized with an emphasis on structural
studies via Rietveld refinement of neutron and/or X ray (laboratory or
Synchrotron) powder diffraction data, single crystal X-ray diffraction, and
electron diffraction, as well as other structural methods. The optical,
electrical and magnetic properties of these new semiconductors will be
systematically studied as a function of composition and structure.
Experimentation will be complemented by theory, where electronic band structure
calculations using density functional theory will be used to garner a deeper
understanding of the physical properties. The ultimate goal of the project is to
relate the crystal structure and electronic structure of these materials to the
observed physical phenomena and identify the key structural elements that impart
each material's unique characteristics. This research has the potential to bring
us closer to the realization of new materials for specialized non-linear optical
applications and thermoelectric devices that convert waste heat into useable
energy. There is also a potential for finding multifunctional materials with
uniquely combined properties for new and existing technologies, for example
photo thermoelectrics or spintronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY
&lt;br/&gt;This project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program, aims to prepare and characterize multi-cation diamond-like
semiconductors (DLSs) with potential second harmonic generation (SHG) and
thermoelectric (TE) properties. DLSs are materials with structures resembling
that of diamond, yet they are semiconducting in nature. Studies will focus on
discovering why a particular compound possesses the observed physical
properties. Through this knowledge, new materials can be designed with physical
properties that are tuned for the desired application. DLSs with improved SHG
response may find uses in medical, industrial and military applications such as
laser frequency conversion and signal communications. DLSs with enhanced TE
properties could be used for harnessing waste heat of the internal combustion
engine and transforming it into energy. Improved TE materials are crucial to
making the wide-scale usage of TE materials in home solid-state heating,
ventilating and air-cooling systems a reality. Post-doctoral fellows, graduate
students, undergraduate students, faculty from primarily undergraduate
institutions, high school teachers and high school students will also
participate in this project. The project will broaden the participation of
groups that are traditionally underrepresented in sciences through the Project
SEED program, a summer program for economically disadvantaged high school
students, and the Women in Science program at Duquesne University. Additionally,
collaborations with faculty and undergraduate students at primarily
undergraduate institutions will take place through training and workshops on the
usage and applications of cutting-edge materials characterization techniques
such as single crystal X-ray diffraction.