* 1201953
* EAGER:  Silicon Graphane Analogues
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Joshua Goldberger, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 01/31/2013
* USD 100,000.00

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;The primary goals of this research supported by
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program are to develop the synthetic
methodology for creating organic-passivated single atom thick sheets of silicon,
evaluate their stability in air and water environments, and study their optical
and electronic properties both in the bulk and as single isolated sheets. These
organic-terminated silicon sheets will be synthesized by combining nonaqueous
deintercalation of layered Zintl silicon phases with surface functionalization
processes. A combination of X-ray diffraction, Raman, FTIR, XPS, AFM, SEM, and
TEM measurements will be employed to characterize the structure and morphology
as well as evaluate the long-term air and water stability of these materials.
The optical and electronic properties of these layered silicon graphane
analogues will be characterized using absorption, fluorescence, and electronic
measurements on bulk pellets and single isolated sheets. These single atom thick
silicon graphane analogues are expected to be air- and water-stable, and possess
numerous advantages compared to bulk silicon and other two-dimensional layers,
including having a direct and tunable band gap, as well as the capability for
covalent functionalization with minimal disruption to conductivity, thus
potentially making them a versatile building block for a multitude of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:
&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of allotropes of carbon that are zero-dimensional
(fullerene), one-dimensional (nanotubes), and two-dimensional (graphene), has
opened up entire fields of research and ultimately culminated in two Nobel
prizes. Still, silicon remains the most ubiquitous and technologically
significant material of our time. This research program focuses on understanding
how to synthesize single atom thick sheets of silicon that are protected with
organic molecules for air- and water- stability, and evaluationg their optical
and electronic properties. Considering the promise and application of silicon in
computing, photovoltaics, thermoelectrics, battery electrodes, spintronics, and
chemical/ biochemical sensing, the creation of new air- and water-stable
allotropes of silicon with fundamentally unique properties can hold great
potential in numerous technologies, including renewable energy technologies.
This program will be integrated with educational and outreach activities at Ohio
State which target high school students, undergraduates, and the general public.
The PI is actively involved in mentoring underrepresented groups at both the
undergraduate, and graduate levels, encouraging their development as the next
generation of materials innovators. Finally, this program will support community
outreach activities designed to foster interest in materials- and energy-related
science, technology, and engineering at the K-12 level, via collaborative
programs with the Center of Science and Industry (COSI) museum, and the state
Science Olympiad program.