* 1201394
* Soliton Dynamics and Scattering Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Avraham Soffer, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 05/31/2016
* USD 231,000.00

The research is focused on understanding the mathematical aspects of soliton
dynamics and related topics in wave propagation and scattering. The PI considers
the nonlinear Schroedinger equation on one two and three dimensions. For
attractive nonlinearities localized in space, solutions may exist, which can
then move without dispersion, until they are perturbed. These class of equations
play now a critical role in describing optical devices, Bose-Einstein condensate
fluids and other nonlinear dispersive problems in fluid dynamics and plasma
physics. The equations being nonlinear, require new techniques to understand the
large time behavior of the solutions of this class of equations. Using the
hydrodynamic formulation of Schroedinger equation it was possible to analyze in
detail a completely new type of situations, in which a soliton solution is
created through tunneling from a potential well. The analysis of the two
dimensional case, with vorex initial condition, revealed a new phenomena, the
formation and the ejection of waves in a form of jets. The theory we use,
predict the direction and structure the of the jets. The prediction and the
details of this soliton formation will be further studied. In particular, the
method offers a new way of proving a-priori estimates on the solutions of
nonlinear Schrodinger equation which are not of the standard energy estimates. A
second part of the research involves the detailed decay in time of solutions of
the wave equation on Schwarzschild and Kerr manifolds. In particular the decay
rates as a function of the angular momentum of the initial data is pursued. This
will provide a rigorous proof of a classical conjecture of Price in the theory
of General Relativity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New processes involving optical
devices are studied in detail. In particular one considers a situation in which
light energy is located in a potential well, inside a properly active dielectric
material. Then, the development of the localized energy is derived by a new
mathematical formalism adapted to this situation. It is shown that soliton waves
can emerge from the well, and the theory is capable of determining their size
and speed. As such, it allows, by tuning the shape of the potential well and the
incoming energy to produce solitons with desired profile, sometimes referred to
as soliton guns. This approach has already been observed in some experiments
based on previous works by the PI. the recent preditin of jet formation through
tunneling two dimensional systems, is being developed; in particular,
experimental observation and validation is planned. A second part of the
research is the mathematical analysis of wave propagation and decay on manifolds
generated by black holes. The approach to this problem led a to a new, more
general theory of solving integral equations of the Voltera type, and also led
to a rigorous mathematical verification of some classical conjectures in the
physics literature concerning the behavior of radiated waves off a black hole.