* 1201872
* Research in harmonic analysis and partial differential equations
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2016
* Mehmet Burak Erdogan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 04/30/2016
* USD 248,999.00

Erdogan will undertake mathematics research in the areas of harmonic analysis
and partial differential equations (PDE). In harmonic analysis, Erdogan focuses
on problems in Euclidean spaces centered around Lebesgue norm inequalities. One
subject of on-going research are the restriction estimates for the Fourier
transform. In recent years Erdogan and his Ph.D. student obtained satisfactory
results in some cases. He proposes to continue his investigations on restriction
estimates, and on their applications in PDE and geometric measure theory. In
PDE, the focus is on the dynamical properties of dispersive PDE. One subject of
on-going research is dispersive decay and smoothing estimates for the
Schrodinger equation (SE). Another topic is the regularity of nonlinear
dispersive PDE such as the Korteweg-de Vries (KdV) equation. Erdogan and his
collaborators recently obtained smoothing bounds for KdV, and found applications
to long-term behavior of the solutions. The techniques employed in this work are
applicable to a wide range of PDE. Erdogan will continue his investigations in
this direction. He will also work on mathematical problems on non-linear SE
motivated by the numerical studies in fiber optic communication systems.

Harmonic analysis has played major roles in pure and applied sciences since
Fourier's seminal work on the theory of heat diffusion, continuing on with
Schrodinger's equation in quantum mechanics. This mathematics research project
is partly concerned with problems coming from real-world applications. For
example, the X-ray transform, an integral operator, applied to the density
function of a patient's body is essentially the data obtained by magnetic
resonance imaging. The dispersion managed solitons are used commercially in
transatlantic fiber optic internet cables. A better understanding of the
underlying mathematical structure may be useful in improving these systems. The
dispersive decay and smoothing estimates have a wide range of applications in
nonlinear partial differential equations modeling diverse physical phenomena. In
particular, the nonlinear Schrodinger equation models the transmission of data
in fiber optic communication systems, and the Korteweg-de Vries equation models
surface water waves as well as ion-acoustic waves in cold plasma.