* 1201256
* Conference Proposal Summary: Planning Meeting to Develop an Annual STEM Media Producers Consortium and Conference
* EHR,DRL
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2012
* JoAnna Baldwin-Mallory, Twin Cities Public Television
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 11/30/2012
* USD 49,994.00

Twin Cities Public Television in collaboration with a committee of Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) media professionals will
organize a one-day conference devoted to network building and planning for an
inaugural, multi-day STEM Media Producers Conference in 2013 or 2014.
Professional organizations and conferences are well-known and effective means of
building community and advancing practice within specific fields. Mass media --
film, television, radio, and more recently, productions for online/digital
platforms -- have been a primary component of NSF's support for informal science
education (ISE) for more than three decades, drawing on the skills of an
extremely diverse array of professionals. Yet despite the many common issues
faced by these professionals and the increasingly cross-platform nature of ISE
media projects in the NSF portfolio, at present no formal organization,
professional society or annual conference exists for this community. An
organization of media producers and a regular, annual meeting will provide a
much-needed forum to address issues of training and professional development,
facilitate cross-platform collaborations, increase the use of new media
technologies, and synthesize evaluations and research into coherent statements
of the powerful impact of STEM media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
conference will take place in conjunction with the ISE PI Meeting in March 2012,
capitalizing on the momentum generated at a media convening organized by the
Center for the Advancement of Informal Science Education (CAISE) in July of
2011. The approximately 30 attendees will include participants from the July
Convening and other STEM media professionals, all representing the subfields of
Film, Television, Radio, and the increasingly important and diverse
Online/Digital field, plus research and evaluation specialists and CAISE staff.
The agenda will emphasize the potential of cross-platform collaborations and
define a second agenda for a larger annual meeting that will include the larger
community of STEM professionals.