* 1201942
* Student Support for Topical Conference on Cathodoluminescence 2011
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Edward Vicenzi, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 03/31/2014
* USD 6,325.00

This award will partially support a conference focused on cathodoluminescence
that is scheduled for October 24 - 27, 2011, at the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) Gaithersburg, MD, under the sponsorship of the
MicroAnalysis Society (MAS) and the Australian Microbeam Analysis Society
(AMAS). The conference is supported and organized by staff of NIST, the
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO), Australia
and the University of NSW, Australia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cathodoluminescence
(CL) is the non-incandescent emission of light (photons) emitted from a
luminescent material excited by an electron beam. CL implemented in an electron
microscope is an advanced microanalysis technique that enables high sensitivity,
high spatial resolution characterization of trace elements and defect
microstructure within a wide range of materials. These microstructural defects
strongly influence the optical, electrical and mechanical properties of
technologically important nanoscale and bulk materials including ceramics,
dielectrics, semiconductor and optoelectronic device materials, etc. CL analysis
of microstructural defects in minerals is also of particular importance in the
geosciences providing for example, unique high sensitivity information about
mineral chemistry, crystal growth, formation conditions, alteration, diagenesis,
context for geochronological measurements, and provenance information of oil and
mineral deposits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting in October 2011 at NIST will
be first meeting of its kind on cathodoluminescence microanalysis and has
stimulated national and international interest and participation. The meeting
follows the proven successful MAS Topical Conference format that includes hands-
on laboratory demonstrations, in addition to invited and contributed conference
presentations. The laboratory demonstrations will take place in the Advanced
Measurement Laboratory of NIST's Surface and Microanalysis Science Division
where a range of state-of-the-art CL systems, CL analysis software and
supporting instrumentation are available to participants. In addition, other CL
systems and ancillary equipment not represented in the NIST laboratories will be
installed for the duration of the topical conference. Poster sessions will be a
highlight of this conference, allowing additional involvement, particularly by
students, post-doctoral fellows, and other early career researchers. The
excellent NIST venue will provide the opportunity for a maximum of 80
participants (including professionals, vendors/ sponsors and students) to attend
the topical conference on CL.