* 1201401
* Monge-Ampere-type equations and geometric optics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Cristian Gutierrez, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2016
* USD 270,000.00

The main question considered in this project is concerned with the design of
surfaces redirecting radiation emanating from a source point (or a set of
points) onto a set of directions or a target screen in such a way that the input
and output intensities of the radiation are prescribed. The sources and the
target lie in different materials having different refractive indices, and the
surface sought is the interface between the two media. Several models are
proposed to describe these phenomena as accurately as possible, taking into
account various important factors such us energy loss in internal reflection and
distance of the target to the sources. The questions proposed concern existence,
uniqueness, and regularity of solutions for these various models. The surface
solutions to these problems satisfy fully nonlinear partial differential
equations of Monge-Ampere type involving the output and input intensities and
other parameters depending on the model. Such equations appear naturally because
the interface surface we seek has the property such that the ratio between the
changes of energy sent and received in a small area can be expressed in terms of
the input and output intensities.

The research pursued in this project arises naturally in the design of optical
devices (e.g., aspherical lenses, mirrors, antennas) that have multiple
applications in the construction of many optical and transmission instruments. A
large portion of the problems under study have practical interest, for example,
in the design of lenses focusing light into a desired targeted destination. The
impact of the project lies in the development of a mathematical theory that
would render this design more efficient, precise, and easily and quickly
adaptable to changing situations. It contains ideas and models that are
potentially transformative for the construction of those devices. This research
is potentially useful for engineering design and manufacturing; in particular,
in the design of aspherical lenses for illumination applications where energy
optimization is important. In addition, numerical implementation of the
mathematical theory developed will be useful in the actual construction of
optical devices. The research also blends with recent developments in other
areas of mathematics and physics, such as transformation optics and cloaking.
The project involves collaborations with scientists in the US and abroad, and it
will contribute to the training of graduate students.