* 1201957
* Photoexcited Carrier Dynamics in Oxide Semiconductors for Photovoltaics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jason Baxter, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2016
* USD 380,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semiconducting perovskite oxides are
made from earth-abundant, non-toxic elements, can be synthesized in high quality
heterostructures, and have electronic properties that can be tuned through
doping. While these properties make them promising candidates for solar energy
conversion, fundamental scientific insights, such as understanding the
mechanisms that limit recombination lifetime of photoexcited carriers, are
necessary before complex oxides can be utilized for efficient solar energy
conversion. The intellectual mission of this project is to identify strategies
to maximize photoexcited carrier lifetime and mobility using a combination of
advanced thin film deposition and ultrafast spectroscopy. Thin film
heterostructures consisting of the ABO3 perovskite structure, where A is a rare
earth or alkaline earth ion and B is a transition metal ion (A = Sr, La, Eu; B =
Cr, Fe), will be synthesized using oxide molecular beam epitaxy. Temperature-
dependent time resolved terahertz spectroscopy (TRTS), UV/visible transient
absorption (TA) spectroscopies, and Hall effect measurements will be used to
probe dynamics of photoexcited carriers and mobility in the perovskite thin
films. Through this detailed study of perovskite photophysics, this work will
lay the scientific foundation for a new generation of oxide-based solar energy
conversion devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide a rational basis for
designing and selecting new perovskite oxides with long lifetimes, high carrier
mobilities, and optimal band gaps for solar energy conversion. Availability of
efficient, low-cost, clean, and sustainable photovoltaics and photocatalysts
made from earth-abundant, non-toxic materials would have transformative impact
on the US energy portfolio. The project will advance scientific education
through activities including the training of graduate and undergraduate students
in materials synthesis and characterization techniques, student participation in
scientific conferences, and in-class demonstrations of thin film deposition and
ultrafast spectroscopy equipment. Outreach will also extend to pre-college
students by the PIs? continued participation in mentoring local high school
teachers through NSF RET and university-initiated programs. These programs are
particularly beneficial for underrepresented groups since most teachers are from
the School District of Philadelphia, whose student body is over 80% minorities.