* 1201087
* Ultra-High Performance Fiber Reinforced Concrete Structures - Macroscale Analysis with Mesoscale Lattice Discrete Particle Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Gianluca Cusatis, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2015
* USD 286,000.00

This research develops a macroscale computational framework for fiber-reinforced
cement composite (FRCC) structural members, with a specific focus on ultra-high
performance concrete (UHPC). UHPC is an FRCC that attains superior mechanical
properties to reinforced concrete through a finely graded cement matrix and a
high steel fiber volume. A key hurdle to analyzing UHPC structural components is
the complex fracture mechanics involved, however recent advances in lattice
model simulation have provided a computationally efficient platform for
simulating discrete cracking. Lattice discrete particle models (LDPM) can
predict concrete behavior through mesoscale constitutive relationships where
failure of the material is represented through fracture and cohesion in tension
and compaction and pore collapse under compression. The LDPM has been
successfully integrated into a commercial finite element framework at small
scales, making it an attractive and accessible option for studying the load-
deformation response of full-scale UHPC structures if computational hurdles can
be overcome. The principal goal of the research is to deliver a validated
computational modeling protocol capable of performing structural analysis to
collapse of full scale UHPC components (e.g., beams, columns, plates) including
discrete cracking, fiber-matrix interaction, and thin-walled
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent efforts by government and industry are
focusing on broad implementation of UHPC in transportation structures, high-rise
buildings, and blast protection. This effort is taking time to catalyze, in
large part because computational tools for analyzing UHPC structural components
loaded to collapse have yet to be developed. This research aims to overcome
existing computational hurdles to deliver a useful structural analysis tool for
UHPC to researchers, government, and industry. Integrated education and outreach
goals for this research will pair the multiscale computational framework with
hands-on experiments to introduce students to the rewards of research and to
fundamental engineering principles. The Center for the Enhancement of
Engineering Diversity (CEED) at Virginia Tech is planning middle school summer
sessions to study tension, compression, and cracking in cement-based composites.
A UHPC module will be developed for the Virtual Center for Resilient and
Sustainable Infrastructures, hosted in the virtual gaming environment Second
Life, to foster student interest in research.