* 1201597
* Travel support for invited speakers to attend 86th ACS Colloid and Surface Science Symposium at Johns Hopkins University, June 10-13, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Michael Bevan, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 12/31/2012
* USD 7,500.00

1201597&lt;br/&gt;PI: Bevan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will partially cover
travel costs associated with invited speakers attending the 86th ACS Colloid and
Surface Science Symposium at Johns Hopkins University, June 10-13, 2012. Invited
speaker participation is critical to the meeting's success in terms of
attracting the best contributed talks and exposing graduate student attendees to
the state of the art in the fields of colloid and surface
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the 2012 colloid and
surface science symposium at Johns Hopkins University is that it provides a
forum for communicating fundamentally new insights into colloidal and surface
science with relevance to existing complex fluids and advanced materials
applications as well as emerging nano- and bio- technologies. Due to its broad
scope, this meeting typically attracts 500-700 attendees from diverse
disciplines (e.g. Chemistry, Chemical Engineering, Materials Science, Physics,
etc.) and nearly all major US academic institutions and many leading
international institutions. The diversity of the attendees and the talks is
further represented by contributions from theoretical, computational, and
experimental groups and the participation of scientists and engineers from all
sectors including industry, government, and academia. This symposium provides an
opportunity for all attendees, including graduate students, to disseminate their
own research findings and to learn about the latest work of invited plenary and
keynote speakers who represent the best internationally recognized investigators
working on problems involving colloid and surface science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this proposal are that
funds from the NSF will be used to ensure the participation and attendance of
premier researchers at our symposium, and thus guarantee dissemination of state-
of-the-art research to all attendees as well as an impact on the education and
training of graduate student attendees. This meeting has traditionally been a
good forum for graduate students, and we expect that about a quarter of the
meeting attendees will be graduate students presenting oral presentations or
posters on their PhD projects. By acquiring travel support the best domestic and
international speakers, this support is in line with NSF's mission to
disseminate research findings from NSF supported research and educate and train
students to create tomorrow's high tech work force. The requested funds will
support invited speaker travel via reduced registration costs so they can
participate in the meeting with preference given to groups traditionally under-
represented in science and engineering discipline.