* 1201982
* Collaborative Research: Intrinsic Limits of Transport in Graphene Nanoribbons
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2012,09/30/2013
* ERIC POP, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 09/30/2013
* USD 220,000.00

The objective of this program is to elucidate the fundamental limiting
mechanisms of charge and heat transport in graphene nanoribbons (GNRs), which
are quasi-1-dimensional (1D) devices obtained from 2D graphene. The combined
experimental and theoretical approach of the PIs will study the influence of
width, substrate, edge roughness and decoration on the electronic and thermal
properties of GNRs over a wide range of temperatures and applied electric
fields. The intellectual merit lies in revealing the fundamental limitations of
current and heat flow in GNRs, which could be used to implement both transistors
and interconnects and have a trans-formative effect on modern electronics. This
project will span from nanomaterials and devices to comprehensive microscopic
simulation to guide and interpret the experiments. Tuning of width and control
of the edge roughness or functionalization achieved in this program would open
new vistas for the manipulation of electronic, thermal, and thermoelectric
response of GNRs. The fundamental knowledge resulting from this work would apply
to other quasi-1D systems where variability, edge roughness, and substrate
effects become important. The broader impacts include (1) the creation of a
broad educational environment for gradu-ate students through the experimental-
theoretical nature of the project, (2) student exchanges and regular visits to
facilitate a vibrant collaboration between the two nearby campuses, (3) involve-
ment of undergraduates in research and publishing, (4) mentoring of women and
minorities, and (5) interacting with K-12 students through local resources (the
UIUC Nano-CEMMS center and the UW-Madison MRSEC), and with a world-wide audience
through the nanoHUB.org.