* 1201986
* Adaptive and Intelligent Forecast Engine Platform for Full-Spectrum Prediction of Solar Power Output
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Carlos Coimbra, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 04/30/2015
* USD 384,452.00

The objective of this research is to develop the concept of Smart Solar Farms.
The approach is to integrate advanced solar forecasting methods into parallel
computer platforms with the objective of quantifying the variability and
availability of solar energy for power production, thus enabling solar
integration with the power grid. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates a very high number of inputs, varying
from radiometric and meteorological time series to high-resolution remote
sensing and ground-to-sky images, into a single adaptive and intelligent
learning platform capable of local processing of high-fidelity forecasts. The
proposed research is transformative in that novel, highly optimized natively
parallel platforms will generate, in-situ, real-time forecasts for all time
horizons of interest by a combination of machine learning software/hardware
integration with intelligent energy management
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The reliable and
economical integration of solar energy resources into the power grid is one of
the most critical global technological challenges of our time. This project
develops cost-effective tools that are essential to the integration of solar
energy into a variety of possible smart grid solutions that aims at energy
security and power quality improvements. We will also educate a new diverse
generation of green energy experts, who master critical machine learning
techniques specifically designed for variable resource power production and
control. The concept of Smart Solar Farms will be demonstrated, and the test-bed
will continue to provide high quality information, research opportunities and
educational experiences for the community-at-large for many years beyond the
duration of the project.