* 1201446
* Automorphic forms, L-functions and the relative trace formula
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Brooke Feigon, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 04/30/2016
* USD 169,670.00

The relative trace formula is an important tool in the study of automorphic
forms and the Langlands program. Jacquet invented the relative trace formula to
study period integrals of automorphic forms, in particular, to establish
criteria for certain cases of functoriality in terms of non-vanishing of
periods. More recently, work has been done in some cases relating the value of
the period explicitly to special values of L-functions. The importance of the
relative trace formula is widely recognized and the field is far from exhausted.
The PI plans on generalizing to higher rank groups a result of Waldspurger and
Jacquet linking L-values with period integrals, extending work of hers on a
subconvex bound and generalizing results of hers on an average L-value formula
to higher degree L-functions where much less is known. In addition, she will
continue her work in computing statistics for curves over finite fields by
looking at the distribution of the zeros of the zeta functions of a family of
Artin-Schreier curves defined over a finite field as the genus of the family
increases.

The PI's proposal includes a plan to mentor and conduct research with
undergraduate students at The City College of New York. This institution has a
diverse student body consisting of large numbers of traditionally
underrepresented groups, in terms of race, ethnicity and socio-economic
background. In addition the PI will continue her work mentoring women in
mathematics.