* 1201263
* Computability and Randomness in Dynamical Systems and Fractal Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Jan Reimann, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2015
* USD 91,693.00

Reimann proposes to investigate interactions between computability theory,
dynamical systems, and geometric measure theory. Reimann intends to use concepts
from dynamical systems and fractal geometry to study computability theoretic
structures, in particular, the set MIN of reals of minimal Turing degree. Being
a central object in the study of degrees of unsolvability, minimal degrees have
recently exhibited interesting properties with respect to geometric measure
theory. An open problem is the determination of the Hausdorff dimension of MIN.
This problem is related to questions concerning extraction of randomness,
diagonally non-computable functions, and Sacks forcing. It also motivates
questions about algorithmic independence of reals, and how effective randomness
(with respect to arbitrary measures) behaves under splits and joins. In a second
area of investigation, Reimann proposes to study algorithmic reducibilities from
the point of view of Borel equivalence relations. In a remarkable confluence of
methods from descriptive set theory, ergodic theory, topological dynamics, and
other areas, researchers have successfully classified many equivalence
relations. Yet most equivalence relations arising from computability theoretic
reducibilities have so far resisted complete classification. Reimann intends to
investigate LR-equivalence, an equivalence relation of fundamental importance in
effective randomness, and also the role uniformity plays in the classification
of Borel equivalence relations.

Computability and randomness are two of the fundamental ideas that drove the
scientific revolutions of the 20th century and changed the way we think about
the world. Computability theory concerns itself with trying to understand which
problems are solvable by computers. It was developed as a rigorous mathematical
discipline in the 1930s through the work of GÃ¶del, Church, Turing and others.
Around the same time, Kolmogorov provided the notion of randomness with a solid
mathematical foundation in the form of measure theoretic probability. The theory
of effective randomness, which brings together probability theory and
computability theory, has made it possible to qualitatively and quantitatively
study the ways in which the two notions, computability and randomness, delimit
and condition each other. It gives a mathematically precise meaning to questions
like "Are random processes necessarily uncomputable?" or "If we have access to
randomness, can we facilitate computation?" The major objective of the proposed
project is to further the study of the interaction between randomness and
computability. In one part of the project, this interaction is to be studied
with the help of concepts from two other areas of mathematics - geometric
measure theory and ergodic theory. In another part, Reimann plans to explore the
role computability and randomness play in certain areas of dynamical systems.
The latter objective can be seen as a first step of a long-term project - to
help pave the way for a better, more exact understanding of the forms in which
randomness does occur in this world, through the theory of effective randomness.