* 1201502
* Resolution of Singularities and Birational Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Jaroslaw Wlodarczyk, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2016
* USD 172,165.00

The investigator plans to adapt his simplified algorithm of Hironaka's
resolution of singularities to different types of resolution problems. By a
suitable modification of the basic notions (like order, marked ideals and etc)
introduced in the algorithm in characteristic zero the investigator plans to
approach the problem of resolution of singularities in positive characteristic.
In particular, the investigator plans to apply the resolution algorithm to some
special classes like locally binomial varieties. Already in this case the
existence of canonical embedded resolution is highly nontrivial and it is a good
testing ground for the general approach. On the other hand by using the theory
of Deligne Weight filtration on the cohomology groups the investigator plans to
study new invariants of singularities describing the cohomological properties of
the fibers of resolutions of singularities and their links. The investigator
plans also to study generalizations of the Weak factorization theorem from the
point of view of its further potential applications. The theorem allows to
factor any birational maps between nonsingular varieties into a sequence of
blow-ups and blow-downs with smooth centers. It is a very useful tool,
especially for studying, so called, birational invariants. The problem is that
the resolution of singularities is not unique. The Weak factorization theorem
can be thus used to compare the invariants resulting from the desingularization
process. The technique of a generalized Weak factorization theorem was used also
in the recent study of the invariants of the fibers of resolutions.

Studying the singularities is of critical importance in many areas of
Mathematics. The Hironaka theorem on resolution of singularities plays a central
role in Algebraic Geometry. It constitutes a basis of proofs of many theorems
not only in Algebraic and Analytic Geometry. The theorem on desingularization is
proven in characteristic zero and is known only in special cases in positive
characteristic. This is a major drawback for many theorems which rely on
desingularization and which can be proven in characteristic zero only. The
project deals with studying new ideas and developing new relatively simple
approach to the resolution problem in positive characteristic. It also opens
some new possibilities in general topic of singularities in positive
characteristic. On the other hand the investigator plans to study new
interesting topological invariants describing the resolutions of singularities
in characteristic zero. He also plans to further develop and generalize
birational techniques (like the Weak factorization theorems) relevant for
studying topological properties of the resolutions.