* 1201484
* RAPID Collaborative Research: Fire severity and ecosystem impacts immediately following an extreme fire event in northern Minnesota
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2013
* Shawn Fraver, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 10/31/2013
* USD 202,704.00

Large natural disturbances have important implications for both short and long
term ecosystem function and dynamics. Among the most important attributes is
severity, a combined function of disturbance intensity and the relative
susceptibility of ecosystem elements, such as vegetation and soils. The Pagami
Creek Fire of August 2011 in the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness of
Minnesota presents an historical opportunity for understanding spatial
heterogeneity in fire effects and its consequences for future ecosystem recovery
within a fire dependent ecosystem in the eastern United States. This large fire
exhibited a wide range of behaviors across an ecologically diverse area for
which unprecedented levels of pre-fire forest conditions were documented. The
seasonal timing requires a rapid field response so that fire intensity,
severity, and initial soil impacts can be accurately measured prior to the onset
of winter.

Transects of plots will be sampled across major forest types for data on live
and dead vegetation amounts and distribution and chemical attributes of the
soils in burned and unburned plots that will also be compared to data obtained
before the fire. Satellite imagery will be used to characterize tree and shrub
burn severity and vegetation loss. This information will be used to scale the
plot level data to the entire burned area and will enable the scientists to
examine the feedbacks among forest structure and fire disturbance and to better
predict future ecosystem recovery.

Opportunities for studying the behavior and ecological impacts of major fire
events in forests of the eastern United States are dramatically less than in the
west. This research will provide a foundation for programs that will increase
public safety, facilitate reintroduction of fire into fire dependent eastern
forests, and provide guidance for forest and wilderness management in the face
of major natural disturbances.