* 1201951
* NSF Nano workshop: Safety aspects of nanosystems and infrastructure for sustainability, Orlando, Florida, December 8-9, 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Sudipta Seal, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 05/31/2013
* USD 46,329.00

1201951&lt;br/&gt;Seal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While there is a body of research
addressing the environment and health issues of EHS (environment, health,
safety), the safety issues involved are not examined as frequently. This
workshop will examine the state of the research and needs for research in the
area of nano-safety. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: To address the
safety issues, this workshop, "NSF Nano workshop: Safety Aspects of Nanosystems
and Infrastructure for Sustainability (SANIS) will be held at University of
Central Florida, Orlando, Fl, 8-9th Dec, 2011. &lt;br/&gt;The main topics of the
workshop are: &lt;br/&gt;-Personal protection from nano exposure
&lt;br/&gt;-Instrumentation for nanosafety monitoring &lt;br/&gt;-Nano storage
safety and handling and disposal &lt;br/&gt;-Lab (Hood, sink, storage, etc.) and
infrastructure design for nano-research &lt;br/&gt;-Information sharing to keep
a safe environment for nano-research &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The gathering of
invited experts to address this safety issues will bring a broad impact to
nanotechnology R&amp;D and will be beneficial to the regional and global
economy. It is envisioned that this workshop will provide an opportunity to
discuss important research activities relating to safety in nanoscience and
technology. The event will comprise a diverse community, including renowned
experts from academia, industry and national laboratories. The workshop aims to
discuss in-depth the current trends and future challenges of nano-safety.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The workshop is also expected to create a
sufficient interest among the researchers to develop and further expands
cooperative research activities. Discussions with the prominent researchers will
lead to new areas of research cooperation and academic exchange. In addition, it
is an absolute necessity to create a new breed of safety researchers who can
work across traditional disciplines. This is vital to the future of
nanostructure science and technology.