* 1201207
* A Decomposition Approach for Rigorous Treatment of Uncertainty in Manufacturing and Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Kurt Maute, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 04/30/2016
* USD 390,000.00

The research objective of this award is to create an approach that enables
integration of manufacturing and design processes of nano-structured materials
into a seamless optimization framework. This approach will allow considering
systematically the interdependency of manufacturing and design parameters, and
rigorously treating uncertainty due to material properties and manufacturing
imperfections. Conventional strategies that loosely couple design and
manufacturing become inadequate when the size of material features and devices
approaches nano-meter scales. This deficiency typically results in lengthy
product development cycles, low yield, high manufacturing costs, and unreliable
designs. The optimization framework here will tightly couple design and
optimization processes. To handle the increased complexity of the interconnected
design and manufacturing problem, this research will explore new strategies for
rigorously decomposing the coupled problem into simpler, tractable sub-problems.
The development of the optimization framework will be driven by the challenges
of designing and manufacturing high-energy-density electrodes for re-chargeable
battery cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research effort will create a formal
approach for the fast and efficient insertion of novel nano-engineered materials
and devices into a broad range of technologies. Through the application of the
new optimization framework to the design of high-capacity battery cells, this
project will directly contribute to advancing energy storage technology, which
plays a crucial role in the quest for sustainable energy. Additionally, this
project will provide a unique opportunity for two graduate students and up to
six undergraduate students who will receive a rigorous training at the interface
between design optimization, numerical modeling, and uncertainty quantification.
Upon graduation, these students will have the knowledge and skills to bridge the
gaps between design and manufacturing, and to tackle fundamental issues
currently hampering the development of a broad class of nano-enabled
technologies. Results of the research will be broadly disseminated for maximum
impact.