* 1201195
* Sustainability and Performance-Based Ground Stabilization Assessment
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Ahmed Elgamal, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2016
* USD 341,096.00

Sustainability is increasingly becoming a major concern in construction and
development of the built infrastructure. Systematic inclusion of environmental
impacts and life-cycle costs as metrics in performance-based engineering
frameworks is a primary objective of this research. In order to develop the
quantitative integrated elements of such a framework, attention is placed on
ground improvement (stabilization) in seismic regions, as a representative
geotechnical engineering area of major economic and environmental consequences.
Researchers with complementary expertise from the University of California, San
Diego (UCSD) and the University of Central Florida (UCF) are collaborating on
this effort. The study will develop and implement for use an extended
performance-based framework for ground improvement that incorporates economic
impacts and carbon footprint metrics; advance the computational modeling
capabilities related to the seismic performance of improved ground through
calibration and verification using data from case histories and model testing;
and report the probabilistic sustainability results in terms of risk/expense and
carbon equivalent outcomes, suitable for decision-making considerations. In
conducting this research, available data on the studied ground improvement
techniques will be coalesced and analyzed. An existing soil constitutive model
will be extended to more accurately capture post-liquefaction reconsolidation
settlement behavior, based on a better understanding of the volumetric strain
distribution and settlement patterns of the improved ground (including the
influence of foundation loading on post-liquefaction settlement). The open
source platform OpenSees will be employed for conducting the underlying Finite
Element (FE) computations. A rigorous probabilistic performance-based
engineering framework that integrally includes sustainability considerations
will be developed and numerically implemented for ground improvement analysis
and design. Building information modeling (BIM) techniques will be used to
integrate geotechnical data, carbon-footprint, and spatial settlement scenarios
with post-earthquake repair and sustainability metrics. Direct input from
practitioners will guide all phases, with the overall goal of advancing the
state-of-the-art and state-of-practice in ground improvement analysis and
design. On this basis, different ground improvement options will be evaluated,
towards the decision-support process. Finally, analysis and design tools based
on this extended PBEE sustainability framework will be developed for efficient
practical implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In parallel with the research
tasks, a primary effort is made to maximize the impacts on education, outreach,
and industry interaction. A small industry advisory board will provide guidance
on the research program, and create field and office summer undergraduate
student internship opportunities. Instructional seminars will be offered to
practicing engineers on the background and use of the tools to be developed in
this study.