* 1201171
* GOALI: Roll-to-roll Solvent-free Fabrication of Asymmetric Porous Membrane for  Low-cost High-efficiency Fuel Cell Humidification
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Chris Gearhart, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 05/31/2016
* USD 369,653.00

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) grant
provides funding to investigate the formation mechanism of asymmetric membranes
in a solvent-free fabrication approach and the water transport phenomena in such
membranes, in order to develop a manufacturing process for low-cost, high-
efficiency humidification systems for fuel cell vehicle applications. The
asymmetric membranes will be fabricated using a roll-to-roll foaming process
with non-equilibrium gas saturation and desorption. A physics-based multi-scale
dynamic model for water vapor transport in porous media will be developed to
guide the design of the membrane structure. A bubble growth model will be
employed together with experimental studies to identify the optimal process
conditions. The experiments will be conducted on a lab scale foaming apparatus
that will be designed and built. The fabricated membranes will be characterized
and evaluated in prototype humidifiers sized for fuel cell vehicles. This
research will be conducted with close collaboration between university and
industry research teams. The university team will focus on modeling and process
development and the industry partner (Ford) will focus on system design and
integration. &lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will lead to
a novel manufacturing process for asymmetric membranes that are suitable for
fuel cell humidification applications. They will also lead to enhanced
understanding of water vapor transport phenomena in porous media. The technology
developed in this work will be transferrable to the automotive industry and
contribute to reducing the cost of fuel cell vehicles and improving the
competitiveness of domestic manufacturers. The developed manufacturing process
can also be used to fabricate membranes for many other applications, such as
water purification and gas separation. In addition, this research will provide a
unique opportunity for undergraduate and graduate students to obtain
experimental and analytical training in a collaborative environment with
industry.