* 1201544
* Geometry and Physics  Miami - Brazil - Mexico - Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Maxim Kontsevich, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* tara smith
* 01/31/2013
* USD 30,000.00

This conference will take place January 23-27, 2012 in Miami. The conference
webpage is at http://www.math.berkeley.edu/~auroux/miami2012.html

Kontsevich's formulation of Homological Mirror Symmetry (HMS) and its
subsequent extension to more general settings involve algebraic and geometric
tools such as Lagrangian intersection theory, some new derived categories, or
noncommutative Hodge structures. Recently, Homological Mirror Symmetry has
transformed from a phantasy to a leading field in modern geometry. This was
achieved in part due to constant exchange of information among the leaders of
the field of Homological Mirror Symmetry (Kontsevich, Soibelman, Orlov, Auroux ,
Abouzaid, Fukaya, Seidel, Zaslow, Pantev, Gross, Siebert, Mikhalkin, Zharkov,
Thomas, Smith, Katzarkov, Bridgeland, Frenkel, Okounkov, Bezrukavnikov,
Bridgeland, Pandharipande)with physicists (Vafa, Hori, Gukov, Kapustin, Neitzke,
Douglas, Diaconescu). This exchange was mainly done during month-long activities
taking place every winter in Miami. In addition, many young people were
attracted to this field: Sheridan, Preigel, Izik, Pandit, Favero, Kerr, Ballard,
Diemer, Dykerhoff. This conference will enable these fruitful exchanges to
continue.

While mirror symmetry initially arose from phenomena in string theory, this very
active subject at the interface between mathematics and physics has acquired
increasing mathematical stature. Numerous works have shown the relevance to
mirror symmetry of new and subtle mathematical structures. This conference will
extend the success of previous activities by branching out in a new field of
dissemination - creating a new University of Miami, Cinvestav, Campinas
institute featuring two conferences per year and exchange of postdocs and
students. These conferences will be happening in winter and will be partially
supported by University of Miami, Cinvestav, and Campinas.