* 1201345
* Conference: Cohomology and Support in Representation Theory and Related Topics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Julia Pevtsova, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2013
* USD 40,478.00

A workshop on "Cohomology and Support in Representation Theory and Related
Topics" will be held at the University of Washington, Seattle, on August 1 - 5,
2012. Following seminal work of Daniel Quillen, cohomological support varieties
have been studied and seen numerous applications to the development of the
representation theory of a wide array of structures: finite groups, Lie algebras
(and superalgebras), finite group schemes, Hopf algebras, small quantum groups,
and general self-injective algebras. In recent years, there has been tremendous
progress in unifying the theories for different structures. Further, the notion
of "support" itself has evolved considerably from its initial definition in
terms of the cohomology of a finite group to a much more category theoretic
concept. The workshop "Cohomology and Support in Representation Theory and
Related Topics," following on the footsteps of the summer school on the same
topic, will be an opportunity to summarize the history of this theoretical tool,
to report on recent progress on multiple fronts, and to prepare a new cadre of
mathematicians to continue the extensive development and applications of
supports in many different areas of mathematics. Additional information on the
workshop can be found at http://www.math.washington.edu/~pischool/

The workshop "Cohomology and Support in Representation Theory and Related
Topics" will bring mathematicians from different areas together to foster
interaction and find new connections between multiple fields united by their use
of the concept of "support" and will introduce a new generation of young
researchers to the field. The organizers of the workshop are Christopher Bendel
(University of Wisconsin-Stout), Henning Krause (Universitat Bielefeld), and
Julia Pevtsova (University of Washington). There are twenty four
confirmed/tentatively agreed speakers which include leading researchers in
several different areas of representation theory, commutative algebra, and
triangulated categories from around the world. The workshop will follow directly
on the footsteps of a summer school for graduate students and recent PhDs to be
held one week prior at the same location. The summer school will present three
series of lectures introducing young mathematicians to several active directions
of research within the broad field to be covered more deeply during the
workshop. Such a juxtaposition will provide the junior participants with a
valuable opportunity to take the foundational knowledge they acquire during the
summer school and use it to delve into current problems during the workshop.
Taken together, the summer school and the workshop are aimed to be both a
thorough survey on the exciting recent developments in the field and the venue
for an active discussion of future prospects and open problems.