* 1201824
* OEDG Planning Grant- Enhancing Recruitment and Retention Through Cross-Disciplinary Support Systems, Incentives, and Culturally-Relevant Curricula
* GEO,GEO
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2015
* David Kimbrough, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 01/31/2015
* USD 39,987.00

San Diego State University is using this planning grant award to explore the
needs of returning Veterans in the San Diego region and identify effective
strategies for engaging them in education and career pathways in the
geosciences. The San Diego region is host to several military bases and there is
a large population of Veterans who have access to higher education through the
G.I. Bill. Data show that there is a greater proportion of Veterans, compared to
the average student population, interested in pursuing degrees in STEM
disciplines, making them a fertile opportunity for engagement in the
geosciences. In addition, Veterans are generally very diverse in ethnic and
cultural background, as well as having a high proportion of persons with
disabilities, as a result of their military service. Unlike traditional
students, Veterans often have completed some college level courses and have
obtained valuable experiences as part of their service. As such, their
educational needs for completion of college degrees, or transitioning from
college into graduate programs, involve a more customized pathway. This planning
grant will host two workshops for academic and military personnel to discuss and
consider issues, barriers, and strategies for effectively engaging returning
Veterans in the geosciences. The project leverages an NSF-funded program at SDSU
within the Engineering programs that specifically targets returning Veterans.
This project serves the NSF and GEO goal of broadening participation in STEM
disciplines and addresses an important Presidential priority.