* 1201995
* Investigation of Turbulence Dynamics in the Presence of Flow Shear, Electrode Biasing, Magnetic Shear and X-Points
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* David Newman, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 344,999.00

Turbulence and turbulent transport of heat, momentum, and particles in the
presence of spatially varying (sheared) flows are ubiquitous in fusion, space,
and laboratory plasmas. It has been observed that when the shear in the flow --
either "equilibrium" ExB flows, or turbulent Reynolds stress self-driven (zonal)
flows -- is sufficiently large, turbulence and/or turbulent transport can be
reduced or suppressed. The high confinement mode (H-mode) widely observed in
toroidal fusion devices is one example of such flow shear suppression. There has
been a significant amount of work, including experimental, computational, and
theoretical, on understanding the interactions between fully developed
turbulence (and its associated transport) and flow shear. However, since the
observed transitions to suppressed or reduced turbulence states typically occur
on very fast time scales, little has been done experimentally to elucidate the
detailed nonlinear dynamics of this transition. Because of the difficulty in
observing the dynamics, a theoretical understanding of the transition is also
lacking, since few detailed tests of models have been
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to improve the
understanding of the detailed dynamics of transitions between states of unstable
drift fluctuations (including broadband turbulence) and fluctuation-suppressed
states in a controlled laboratory environment. Experiments, which are being
conducted in the dual-source HelCat (Helicon-Cathode) device at the University
of New Mexico (UNM), are investigating the effects of controlled magnetic shear
and magnetic X-points on these dynamics, as well as the detailed effects of
electrode biasing. These experiments are being complemented by direct
comparisons with a fully nonlinear global Braginskii code, as well as other
computational tools. The primary numerical code, a fully 3D global (full plasma
equilibrium and fluctuations), is being used to model and understand both large-
scale equilibrium flows and fluctuations. This code is complemented by a linear
stability code, which will be used to interpret the nature of the fluctuations,
and a 1D, 3V particle in cell (PIC) code to understand the details of the plasma
potential profile as electrodes are biased to arbitrary voltages to affect
flows. Additionally, measurements and simulations from the linear HelCat device
are being compared with those from the toroidal TORPEX basic plasma device at
the Centre de Recherche en Physique des Plasmas, École Polytechnique Fédérale de
Lausanne (CRPP-EPFL) in Lausanne, Switzerland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
international research team includes researchers from UNM, the University of
Alaska, Fairbanks, and CRPP-EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland (who are participating
at no cost to NSF). The team is composed of full-time faculty, graduate and
undergraduate student researchers, including female and minority students, and
thus has a strong STEM educational component. This work will increase the
fundamental knowledge of plasma turbulence/flow shear dynamics, and is expected
to have an impact on astrophysical, space, laboratory, and fusion plasmas, as
well as on neutral fluid systems.