* 1201442
* Analytic, probabilistic and combinatorial number theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Kevin Ford, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2016
* USD 288,183.00

One project deals with refining stochastic models for an important problem in
arithmetic dynamics, namely understanding the extreme orbits of iterates of the
Collatz function T, where T(n)=n/2 if n is even and T(n)=(3n+1)/2 if n is odd.
The analysis involves models based on random walks and branching random walks,
subjects from probability theory. Goals are to better understand certain aspects
of the numerical data and compare and contrast the predictions of different
models. A second project deals with a problem of how many disjoint arithmetic
progressions are possible with distinct moduli less than a given bound. Here
there are connections with central questions in combinatorics concerning
families of pairwise intersecting sets. Thirdly, the proposer will investigate
the distribution of Euler-Kronecker constants associated with number fields, and
how they are connected with configurations of prime numbers called ``prime
k-tuples'' and with values of Euler's phi function. For the fourth project, the
proposer will continue his investigations into subtle discrepancies in the
distribution of prime numbers in arithmetic progressions. The main new topic of
inquiry is how large the discrepancies can be if the Extended Riemann Hypothesis
is true. Previously the proposer studied the discrepancies under the assumption
that the Extended Riemann Hypothesis is false. The proposer will continue his
investigations into the structure of Pratt trees, a structure built up from
prime numbers. He will also continue research into explicit constructions of
matrices satisfying a Restricted Isometry Property which have application to
sparse signal recovery.

Questions about properties of positive integers, especially the way in which
integers factor and the distribution of prime numbers, have fascinated people
for thousands of years and have recently found applications in computer science,
information security and sparse signal recovery. This proposal concerns several
projects in the theory of numbers, emphasizing connections with other areas of
mathematics such as Probability and Combinatorics as well as applications to
other fields. For example, the study of a certain iterated function on the
integers leads into cutting edge research in probability theory, and the study
of collections of disjoint arithmetic progressions leads to fundamental problems
in combinatorics about intersecting families of sets. Other projects concern the
distribution of prime numbers in arithmetic progressions, special configurations
of prime numbers, and the construction of matrices (using number theory) which
are useful in compressed sensing.