* 1201878
* Molecularly Engineered Artificial Nanopores with Differential Selectivity and Sensitivity
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2012,02/29/2016
* Richard Timmons, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 02/29/2016
* USD 388,000.00

Objectives: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This proposal addresses a number of
fundamental and important obstacles that have limited the utility of nanopore
sensing technology. Specifically, nanopore size, surface composition and
stability of the pores are addressed to broaden this technology to include
important new areas, e.g. sequencing of genomes, as but one of many examples. To
help expedite progress in this area, our objective involves fabrication and
thorough evaluation of a new approach to nanopore sensor technology.
Specifically, we propose construction of artificial pores in which both the size
and surface chemistry of the pores are precisely controlled over a wide range of
pore sizes. For this purpose, a novel combination of thermal processing,
followed by pulsed plasma chemical vapor deposition, will be used to shrink pore
sizes controllably and reproducibly, while simultaneously varying surface
chemistry. Availability of these molecularly engineered nanopores will hopefully
overcome limitations currently encountered in analytical applications of this
technology. An additional important objective involves extension of this
technology to several new, high profile applications to be made available via
our approach, e.g., selective differential detection by two oppositely chirally
functionalized nanopores which will revolutionize chromatographic measurement of
chiral compounds; similar schemes will be possible in many other
cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits of the Proposed Activity?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; To date, nanopore fabrication has focused primarily on
low-throughput serial approaches, with little use of bottom-up technology. In
general, key issues such as stability of nanopore/fluid interfaces,
reproducibility of nanopore surface properties, extended pore stability and the
need for robust chemical functionalization of the nanopores remain. The ready
availability of mechanically stable nanopores, having a range of well-defined
diameters and surface chemistries, as described in this proposal, represents a
transformative advance in this area. New insights will be gained from selective
interactions in nanopores, providing quantitative handles to evaluate the
molecular responses of ligands and to define novel, chemical means of
interrogating targeted analytes. This will stimulate additional studies: control
of translocation times of analytes through the pores (an immensely important
present problem) and the use of chemistry and size differentiated nanopore
arrays. This innovation will also help overcome and replace the present labor-
intensive and low-throughput fabrication methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts of the Proposed Activity?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposed project
will impact many areas that depend on the confluence of sciences and
engineering. Examples include design of bio-inspired systems, sensors for
environment and living systems, etc. The basic principles involved can be
integrated into all levels of education. Graduate and undergraduate (UG)
students will be engaged and introduced to exciting new dimensions of analytical
chemistry, biochemistry and solid-state fabrication through development of a
cross-listed course module on the bio-nano interface. The research outcomes will
be also used to develop integrative participatory modules at our presently
conducted Summer Camps (for middle/high-school students) and Girlgeneering Camps
(for female high school students) to attract future adults to STEM careers.
These outreach endeavors will be pursued: (1) Seminars/lab-tours for involvement
and retention of UGs in research; (2) Engaging minority students through the
McNair Fellows program; (3) Dynamic Facebook presence for the
projection/exposure/discussion of the research; (4) Engagement of K-12 students
and teachers through live webcasts. The results of the proposed research and
education endeavors will be disseminated not only through peer-reviewed articles
and conferences, but also through public media (radio, newspaper, weblogs,
public displays). UTA Chemistry participates in the local State Fair. UTA has
the largest digital planetarium in the Metroplex, with extremely heavy K-12
traffic. We plan to develop a small clip on nanopore sensors.