* 1201512
* Motivic structures in physics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Matilde Marcolli, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2016
* USD 187,653.00

The theory of motives, initiated by Grothendieck, is one of the highlights of
modern algebraic geometry. It was initially motivated by the existence of
several different notions of cohomology for algebraic varieties and the quest
for an underlying universal structure. It has since developed into a very
complex and fascinating subject of pure mathematics, which is currently still at
the center of much ongoing investigation and which, over the years, gave rise to
many deep results in arithmetic and algebraic geometry. Given its original
motivation and its historic development, the theory of motives appears very far
remote from the world of theoretical physics. However, in recent years, explicit
computations carried out by physicists working in perturbative quantum field
theory, followed by an increasing number of precise mathematical results, have
uncovered a deep connection between periods of motives (numerical invariant
that, in an appropriate sense, measure the complexity of a motive) and
amplitudes of Feynman diagrams in quantum field theory. This project is focused
on the role of motives in various branches of theoretical physics, starting from
the Feynman amplitudes, by investigating the relations between different models
(the parametric Feynman integrals on one side, and the twistor based
computations of Feynman amplitudes on the other), but also by using the
algebraic varieties that occur in quantum field theory as a testing ground for
new theories in algebraic geometry such as the so-called "geometry over the
field with one element". Moreover, part of this project investigates the
occurrence of motives and periods in statistical physics, through the algebro-
geometric properties of the partition function of Ising models and their
generalizations, the Potts models. Another part of this project deals with the
development of a new theory of "noncommutative motives" and its role in string
theory and quantum field theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an
interdisciplinary project that bridges between a very abstract field of pure
mathematics, the theory of motives, and concrete mathematical models in high-
energy physics, statistical physics, and string theory. The research project
described above will have the effect of importing new mathematical tools into
some fast developing areas of physics, and will also, at the same time, lead to
new mathematical results, and the further development of some new branched of
pure mathematics, within the research areas of algebraic and arithmetic
geometry, through a new input of ideas, motivation, and intuition from physical
theories. The project has a strong educational component, with the direct
involvement of several graduate and undergraduate students.