* 1201449
* 2012 Catalysis GRC, New London, NH, June 24-29, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2013
* Bruce Cook, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 02/28/2013
* USD 15,500.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1201449&lt;br/&gt;Cook&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cataly
sis is a key technology for improving the quality of life while simultaneously
reducing the adverse impact of human activities on the environment. The
discovery of new catalytic processes and the improvement of existing ones have a
major economic impact on our nation. It is estimated that 80% of the products of
modern society go through a catalytic process at some point in their
manufacture. Catalysis is also critically important for securing the nation?s
energy supply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests support for the 2012
Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Catalysis. The conference, which will be
held at Colby-Sawyer College in New London, New Hampshire, on June 24?29, 2012,
will bring together leading researchers from around the world to discuss their
latest, most exciting work in catalysis and future directions for the field. The
meeting sessions that will take place are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Catalysis:
New Advances and Applications&lt;br/&gt;2) Advances in Surface Science and
Characterization&lt;br/&gt;3) Advances in Theory and its Application to
Catalysis&lt;br/&gt;4) Perspectives on Catalytic Mechanisms&lt;br/&gt;5)
Organometallic Catalytic Systems: Homogeneous to Heterogeneous&lt;br/&gt;6)
Closing the Pressure Gap, Fundamentals to Application&lt;br/&gt;7) Advances in
Photocatalysis&lt;br/&gt;8) New Frontiers in Catalysis in Energy
Systems&lt;br/&gt;9) Catalysis: Impact and Future Directions. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;A special effort will be made to support early career scientists who
otherwise would be unable to attend: junior faculty members, post-docs and
graduate students, with special emphasis on promoting the participation of women
and underrepresented groups. Participation by early career catalytic researchers
will add significant value to this conference and will foster communications
among current and future leaders in a field that derives its vitality from the
continuous interplay between academic and industrial research. The setting of
the conference helps keep participants on-site in order to maximize
interactions, intellectual discourse and networking.