* 1201876
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Institutions, Development, and the Politics of Locust Control in West Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Sallie Marston, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Hammel
* 10/31/2013
* USD 12,000.00

This doctoral dissertation project investigates the differential scale in which
locust outbreaks are managed in West Africa. Institutions are often mismatched
to the problems they are mandated to resolve. This mismatch is often of spatial
scale, such as, national agencies mandated to solve problems of international
scale, or international organizations mandated with local-scale management
issues. Such institutional mismatch poses an intellectual puzzle common to
numerous ecological and public health management regimes, which include water
pollution control, vector disease prevention and climate governance. The study
is concerned with how scientific and technical experts operate and adapt within
agencies assigned to resolve precisely these mismatched crises. It focuses on
national and international efforts to manage an agricultural pest hazard that is
especially adept at evading and exceeding state capacity: the swarms of Desert
Locust (Schistocerca gregaria) that periodically threaten crops throughout
Western and Northern Africa. To this end, the study examines the social and
technical practices of, and interactions amongst, locust scientists and locust
management experts and technicians in (1) a locust science research center (in
France), (2) a national locust control center (in Mali), and (3) meetings of
international agencies mandated with the coordination of scientific expertise,
management activities, and funding allocation related to locust control efforts.
Interviews on, and observations of, the activities of the concerned actors will
supplement analysis of various document materials (locust science literature,
conference proceedings and crop protection agency reports) to determine how
perceptions of locusts and their control vary between groups, experts and
authorities, which factors direct and control the flow of locust control
resources, and how and whether each of these vary over time and across
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By explaining how and why certain locust
management practices are favored, and in response to what challenges or
opportunities, the study will identify the source of specific lapses in
management capacity, which in turn will allow more informed decision-making and
risk analysis, providing opportunities to amend the nature of pest control
within international development efforts. This holds out the prospect for
reducing the financial as well as environmental costs of interventions, and
making them more amenable to explicit political negotiation by diverse publics.
At a broader level, the results of this study will help re-think the role of
technical and scientific expertise in the networks of international development
aid and knowledge, their relation to the challenges of state-making, and will
help find ways to increase the fit between institutions and ecological
management. These problems are crucial to strategies to both enhance food
security and to govern real and pressing environmental problems throughout the
world. Dissemination is planned for academic and non-academic audiences. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this project will provide
support to enable a graduate student to establish an independent research
career.