* 1201384
* Tailoring the Energy Levels of Donor and Acceptor in Organic Photovoltaics for Increased Photovoltage with Ferroelectric Dipole Layer
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Stephen Ducharme, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 06/30/2016
* USD 416,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Energy, Power, and Adaptive Systems
Program (EPAS) in the Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems
(ECCS) and the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program (EPM) in the Division
of Materials Research (DMR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research Objectives and
Approaches. The objective of this research is to enable large efficiency
improvements of Organic Photovoltaic (OPV) devices by focusing on the leading
cause of efficiency reduction in OPV devices which occurs in the charge transfer
process from donor to acceptor molecules. The approach is to insert an electric
dipole layer between the semiconductor donor and acceptor layers to minimize the
energy loss with tuned the relative energy levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. This project provides a unique device
design rule to increase the open circuit voltage of OPV devices potentially to
the thermodynamic limit. This device structure can be applied in any existing
polymer system to boost the efficiency without compromising other properties
such as the current output or device stability. This is a transformational
approach because of its potential to transform OPVs from laboratory subject to
vital technology. In addition, the proposed research will provide new
fundamental insight into the physics of charge photogeneration, charge
collection, and the factors determining photovoltage output of OPV devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The project activities will make
significant contributions to scientific knowledge, education, outreach, and will
benefit society through technology transfer, training the next generation of
scientists and engineers, and informing society about the excitement of organic
solar energy production. The project will provide graduate students with
innovative opportunities such as industry research experience for graduate
students. This project will promote teaching, training, and learning by
involving undergraduate involved in the inherently interdisciplinary cooperative
research activities and recruiting students from minorities and underrepresented
groups.