* 1201976
* TiO2 ultrafast all-optical devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Eric Mazur, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 06/30/2015
* USD 375,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop on-chip microphotonic devices for
future telecommunication bandwidth and computing needs. The approach exploits
recent advances in TiO2 photonic nanowires to build novel all-optical
modulation, switching, and logic devices. Professor Eric Mazur is an expert in
nonlinear optics and pioneer of both silica nanowires and TiO2 photonics. He
proposes to leverage TiO2-photonics technology to realize devices for all-
optical switching applications within the communications octave (800?1700 nm).
TiO2 balances a strong optical nonlinearity with low two-photon absorption, a
high refractive index, and wide transparency not achievable in silicon, silica,
or chalcogenide glass. These properties enable lithographically defined
nanoscale waveguides with huge effective nonlinearities (100,000 times that of
silica). The proposed TiO2 Sagnac interferometers are small (< 0.3 mm2),
efficient (< 10 pJ), and capable of ultra-high bit-rate all-optical logic (>
1Tb/s). This research will usher in a new paradigm of devices capable of
operating across widely spaced communication bands. Beyond miniaturized photonic
devices, this proposal will support current collaborations developing integrated
quantum optical devices, optical frequency combs, and biological sensors. TiO2
is both inexpensive and scalable, expediting its adoption into society. This
work will educate and train future multidisciplinary scientists and engineers
through research-based education. Professor Mazurs work with local high schools,
NSF-sponsored programs, and the high representation of women in his research
group will broaden participation of underrepresented groups. Finally, this work
will be broadly disseminated to the public using the group?s well-established
program integrating outreach and public education with research.