* 1201234
* Statistical Methods for Enabling Medical and Population Genomics of Admixed Human Populations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Carlos Bustamante, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,590,784.00

The intellectual merit of this project lies in the development of population
genetic theory and statistical genomic approaches for modeling the demographic
history of admixed human populations, including minority populations in the U.S.
The project has three major aims: AIM 1: To develop improved population genetic
models of admixed human populations. Genomes of admixed individuals can be
modeled as mosaics of chromosomal tracts that originate from a finite number of
ancestors and populations. Current models of admixture are limited by
simplifying assumptions regarding the amount, duration, or direction of the
admixture process and fail to accurately predict patterns of genetic variation
observed in real data. To redress this issue, the investigators propose a family
of higher order Markovian models and coalescent approaches that provide much
greater flexibility. AIM 2: To develop statistical inference tools for
estimating historical admixture. This project will improve upon existing methods
for robustly inferring the population of origin of chromosomal segments in
admixed genomes. Given the distribution of ''admixture tracts'', one then wishes
to model the recent demographic history of the population. The investigators
will use the results of Aims 1 and 2 along with a growing database in the
investigator's lab on genomic variation in the Americas to provide detailed
models of admixture that can empower medical and association studies in the
Americas. AIM 3: To develop a Linkage/Admixture Map of Hispanic/Latino
populations. Recently, it was shown that motifs associated with population
specific alleles at the PRDM9 locus account for a significant fraction of
recombination rate variation among populations. The investigators propose
analyzing data from more than 20,000 genetically and ethnically diverse U.S.
participants across at least 2.5 million markers to identify population-specific
recombination hotspots and their relationship with ancestry. Specifically, the
investigators aim to identify Native-American specific recombination hotspots
and produce the highest-resolution recombination map of the human genome to
date.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS) have
dramatically increased the scientific community's understanding of the genetic
basis of complex disease by identifying thousands of genetic variants associated
with chronic diseases including Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes, heart disease,
hypertension, and many cancers. A key limitation of existing studies is that
they have focused largely on participants of European descent and some of these
genotype/phenotype associations do not readily translate from one ethnic group
to another. Furthermore, since the next generation of studies will focus largely
on querying rare genetic variants (i.e., &lt;5% frequency) for association, this
''transferability problem'' is likely to get worse and risks perpetuating or
even widening existing health disparity among ethnic groups in the U.S.
Broadening representation in medical genomics studies is a key mechanism for
redressing these biases. Critical to enabling trans- and multi-ethnic medical
genetic studies is a rigorous understanding of how 500 years of admixture among
diverse European, African, and indigenous American source populations have
shaped the genomes of African-American, Hispanic/Latinos, and Native Americans
today. A key outcome of this research will be user-friendly software that
implements a comprehensive, probabilistic, and flexible family of methods for
inferring genetic ancestry. The investigators will train undergraduate, high
school, community college, graduate, and post-doctoral students including many
from underrepresented minority groups. Project results will be disseminated to
the public through the San Jose Tech Museum and participation in conferences
aimed at minority groups including SACNAS and the National Urban League.
Partnerships with key industry leaders will allow us to reach potentially
millions of participants.