* 1201735
* EAGER:   Optimizing Nitrogen Fixation between Bacteria and Legumes in Marginal Soils
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Ann Hirsch, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2016
* USD 293,609.00

After photosynthesis, nitrogen fixation is the most important biochemical
reaction on Earth; both processes are essential for life. Although 78% of the
earth's atmosphere is diatomic nitrogen (N2), all living organisms require
nitrogen but in either reduced (ammonia) or organic forms (amino acids, nucleic
acids, etc.). Nitrogen for plant growth is supplied mostly as commercial
fertilizer, but the costs of fertilizer (and with it food) are increasing
because synthetic nitrogen fertilizer requires natural gas for its production.
Certain bacteria reduce or 'fix' N2 gas into ammonia as the starting point for
amino and nucleic acid syntheses. Nitrogen fixation is a crucial component of
the nitrogen cycle, and thus essential for maintenance of the planet's nitrogen
balance. This project will test members of the genus Burkholderia, recently
discovered to nodulate such agriculturally important legumes as bean and cowpea,
with Rhizobium strains in terms of providing fixed nitrogen to plants growing in
arid, acidic, or saline soils, which will become more widespread as climate
change continues. Our approach will be to inoculate legumes with Burkholderia
species either singly or together with Rhizobium strains, or together with newly
discovered plant growth-promoting bacteria that improve root architecture for
water uptake or provide available phosphate or iron, to test for increased plant
biomass, seed yield, shoot and root growth, nodule number, and nitrogen fixation
ability. Genetic tools including reporter gene fusions and mutagenesis as well
as genome analysis and physiological/biochemical experimentation will be
employed. This project will provide scientific training and critical thinking
skills to undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral students, particularly
members of groups who are currently underrepresented in STEM fields. Our
ultimate goal is to reduce our dependence on non-renewable fossil fuels by
utilizing beneficial microbes that act synergistically with nitrogen-fixing
bacteria to enhance plant growth and yield even on the most marginal soils.