* 1201896
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Turbulent Mixing in Laboratory Magnetospheres
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Jay Kesner, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

Plasmas constitute over 99% of the visible universe and turbulent mixing of
plasmas is a fundamental process that is important both in natural and
artificial situations. Turbulent mixing of ionized gas, called plasma, is
especially fascinating when the plasma is embedded inside a strong magnetic
force field. Mixing of magnetized plasma has special geometric relationships,
couples energy from small and large sized vortex-like structures know as
"eddies," and creates self-organization through a remarkable turbulent "pinch."
A collaboration between two universities will operate two unique facilities,
called laboratory magnetospheres, that contain high-temperature ionized gas
using a magnetic force field that resembles the field that surround our Earth
and other planets. New measurements will be combined with new theories and
simulations that will answer unresolved questions including: How do plasma
eddies couple energy at different sizes? How do plasmas evolve during turbulent
mixing? What mechanisms cause turbulent self-organization? New science will
advance including: (1) global imaging and control of turbulent interchange
mixing in a variety of plasma conditions, (2) study of electrostatic self-
organization through the understanding of the turbulent pinch, and (3)
validating our models for lowfrequency turbulence by carrying out self-
consistent nonlinear simulations of turbulent mixing in laboratory
magnetospheres.

This research has broad impact because turbulent mixing of magnetized plasma is
ubiquitous and fundamental. Understanding turbulent mixing in laboratory
magnetospheres will improve our understanding of (1) processes occurring in the
ionosphere, which is important to satellite communication, (2) turbulence inside
the central regions of planetary magnetospheres, which is important to space
weather models, and (3) the anisotropic mixing of low-dimensional fluid systems,
which is important to industrial processes. Additionally, this collaborative
research uses state-of-the-art facilities at highly-regarded research
universities to motivate students and scientists to explore plasma dynamics in a
magnetic configuration that resembles a magnetosphere and to encourage the next
generation of scientists able to understand and control high-temperature,
ionized matter.