* 1201475
* Spectra, gaps, degenerations and cycles
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Maxim Kontsevich, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2015
* USD 243,000.00

The PIs will continue their foundational work on Homological Mirror Symmetry
(HMS), to develop the structures and theories involved in HMS, and to build on
applications of these theories. One notable direction is the theory of higher
symplectic structures, which brings out the duality between the ``stacky''
directions and the ``derived'' directions of most moduli problems in algebraic
geometry. Exploiting the full depth of these structures will require a careful
study of the moduli of various kinds of categorical and higher categorical
entities. This is one of the main areas of expertise of all the PIs. Kontsevich
introduced one of the main tools, derived schemes. Katzarkov came up with the
idea that moduli of LG models and its monodromy can be interpreted as stability
conditions and spectra.

These activities fit into a more general and global philosophy designed to
accompany Geometry in the 21st Century. The study of Geometry in the 20th
Century was devoted, in large part and with astounding success, to the
classification and parametrization of geometrical objects. However,these
objects, of various kinds, were uniformly viewed somehow as ``sets of points''.
Along the way, the relationship with categorical structures grew steadily,
leading to the many inputs into our program as discussed above. The PIs
themselves played a pivotal role in much of the progress that was made at the
turn of the century. With PI Kontsevich's introduction of HMS, a subtle change
was introduced, in that ``Geometry'' began to be seen within a categorical
structure. And the concurrent development of the theory of higher stacks meant
that geometric structures were no longer viewed just as ``sets of points'' but
rather as objects enclosing a higher structure. This project is highly connected
with theoretical physics. As we head into the second decade of the 21st Century,
elementary particle physics is on the crux of a profound revolution to be
brought about by the new experimental results coming out of the LHC at CERN.
These will serve to identify which of the multitude of theoretical possibilities
which are currently open, best address quantum field theory at the high energy
scale. And for those theories, to tell which are the right parameters. So there
will soon be a lot of work to do on the theoretical side, and this will surely
require new tools and a new approach. With the relationship between HMS and
supersymmetric theories, with the relationship between higher categories and
TQFT, with the relationship between partition functions and nonabelian
cohomology, the kinds of geometrical objects which we are going to investigate
in this project are becoming crucial for understanding these new panoramas in
theoretical physics. The project has an educational component - conferences and
educating postdocs, This component has been hugely successful in the past and
with more funding we plan to bring it to the next level.