* 1201136
* RET in Engineering and Computer Science Site on Infusing Mobile Platform Applied Research into Teaching (IMPART)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Harvey Siy, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 04/30/2016
* USD 449,775.00

This funding establishes a new CISE Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) site
focused on emerging technologies in mobile computing at the University of
Nebraska at Omaha. Each summer a cohort of teachers from Omaha Public Schools
will conduct research with faculty at the university. They will also develop
problem-based learning modules which they will integrate into their classes
during the school year. Numerous academic year activities will expand the
project to many other computing teachers thus impacting over 4,320 students in
the participating schools. This site is co-funded by the Experimental Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project lies in strong research basis and the
expertise of the faculty. The project team has significant related research and
experience in educational applications and K-12 school outreach. The projects
are in research areas that are current and of interest to teachers and their
students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project include
providing a quality research experience to teachers and the infusion of sound
instructional models into the K-12 schools. The project includes outreach to a
large community of teachers in the metropolitan Omaha region and should impact a
student population that has a significant minority population. The materials
will be broadly disseminated for use by others. The project has the potential to
create a sustainable partnership between the university and schools thus
benefitting the Omaha area for years to come.