* 1201903
* Evolution of the Galapagos Mantle Plume
* GEO,EAR
* 08/31/2011,08/31/2016
* Esteban Gazel, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2016
* USD 513,793.00

Evolution of the Galapagos Mantle Plume&lt;br/&gt;(project jointly supported by
EAR/Petrology &amp; Geochemistry and
OISE/Americas)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Current models suggest
that the massive basaltic production responsible for the emplacement of large
igneous provinces (LIPS) during the Permian-Paleocene (with a strong impact on
the environment and life on the planet) may represent the initial phases of
mantle plumes that feed some of the current ocean-islands. Volcanic rocks
related to mantle plumes are the most important source of information on the
deep Earth geochemical cycles. Because oceanic plume tracks are largely
submerged, most geochemical information on mantle plumes is derived from studies
of young ocean island basalts (OIB). In contrast, the initial LIP phase in most
cases is obscured by continental contamination. Recent petrological modeling
suggests that during initial LIPS formation the mantle plumes are generally
hotter and melted more extensively than during formation of modern ocean
islands. Constraining the origin and degree of such secular cooling requires
knowledge of a continuous cooling record of a mantle plume from head to tail.
The Galapagos track is one of the few examples where secular cooling of the
mantle plume has been demonstrated, and it offers a near continuous record from
the ~90 Ma LIP phase of the Caribbean Large Igneous Province (CLIP) to the
recent OIB phase at the Galapagos Islands. This is because much of the plume
track is preserved as accreted terranes in Central America and thus is
accessible. Nevertheless, there is a sampling gap from 15-60 Ma in the thermal
and geochemical evolution of the Galapagos Plume. Here it is proposed to close
this gap through sampling of the accreted CLIP and plume tracks in Panama and
Costa Rica and conducting a detailed petrological and geochemical study
complemented by modeling of plume dynamics. The new data will be integrated with
literature data to provide a continuous record of the evolution of the Galapagos
Plume with focus on the following key questions:&lt;br/&gt;1. Is the recently
observed temperature difference between melts from a plume head versus a plume
tail due to changes in the plume source temperature or an effect of plume
transit (more efficient cooling of the plume tail vs. plume head) and/or a
dynamic effect of a change in lithology (peridotite vs.
pyroxenite)?&lt;br/&gt;2. Can we trace the core of the plume through correlation
between high temperatures and elevated 3He/4He signatures above upper mantle
values?&lt;br/&gt;3. Is there a change in the sampling of peridotite versus
pyroxenite sources from plume head to tail and what does this tell us about the
proportions of those lithologies deep in the mantle and the dynamic aspects of
their sampling by the plume?&lt;br/&gt;4. Do helium, radiogenic isotope, and
trace-element compositions change with lithology and/or spatially-temporally,
and what does this tell us about the size and composition of the different
geochemical domains in the mantle?&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study will provide a
continuous record of a long-lived plume and key information on the evolution of
a plume, effects of plume transit and deep geochemical cycles. It will be of
interest to the broad Earth science community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The results of the study will be presented at international meetings
and published in peer-reviewed journals. PI Gazel (who leads the project) is in
the early phase of his career. The project supports the infrastructure at LDEO.
PI Class manages the ultraclean laboratory at LDEO and teaches a graduate course
in Modern Analytical Methods at Columbia University (CU) thus impacting the
training of undergraduate and graduate students of CU as well as visiting
scientists. Undergraduate students will be trained in sample preparation and
electron-microprobe analyses as part of this project. The project topics and
findings will be factored into courses taught in New York (including K12
schools), and outreach activities to the non-scientific community. Gazel lead a
yearly field trip to the Costa Rican oceanic complexes, attended by students and
faculty from the Univ. of Costa Rica (UCR), LDEO and other academic
institutions. The project involves an international collaboration between LDEO,
the IPGP (France) and the UCR.