* 1201873
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of Paper Versus Digital Map Technology on Students' Spatial Thinking Skill Acquisition
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2012,06/30/2014
* Larianne Collins, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 06/30/2014
* USD 8,040.00

This doctoral dissertation research project considers the impact on spatial
thinking skills of the increased use of digitally-based maps compared with the
use of more traditional paper maps in geographic education. The ability to think
in spatial terms is essential to the understanding of natural and cultural
phenomena. Critical business, emergency preparedness, intelligence, and
international relations decisions, among others, depend on spatial thinking.
Spatial thinking skills allow people to recognize and understand relationships
in multiple ways and to remember them in both static and dynamic
representations. This project compares the use of digitally presented maps with
traditional paper maps and considers how they impact the development of spatial
thinking skills in K-12 students. Despite repeated suggestions that geographic
information systems and virtual globes are unmatched for their ability to engage
K-12 students in higher-level spatial thinking skills, there is little empirical
evidence to suggest that paper maps, or other traditional low-tech instructional
delivery, fare worse. This research is motivated by 1) a lack of student
proficiency in geography content and skills in the United States; 2) inattention
to the educational uses of digital maps; and 3) the overwhelming need to improve
spatial thinking skills among K-12 students. Two research questions are posed:
1) Does spatial thinking skill development differ between paper and digital map
instructional delivery? 2) Does spatial thinking skill development differ based
on attitudes toward geography, past travel experience, or demographic variables
such as gender, and are there interaction effects among them related to the
instructional method? This project uses two curriculum components: South
Carolina Maps and Aerial Photographic Systems, standards-based interdisciplinary
middle school curriculum designed to enhance spatial thinking skills, and Google
Earth, a frequently updated computer application that provides opportunities to
see the Earth's varied geography from scales that range from global to street-
level views. Participating teachers will be trained in both curricula and
students will complete a basic questionnaire and attitudinal survey. Spatial
thinking skill development will be measured as students participate in either
paper-based or digital map-based instruction. Spatial thinking skills will be
tested pre- and post-lesson implementation via the Spatial Thinking Ability
Test. The research questions are investigated using a quasi-experimental (non-
random) design involving classes of 8th grade middle school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study will advance K-12 learning by
investigating the methods, traditional paper versus digital technology, best
suited for delivering content that improves spatial thinking skills. This
research project is designed to anticipate technology changes and challenges
facing teachers in the future and to provide guidance on the best instructional
delivery methods necessary to promote effective learning. This research furthers
our understanding of how best to approach and foster these skills with students
and ultimately create curriculum and materials to achieve those goals. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.