* 1201973
* Robust Control of Uncertain Switched Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Constantino Lagoa, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2016
* USD 360,000.00

The objective of this proposal is to develop systematic controller design tools
for complex systems. The PIs will develop procedures for modeling the behavior
of interest using a set of so-called uncertain affine models. Having a
representation of the system in this standard form will then allow for the
development of systematic robust controller design algorithms that enable
controller synthesis with provable performance. Emphasis will be put not only on
the development of theoretical results but also on using the proposed approach
in concrete applications such as feedback control of epileptic seizures.

Intellectual Merit: The approach presented relies on the concept of uncertain
switched systems. The proposed work will address several open problems in the
area of switched systems and their connection to uncertain systems.
Specifically, the proposed research will develop efficient methods that
determine a set of affine models and the uncertainty bound that explain the
observed nonlinear behavior, and tools for robust controller design for
uncertain switched affine systems. The main advantages of the proposed approach,
as compared to other approaches to controller design for complex systems, are:
a) Robust system approximation procedures; b) Ability to design controllers with
provable performance and, given enough computational resources, with performance
arbitrarily close to the achievable optimum; c) Ability to design controllers
for complex systems for which one does not have a global model but only local
information is available.

Broader Impact. The proposed activity explores the concept of covering complex
dynamics by the set of dynamic behaviors of an uncertain switched affine model.
It will lead to the development of systematic, problem-independent tools for
controller design that can be used in a wide range of applications such as
feedback control of epilepsy and other similar neurological disorders. Education
is proactively integrated into this project through incorporation of nonlinear
control in the undergraduate curriculum, a robotics course developed with
particular emphasis on the nonlinear control aspects, REU supplements to
motivate undergraduate students to pursue studies in nonlinear and hybrid
control, and integration of the research outcomes into graduate course
materials. &#8195;