* 1201603
* US-Pakistan: Partnership-building and Pilot Research for an Evaluation on Strengthening Private Schools for the Rural Poor in Pakistan
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Asim Khwaja, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 04/30/2013
* USD 72,907.00

1201603 &lt;br/&gt;Khwaja&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project by the
Dr. Asim Khwaja, Harvard Kennedy School, Harvard University is to catalyze
collaboration with scientists in Pakistan in the area of Evaluation and
Strengthening Private Schools for the Rural Poor in Pakistan. The foreign
collaborator is Ali Asjad Naqvi, Research Director at the Center for Economic
Research in Pakistan (CERP). The emergence of low-cost, for-profit private
schools serving the rural poor has transformed the education sector in Pakistan
and low-income countries across the globe. Small rural private schools are among
the fastest growing segments of the small-to-medium-sized enterprise (SME)
sector in Pakistan. Recent research has demonstrated the power of these schools
as they (i) serve the rural poor; (ii) employ, teach, and empower women; and
(iii) outperform government schools in math, Urdu, English learning outcomes, in
addition to (iv) producing higher levels of civic values among students. Despite
the demonstrated strengths of private schools, constraints to continued growth
of this sector are emerging. The PI plans a series of activities that will lay
the groundwork for a rigorous empirical evaluation of new models for providing
financing and education support to private schools in emerging economies. The
project builds on existing work by the PI supported by NSF (SES 0962504:
?Understanding Education Markets Experimental and Observational Evidence from
Pakistan?) and expands into the specific area of low-cost private schools.
Research results have revealed that, in spite of their relative low cost,
private schools in Pakistan outperform government schools, but they face
constraints to continued growth and quality improvements. Motivated by a dearth
of evidence on how best to support this dynamic sector, The PI will conduct the
preliminary work that is needed to design, implement, and evaluate models to
support private education entrepreneurs through the provision of financial,
educational and operational support. This entails engaging with key
international stakeholders and utilizing additional data sources to design a set
of interventions and associated project evaluation methodology to support the
sector and identify implementation partners for the interventions. Dr. Naqvi
will play a key role in partnership development, designing project activities
and providing local input to inform the research evaluation.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Cognizant of both the rapid rise of low-cost
private schooling and the emerging constraints this sector faces, the PIs aim to
fill a gap in the existing knowledge: how to interface, support, and enable the
success of the private education sector. They plan to address a number questions
still left unanswered by existing literature. What needs of private schools are
the greatest, or which constraints are binding? What are the returns to
investments in the low-cost private education sector, in terms of profitability
and social outcomes? What financial mechanism (grants, loans, or equity
investments) will generate the maximum return on investment and improvement in
social outcomes? And finally, what is the optimal combination of financial and
access to educational support to further strengthen this dynamic sector?
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The empirical evidence generated by this study has
the potential to make unique contributions to academia, and to also generate
significant reaction among policymakers and practitioners in the NGO and private
sectors. Should the model prove sustainable and generate the envisioned results,
the limits for potential impact extend well beyond the evaluation areas. There
is a potential for these models to be replicated, sustained, and scaled to
similar contexts where un- and under-served school age children can be supported
by unleashing the power of markets and these free enterprises to dramatically
improve education outcomes across the country and ultimately across similar
countries globally.