* 1201370
* Mathematical analysis and its applications to electromagnetic waves, image processing, and materials science
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Hoai Minh Nguyen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 05/31/2015
* USD 171,998.00

This project is devoted to the study of various central mathematical questions
and problems strongly motivated from physics, mechanics, and computer sciences.
The three main themes are electromagnetic waves, Sobolev spaces and related
problems, and the calculus of variations with applications to elasticity. For
the first theme, the principal investigator intends to study questions on
approximate cloaking for Maxwell's equations and generalized impedance boundary
conditions for evolution equations. The goal of the first direction is to
understand whether or not one can approximately cloak an object using the
transformation optics (or the change of variable scheme) under various
circumstances. Regarding the second direction, the principal investigator seeks
to obtain general impedance boundary conditions for highly conductive obstacles.
This part of the project is intended to pose new problems and answer new
questions motivated by image processing and recent approaches to Sobolev spaces.
As to the third theme, the project investigates patterns formed by deformations
of thin elastic membranes. The following three problems are considered: (1) the
deformation of a thin circular elastic sheet placed on top of an open cylinder
and subject to a downward force at the center of the sheet, (2) the deformation
of a floating thin elastic membrane, and (3) the deformation of a thin film
bonded to a compliant substrate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The understanding of the
problems whose solutions this project hopes to find will advance many
applications in technology (e.g., cloaking, image processing, determining the
property of materials). The proposed methods make use of various tools in
analysis, the calculus of variations, and applied mathematics. These appear to
be novel and robust, and they could be widely applicable. One of the main goals
of the project will be to generate significant research and teaching
interactions among faculty, postdoctoral scholars, and graduate students
associated with the University of Minnesota's School of Mathematics. The
principal investigator is planning to use the techniques and results developed
in this proposal for research topics in his classes (calculus, partial
differential equations, and the calculus of variations). Since the research is
multidisciplinary in nature, he is also planning to participate in multi- and
interdisciplinary conferences and workshops.