* 1201170
* Deontic Modeling and Natural Language Processing for Automated Environmental and Green Compliance Checking
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Nora El-Gohary, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* yanfeng ouyang
* 05/31/2016
* USD 320,000.00

This grant provides funding for the development of a computational approach for
checking the compliance of textual construction plans (such as storm-water
pollution prevention plans) with environmental regulations and contractual
requirements. This is intended to automatically detect non-compliance instances
and provide a relatively rich analysis of the non-compliance such as which
regulation was violated, the reason for the violation, the possible consequences
of the violation, etc. To achieve such deep levels of text processing and
automated reasoning, three algorithms will be developed and combined into one
computational platform: 1) a machine learning-based algorithm for classifying
text, 2) a hybrid syntactic-semantic (that utilizes grammatical and meaning-
descriptive features of the text) algorithm for information extraction, and 3) a
logic-based algorithm for compliance reasoning. The automated analysis will be
facilitated by a knowledge model of normative reasoning (deontic model) in the
construction domain. The algorithms will be implemented in a proof of concept
prototype software. Real life-based test case scenarios will be formulated - in
collaboration with construction contractors - and used to test and validate the
algorithms developed.

If successful, the results of this research will lead to improvements in the
area of automated regulatory and contractual compliance checking in
construction. The long-term goal of this research is to provide construction
industry professionals and regulators with an approach that can help reduce
compliance assessment errors, as well as reduce the cost and time associated
with compliance checking. The proposed work will also contribute to the
computational tools and methodologies available for both deep natural language
understanding/processing and semantic reasoning. This project will also involve
educational and outreach activities to promote teaching and learning, engage
undergraduate and graduate students, and reach out to female high-school
students. This includes the development of a project website, course modules,
and hands-on outreach material about environmentally-conscious construction.