* 1201026
* Preliminary Study of the Seismic Performance of Improved Ground Sites during the 2010-11 New Zealand Earthquakes
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2013
* Guney Olgun, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 04/30/2013
* USD 79,464.00

The south Island of New Zealand has been recently subjected to a series of
strong earthquakes that caused significant damage throughout the Canterbury
region. The first event, the September 2010 Deerfield Earthquake, was magnitude
7.1 and located 40 km west of Christchurch. Strong ground shaking occurred near
the epicenter where peak ground accelerations (PGA) up to 1.3g were measured.
Shaking in central Christchurch was moderate (PGA approx. 0.2g). Older
unreinforced masonry buildings suffered heavy damages, as did residential
developments where ground failures, such as soil liquefaction, occurred in
Kaiapoi and Christchurch. A second smaller earthquake of magnitude 6.3 struck
near Christchurch in February 2011. Although this earthquake was smaller, it
produced more damage because it was shallower and located only 10 km from the
city. Shaking was extreme near the epicenter, with PGAs up to 2.2g. In central
Christchurch, the shaking was very strong (PGA approx. 0.6 - 0.8g), about three
times higher than that from the magnitude 7.1 September earthquake. Damage
included significant soil liquefaction along with the collapse of several multi-
story buildings and unreinforced masonry structures. Nearly 200 people were
killed. A third earthquake of magnitude 6.3 struck in June 2011 and was centered
13 km from Christchurch. This shock further weakened structures damaged in
previous events and caused moderate liquefaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of
central Canterbury is underlain by saturated soft silts and loose sands.
Christchurch in particular overlies swamp deposits located behind beach dune
sands, and estuaries and lagoons that have been drained. The prevalence of these
soft and weak deposits throughout the region means the area is highly
susceptible to liquefaction and other forms of earthquake-induced ground
failure. To reduce anticipated damages, various engineering methods have been
used in recent years to strengthen the soils beneath multi-story buildings,
large-scale municipal facilities, and residential housing developments in
Christchurch. The most common soil improvement method has been
vibrodensification with stone columns, a construction method that employs large
vibrating probes that are inserted into the ground and slowly withdrawn as stone
is added to form a cylindrical column of dense, compacted stone mixed with the
native soil (i.e., a "stone column"). Stone columns are designed to bolster
earthquake performance by preventing liquefaction and other forms of ground
damage such as large, intolerable settlements in the foundation soils. Working
with local engineers, researchers, and public officials, we collected data for
10 improved soil sites that were subjected to strong shaking in Christchurch.
While some treated sites performed well (i.e., little to no ground damage
occurred relative to unimproved nearby sites with damage), it was surprising
that some did not perform well, especially during the February earthquake.
Unexpected ground failure and large settlements occurred at numerous treated
sites where municipal facilities and multi-story buildings were recently built,
leading to catastrophic damages and demolition of the facilities. The reason
some improved sites performed well and others did not is unclear. However,
several hypotheses have been proposed. First, some sites were shaken harder than
their design levels. We also suspect that current engineering approaches used
for the design of stone columns may lead to an overestimation of their
effectiveness. Our recent field and numerical studies of improved sites from
other earthquakes suggest such ground treatment is often much less effective in
reducing earthquake damages than current design methods predict.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will fund travel to New Zealand to collect data
for each site and performing analyses that can help to resolve these design
issues. We will collaborate with Canterbury University researchers and local
engineers. The main intellectual merit is that our study may show current design
methods to be unconservative. We also have the unique opportunity to study sites
subjected to shaking far above their design levels. The broader impact is that
our findings could impact international building practices. Our results would
also inform stakeholders and decision makers in the Christchurch community who,
in an effort to rebuild sustainably, are trying to assess what improvement
technologies worked and what did not, and what methods should specified for
future projects. Finally, this research will allow us to develop a better
understanding of the cost-benefit tradeoff for earthquake mitigation practices,
thereby increasing the safety and reliability of constructed facilities and
lifelines during future earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-
funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering.