* 1201874
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Turbulent Mixing in Laboratory Magnetospheres
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Michael Mauel, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

This award is made in response to a proposal submitted to and reviewed under the
NSF/DOE Partnership in Basic Plasma Science and Engineering joint solicitation
NSF 09-596. The award provides funds to support undergraduate participation in
the overall research effort, which is being funded separately by the DOE under
contract to Columbia University (TBD).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plasmas constitute
over 99% of the visible universe and turbulent mixing of plasmas is a
fundamental process that is important both in natural and artificial situations.
Turbulent mixing of ionized gas, called plasma, is especially fascinating when
the plasma is embedded inside a strong magnetic force field. Mixing of
magnetized plasma has special geometric relationships, couples energy from small
and large sized vortex-like structures know as "eddies," and creates self-
organization through a remarkable turbulent "pinch." A collaboration between two
universities will operate two unique facilities, called laboratory
magnetospheres, that contain high-temperature ionized gas using a magnetic force
field that resembles the field that surround our Earth and other planets. New
measurements will be combined with new theories and simulations that will answer
unresolved questions including: How do plasma eddies couple energy at different
sizes? How do plasmas evolve during turbulent mixing? What mechanisms cause
turbulent self-organization? New science will advance including: (1) global
imaging and control of turbulent interchange mixing in a variety of plasma
conditions, (2) study of electrostatic self-organization through the
understanding of the turbulent pinch, and (3) validating our models for
lowfrequency turbulence by carrying out self-consistent nonlinear simulations of
turbulent mixing in laboratory magnetospheres.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research has broad impact because turbulent mixing of magnetized plasma is
ubiquitous and fundamental. Understanding turbulent mixing in laboratory
magnetospheres will improve our understanding of (1) processes occurring in the
ionosphere, which is important to satellite communication, (2) turbulence inside
the central regions of planetary magnetospheres, which is important to space
weather models, and (3) the anisotropic mixing of low-dimensional fluid systems,
which is important to industrial processes. Additionally, this collaborative
research uses state-of-the-art facilities at highly-regarded research
universities to motivate students and scientists to explore plasma dynamics in a
magnetic configuration that resembles a magnetosphere and to encourage the next
generation of scientists able to understand and control high-temperature,
ionized matter.