* 1201649
* High Temperature Terahertz Quantum Cascade Lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Qing Hu, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 06/30/2015
* USD 360,000.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposed research seeks to develop
terahertz quantum-cascade lasers (THz QCLs) that operate at high temperatures,
specifically above 240 K, so that they can be conveniently cooled by
thermoelectric coolers. Such a development will have a significant impact on the
science and technologies in THz frequencies, where potential applications are
promising in sensing, imaging, and communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Intellectual merit: The project will involve a considerable amount of design
effort of quantum structures composed with various combinations of quantum
wells. If an isolated quantum well can be viewed as a one-dimensional
"artificial atom", then a multiple quantum-well (MQW) structure is an
"artificial molecule". This project is nothing short of designing and making
such artificial molecules which perform the desired function of THz lasers. The
principal investigator has the best track record in the field and has access to
all the necessary facilities to carry out the proposed research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Broader impacts: The principal investigator
has been invited to give invited/plenary/keynote talks at many prestigious
conferences. The work has also been reported in media for broad communities such
as Technology Review, Laser Focus, NPR Market Place, Discovery, and Popular
Science. Through collaborations, the THz lasers developed in the PI's group have
helped to enhance infrastructures at other institutions in THz-related
activities by adding a crucial enabling component. The principal investigator
has incorporated elements in the research project into a graduate course in
solid-state physics and a undergraduate core course Signals and Systems. Effort
will be made to involve members from underrepresented groups and undergraduate
students in the research activities.