* 1202259
* GOALI: ADVANCING THE UNDERLYING SCIENCE OF IN-LINE RF METROLOGY AND PULSED RF POWER DELIVERY FOR LOW TEMPERATURE PLASMA HEATING
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Steven Shannon, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 12/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

This project will advance a class of manufacturing processes that are critical
to the high technology economy of the United States through a unique academic /
industry partnership that will advance manufacturing through science-based
understanding and application of learning to systems used in a plurality of
domestic industries spanning electronics, energy, and the environment. These
manufacturing processes utilize reactive plasma systems that are driven by radio
frequency power sources. Specifically, this program will advance the knowledge
of pulsed radio frequency heating to advance plasma assisted manufacturing
capability for future technology manufacturing nodes. Pulsed Radio Frequency
(PRF) heating of these plasmas demonstrates unprecedented dynamic range in its
ability to modify plasma chemistry and plasma/surface interactions. The
advancement of stable, manufacturing worthy systems that employ PRF will enable
new processes for applications of broad national interest including integrated
circuit fabrication, energy production, and medical applications.

This project will advance the understanding of plasma response to transient RF
systems by correlating measured plasma conditions via a suite of time resolved
diagnostics to waveform-resolved voltage, current, and phase measurements made
with an in-line RF measurement system capable of resolving the transient
response of the electrical system to levels of accuracy previously not available
to the scientific community. This project will leverage this unique
academic/industry partnership to develop educational modules that will be
incorporated into not only an established STEM program in plasma science, but
also into freely accessible continuing education modules for mid-career
technologists considering a focus in low temperature plasma applications in
their profession. Finally, this project will develop instructional, visually
stimulating media designed to educate high-school level science teachers on the
application of plasma science in an array of industries that are tangible to the
typical high school student, such as microelectronics, display technology, and
photovoltaic fabrication.