* 1202963
* Probing Galaxy Feedback across Cosmic Time with a 3-Dimensional Census of Quasar Absorption Lines
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Britt Lundgren, Lundgren                Britt          F
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2015
* USD 267,000.00

Dr. Britt Lundgren is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison. A longstanding problem in astrophysics is to understand how
galaxies form and develop---or evolve---throughout their lifetimes. Such
understanding is necessary to uncover how our Universe evolved and to gain
insight into the origin of our own Milky Way Galaxy. One important aspect of
understanding galaxy evolution is to study how large region of newly forming
stars in certain galaxies interact with the massive black holes at the centers
(nuclei) of these galaxies, which is the central theme of this fellow's project.

By using the largest sample of quasar absorption lines (QALs), the fellow will
address outstanding questions regarding the enrichment history of the
intergalactic medium and its connection to feedback from star formation and
Active Galactic Nuclei (AGN) in galaxies. QALs provide uniquely unbiased probes
of galactic environments over vast ranges in redshift, but only recently has the
number density of spectroscopically observed high-redshift quasars, combined
with the scale of deep galaxy surveys, provided sufficient statistics to study
the associations between galaxies and absorption features in proximate quasar
sightlines over wide ranges in redshift and galaxy properties.

Through her participation in the Sloan Digital Sky Survey III's Baryon
Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey (BOSS), which will obtain spectra for 160,000
redshift z > 2.2 quasars over the next three years, the fellow will extract a
3-dimensional census of metal absorption lines in the redshift range z = 0.35 to
4. Using this data set, already one order of magnitude larger than existing
samples, she will precisely measure the evolution of the number density and
equivalent width distribution for the most prolific metals in the intergalactic
medium from redshift z around 4 to present. Leveraging these data with her
existing participation in numerous deep galaxy surveys, she will reveal the
typical galactic environments of QALs from high redshift and constrain the
physical distances to which galaxy and AGN outflows extend as a function of
galaxy properties and redshift. Together, these investigations will potentially
revolutionize our understanding of feedback from star formation and AGN and its
role in the co-evolution of galaxies and the intergalactic medium throughout
about 90% of cosmic history.

The broader impacts of this project include a significant educational component.
The fellow will undertake a program of educational outreach in partnership with
the UW Space Place, a well-established astronomy outreach center in Madison.
Within this facility she will conduct a series of weekend workshops for students
in grades 6 through 8 using a well-tested curriculum of inquiry-based modern
astronomy activities that she designed for a previous educational program. The
fellow will supplement these student-focussed sessions with a shorter series of
evening workshops for local high school science teachers that are designed to
familiarize educators with activities using the public interface to the Sloan
Digital Sky Survey, the Skyserver. These programs will serve the next generation
of scientists by providing students at a critical age with a positive
introduction to modern astronomy research in addition to providing their future
educators with the tools to foster further explorations in the high school
classroom.