* 1202671
* Space-Time from the Spectral Point of View: Towards Quantum Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Ali Chamseddine, American University of Beirut
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2016
* USD 150,000.00

The most challenging problem in theoretical physics is the unification of the
laws of quantum physics with Einstein's general theory of relativity. The ideas
in this direction that have been pursued most forcefully are superstring theory
and noncommutative geometry. These two approaches are intimately related.
Noncommutative geometry has provided a new framework to study spaces which could
not be handled by the standard methods of Riemannian geometry. It offered a new
perspective in the study of gauge theories and the role of the Higgs field and
is a promising candidate to describe geometries at Planckian energies. In the
past years it has been established that space-time is approximated by a well
defined product of a continuous four-dimensional manifold by a finite
dimensional space. The main focus of this program is to construct a genuinely
noncommutative finite dimensional space valid at sub-planckian scales and whose
limit at lower energies is the noncommutative space of the standard model. The
geometry will be reduced to those of almost commuting matrices, and it will be
possible to get a handle on quantizing the geometry. It will also study new
asymptotic limits of the spectral action as well as cosmological implications.
Other parts of this project will study various aspects of gravity such as
stability of BPS monopoles, and formulation of consistent massive theories of
gravity, implications of the presence of right-handed neutrinos on the geometry
of spacetime, the behavior of spectral actions in the presence of singularities
and non-perturbative evolution of the dynamical fields at scales of the order of
the Planck length. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impact of Project: Due to its
interdisciplinary nature, this work which involves research on the frontiers of
noncommutative geometry, will be of benefit to both physicists and
mathematicians. The new ideas and methods in this proposal will contribute to
the knowledge of the high energy theory and phenomenology, quantum gravity and
mathematics communities, and to a lesser extent to the astro-physics community.
The American University of Beirut (AUB) plays a very important role in promoting
the American educational system in the Middle East. Historically, the emphasis
was on liberal education. The new aim is to provide in addition a vibrant
environment for the promotion of research. The launching of the Ph.D. program in
theoretical physics in October 2009 is a step in that direction and is
attracting students of high caliber.