* 1202894
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2012
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Peter Homyak, Homyak                  Peter          M
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 07/31/2015
* USD 189,000.00

Gaseous nitrogen fluxes in dry soils: are surviving microbes controlling
nitrogen emissions?

Soil gaseous nitrogen (N) emissions are not typically considered in ecosystem N
budgets, presumably because in mesic sites, hydrologic N losses balance N
inputs. However, in dryland environments, significant amounts of N are exported
through gaseous pathways, yet the mechanisms controlling fluxes are poorly
understood. In particular, are microbes controlling N emissions in dry soil?
Does soil rewetting hinder microbial activity while enhancing abiotic processes?
Paradoxically, biological control of N emissions appears to intensify during
soil drying and becomes less important during soil rewetting. Because dryland
regions comprise about 1/3 of the land surface and account for 25% of soil NO
emissions, understanding what processes control N losses is critical for
developing nutrient budgets and modeling N pollution. This research seeks to
transform understanding of N cycling by evaluating two widely held paradigms: 1)
that in dry soil, biological cycling of N is unimportant and 2) that N emissions
are not significant in annual N budgets.

The training objectives are to broaden knowledge in soil C and N cycling, learn
the application of eddy covariance, develop a method for measuring the isotopic
composition of oxygen in NO. Broader impacts include land management
applications to establish N critical loads in ecosystems impacted by N pollution
through vegetation type conversions and increased incidence of wildfires. This
research will also be used to foster participation of underrepresented groups in
science and mathematics by delivering lesson plans through the PUENTE program,
the "Outdoor Classroom" at Sedgwick Reserve, and Scienceline, a website that
partners scientists with K-12 students.