* 1202124
* Conference: 2012 Mitochondria and Chloroplasts GRC &amp; GRS on July 28-August 3, 2012 in Smithfield, Rhode Island
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,10/31/2012
* Alice Barkan, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 10/31/2012
* USD 13,000.00

Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The 2012 Mitochondria and Chloroplasts GRC &amp;
GRS will be held July 29-August 3, 2012, and July 28-July 29, 2012, respectively
at Bryant University in Smithfield, Rhode Island. Mitochondria and chloroplasts
house numerous metabolic processes that are essential to organismal growth,
development, and adaptation. The Gordon Research Conference on Mitochondria
&amp; Chloroplasts is the most highly regarded meeting covering these topics due
to the excellent reputation and interactive nature of Gordon Conferences, its
focus on both DNA-containing organelles, the quality of the speakers, and the
broad perspective that is achieved by bringing together investigators using
diverse approaches and organisms to attack problems of shared interest. The
conference will provide a unique forum for scientists working on plant, animal,
and fungal systems to identify common mechanisms and shared properties of these
organelles. The integrated focus on chloroplasts and mitochondria is quite
unique to this conference. It will convene investigators who specialize in
physiology, genetics, biochemistry, cell biology, proteomics, and structural
biology, thereby fostering a cross-disciplinary perspective, the sharing of
technological expertise, and the establishment of new collaborative efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The conference program will
include approximately 20 graduate students and postdoctoral speakers. Over half
of the participants in 2010 were graduate students or postdoctoral students.
Overall, approximately 50 attendees will attend the seminar and approximately
150 at the conference. In 2010, 30% of the participants at the GRC on
Mitochondria and Chloroplasts were women. Particular attention has been made to
increase participation of underrepresented groups and the conference organizers
intend to provide special consideration for qualified applicants who are members
of underrepresented groups. Faculty at predominantly undergraduate institutions
will also be given special consideration.