* 1202821
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2012
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Silvia Alvarez-Clare, Alvarez-Clare           Silvia
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 12/31/2014
* USD 158,000.00

Effects of nutrient availability and warming on greenhouse gas fluxes from
lowland tropical forest soils: An integrated approach

The response of greenhouse gas (GHG) fluxes to multiple and interacting global
change factors, such as warming and increased nutrient availability resulting
from changes in biogeochemical cycles, is poorly understood in tropical forests
but will certainly play a key role in the future global climate. This study will
use a novel, integrated approach, that includes simultaneous measurements of
three of the most important GHGs (carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4) and
nitrous oxide (N2O)) both in the field and in the laboratory, to advance our
understanding of how increased nutrient availability and warming influence
fluxes of these GHGs from soils in a lowland tropical rain forest in Costa Rica.
This study will provide a new perspective on biological and physical controls on
these fluxes after chronic (5 years), relatively large scale (30 x 30m), and
replicated (N= 6) nutrient manipulations.

The proposed research will broaden conceptual understanding of lowland tropical
forest ecology by investigating belowground processes and fluxes, and will
enable the Fellow to acquire new methodological and analytical tools. Data
stemming from this project will be relevant to calibrate models used to generate
regional or global emission inventories. The proposed research will broaden
conceptual understanding of lowland tropical forest ecology by investigating
belowground processes and fluxes, and will enable the Fellow to acquire new
methodological and analytical tools. Data stemming from this project will be
relevant to calibrate models used to generate regional or global emission
inventories. In addition, exploring GHG emissions that occur at the soil-
atmosphere interface is an essential part of the effort to integrate land
management strategies with climate change mitigation and adaptation in the
tropics. Finally, this project will provide opportunities for training of
undergraduate minority students, and will include mentoring for Costa Rican and
US students through participation in field and laboratory work.