* 1202189
* Printed Organic Layers for Integrated Electronics: controlling processing to achieve stability and reproducibility
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Ana Arias, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 07/31/2015
* USD 360,000.00

The objective of this program is to demonstrate reliable deposition of solution
processed electronic materials over large areas in order to obtain stable device
performance and allow integration of components of sensing systems that are
mechanically flexible. The program will investigate methods of obtaining
stability at every step of device fabrication: ink formulation, ink deposition,
solvent removal, thin film morphology and device electrical stability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is the demonstration of reliable
and stable fabrication of printed flexible electronics. The program will address
two of the most challenging aspects of printing electronics: reliable deposition
of multi-layers and device-to-device variations. A process for suspending
semiconducting polymers as nanoparticle dispersions in water will be developed
and as a consequence allow layer-to-layer deposition from benign solvents with
high interfacial quality. Device stability and reliability will be studied in
two types of structures; photodiodes and thin film transistors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are contributions to the fundamental
understanding of materials processing and device fabrication using printing. The
goal of developing reliable printing conditions over large flexible areas is
applicable to a range of electronic devices and sensors based on organic
materials. The approach of processing organic materials from aqueous
nanoparticle dispersion will enable the demonstration of precise deposition of
multiple polymer layers from solution. The PI is engaged with several outreach
programs that offer research experiences to high school teachers and students.
Within this program, simple printed electronic devices will be developed and
integrated with existing educational programs targeting the enrichment of pre-
college education.