* 1202631
* Collaborative Research:  Energy, Environment and Society Learning Network (ENERGY NET):   Enhancing opportunities for learning using an  Earth systems science framework
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Daniel Bain, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2016
* USD 299,998.00

ENERGY-NET (Energy, Environment and Society Learning Network) brings together
the Carnegie Museum of Natural History (CMNH) with the learning science and
geoscience research strengths at the University of Pittsburgh to create rich
opportunities for participatory learning and public education in the arena of
energy, the environment, and society using an Earth systems science framework.
ENERGY-NET builds upon a long-established teen docent program at CMNH and forms
Geoscience Squads comprised of underserved teens. Together, the ENERGY-NET team,
including museum staff, experts in informal learning sciences, and geoscientists
spanning career stage (undergraduates, graduate students, faculty) provides
inquiry-based learning experiences guided by Earth systems science principles.
Together, the team works with Geoscience Squads to design "Exploration Stations"
for use with CMNH visitors that employ an Earth systems science framework to
explore the intersecting lenses of energy, the environment, and society. The
goals of ENERGY-NET are to: 1) Develop a rich set of experiential learning
activities to enhance public knowledge about the complex dynamics between
Energy, Environment, and Society for demonstration at CMNH; 2) Expand diversity
in the geosciences workforce by mentoring underrepresented teens, providing
authentic learning experiences in earth systems science and life skills, and
providing networking opportunities with geoscientists; and 3) Institutionalize
ENERGY-NET collaborations among geosciences expert, learning researchers, and
museum staff to yield long-term improvements in public geoscience education and
geoscience workforce recruiting.