* 1202846
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Spatio-Temporal Soil Variability on Late Quaternary Fluvial Surfaces of the Southeastern Atlantic Coastal Plain
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2012,11/30/2013
* David Leigh, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kelley Crews
* 11/30/2013
* USD 12,000.00

The goal of this doctoral dissertation project is to understand the effect of
time on soil formation processes. Soil spatial variability exists in all
landscapes and may occur predictably, in response to known geomorphic and soil-
forming factors, or unpredictably, without any apparent relationship to
measureable changes in soil forming factors conditions. Such variability has
important implications for soil chronosequence studies, which evaluate the
influence of time on soil development. Understanding how soil properties change
over time is critical for the restoration of degraded soils and the use of soils
as relative-age dating tools in Quaternary geologic studies, and soil
chronosequences remain the primary source for empirical data to evaluate rates
and theories of soil development. However, spatial variability among soils of
equivalent age can pose both theoretical and practical problems for the
chronosequence approach. Within a chronosequence framework, adequate
representation of soil spatial variability on even-aged surfaces is needed
before dominant soil forming processes can be ascertained, models of soil
formation can be tested, and rates of soil formation can be estimated.
Nevertheless, relatively few studies have addressed this topic. Thus, the goal
of this project is to characterize the range of soil development within and
among late Quaternary fluvial surfaces of different ages in the southeastern
Atlantic Coastal Plain in order to assess spatiotemporal trends of soil
variability and development and evaluate drivers of these changes.

This research will examine the morphology and chemistry of soils developed on
the scrollbar components of three fluvial surfaces that span an age range of
approximately two orders of magnitude (1,000 vs. 10,000 vs. 100,000 years) along
the Oconee-Altamaha (Georgia) and Pee Dee (South Carolina) Rivers. Two
scrollbars will be sampled per surface in each river valley, for a total of
twelve sampled scrollbars, and sampling will be guided by a pilot study that
will determine the number and spacing of profiles needed to adequately
characterize soil variability on a single scrollbar. Soil properties will be
evaluated that have been shown to be valuable chronosequence parameters in the
region, including overall soil thickness; leaching (E) horizon thickness; as
well as the thickness, clay content, redness, extractable iron, and total
chemistry of the whole soil (<2 mm) and fine sand (0.125-0.250 mm) fractions of
the most well expressed horizon in which there is active soil formation
occurring (B horizon). Multivariate statistical techniques will be used to
identify drivers of soil variability, assess dominant soil forming processes,
and evaluate the implications of spatial variability for the use of
chronosequences as tools in soil formation and geomorphic research.

By characterizing soil variability within a chronosequence framework, this
research will directly address key problems that have emerged in soil geographic
research in recent decades, such as 1) whether soils converge toward a spatially
uniform, steady state condition or diverge into an increasingly complex spatial
mosaic over time, and 2) the extent to which observed soil variability can be
attributed to systematic drivers versus the degree to which variability is
unexplained by measurable factors and possibly linked to chaotic behavior or
stochastically random variation. Results will not only advance soil geographic
thought, but have important implications for broader scientific questions about
order and disorder, sources of spatial variability, and the evolution of natural
systems through time that span disciplinary boundaries, from physical geography,
to soil science and geology, to ecology and natural resources management. In
addition, this project will provide valuable reference information for the
restoration of degraded soils and ecosystems in alluvial bottomland settings. It
will also evaluate the persistence of soil properties during the last glacial-
interglacial cycle, a period when the Southeast experienced drastic fluctuations
in environmental conditions, and will improve understanding of soil resistance
to past and projected future climate change and its implications for land use.
The project includes plans to collaborate with USGS on a map of the sediments of
the region. There are also plans for academic and non-academic dissemination of
the results, and an educational outreach module with a regional middle school
will be developed. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this
award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish an
independent research career.