* 1202182
* Surface plasmon Sagnac interferometry for label-free characterization of flows in microfluidic environments
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Raymond Frey, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 04/30/2016
* USD 304,279.00

The objective of this program is to develop a label-free, surface plasmon-based
optical sensor which relies on a relativistic effect known as photon drag to
characterize micron-scale fluid flows. The intellectual merit is the proposed
development of a surface-plasmon Sagnac interferometer, which will enable
optical mapping of low-contrast flows in nano- and microfluidic channels, using
phase-sensitive detection. A fluid-circulating opto-fluidic cell will be
integrated into the interferometer, and the phase shifts resulting from photon
drag on counter-propagating plasmons excited in the cell will be measured.
Theoretical modeling will accompany the experimental studies. Compared to
existing amplitude-sensitive surface plasmon-based devices, this interferometric
method allows lowering of the detection threshold by an order of magnitude. Such
enhancement is crucial for on-chip gas and single molecule sensing, nano-scale
flow-rate diagnostics, and micro-jet fluidic device monitoring.

The transformative aspect of the proposal lies in the development of new methods
for mapping micron-scale flow conditions using surface plasmon interferometry.
This is potentially transformative for the development of label-free
microfluidic sensors for lab-on-chip systems, enabling rapid, non-interacting
and accurate diagnostics of local flow fields.

The technological broader impacts are on future sensing technologies, through
the development of plasmonic sensors able to diagnose microscopic fluid flows,
as well as detect microturblence and electrical currents. The educational
broader impacts include student training students will acquire valuable
expertise in plasmonic sensing and microfluidic fabrication and operation
techniques. Students professional development is also addressed through
participation in outreach activities, thus facilitating the development of
science literacy in the broader community.