* 1202622
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2012
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Piercen Oliver, Oliver                  Piercen        M
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 05/31/2014
* USD 123,000.00

Studying the influence of membrane curvature on positioning lipids and proteins
in bacterial membranes

Many proteins in bacteria are preferentially located at specific sites within
the cell. These proteins can control anything from cell shape, growth, division,
movement of intracellular components, or assembly of motility systems to cell
polarization. An untested hypothesis is that microdomains of a uniquely-curved
phospholipid, cardiolipin, function as 'landmarks' to localize proteins in
bacteria at regions of high negative curvature via a mechanism similar to lipid
rafts. The aim of this proposal is to determine the relationship between the
localization of CL microdomains, protein localization, and membrane curvature
using spheroplasts of Escherichia coli, giant unilamellar vesicles (GUVs), and
supported lipid bilayers (SLBs). By compressing spheroplasts and GUVs in
microfluidic channels, or by conforming SLBs to either micropatterned curvy
substrates or subject to deformation over a micropore, the temporal and spatial
organization of CL and its putative binding proteins can be measured. An
understanding of the reorganization of lipid microdomains in response to
membrane curvature will be critical in developing a complete picture of the
physical forces that influence biomolecule localization in bacteria. It is
envisioned that the strain induced reorganization of membranes may be a widely
spread phenomenon in biology that extends to eukaryotes.

Training objectives include developing an expertise in bacterial lipid
metabolism and its quantification by in vivo labeling or through in vitro
analysis. Broader impacts of this work include educational outreach through the
Research Experience for Teaching Program. The PI will mentor local teachers by
developing educational kits that will be incorporated into after-school programs
in the Madison Metropolitan School District through the MicroExplorers Program.