* 1202583
* Optical Control of Dynamics in Spintronic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Lu Sham, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 03/31/2016
* USD 330,000.00

The ability to control spin dynamics is critical for enabling the operation of a
host of magnetic devices. Exciting opportunities for manipulate spins are
offered by directly using optical fields, as was recently demonstrated in
experiments. This program introduces a comprehensive theoretical and
computational framework for the characterization, modeling, and design of
magnetic devices involving optical control of spin dynamics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has a theoretical physics,
computational physics, engineering, technological, and educational component.
The research provides fundamental understanding of optics driven spin dynamics,
such as near Curie-point switching, all-optical switching, combined optical-spin
transfer torque phenomena, and optics-induced spin waves. The program identifies
new spin dynamics phenomena and structures that exhibit novel functionalities
and the associated fluctuations and noise reduction particularly prevalent on
the quantum scale. The research creates new methods and efficient simulators,
including high-performance atomistic, mesoscale, and multiscale (hybrid
atomistic-mesoscale) solvers. The research spawns new opportunities for modeling
magnetic and optical devices and systems. The introduced multi-scale framework
is used to address critical technological problems involving magnetic materials
and devices employing optical control, such as energy assisted magnetic
recording. The program includes an essential component of education of
undergraduates and graduates, through courses and mentoring, in application of
quantum mechanics to modern technology, particularly, micro- and nano-magnetics
and electromagnetics. The work involves graduate and undergraduate students in
research, and contributes to diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program has a
range of broader impacts. The fundamental quantum mechanical models for
magnetics contributes to the general field of quantum mechanics and its relation
to practical devices. Various components of the high-performance methods can be
used in other fields, such as biophysics, chemistry, and astrophysics. The
proposed multi-physics solvers can be hybridized with solvers in other physical
domains such as electrical/mechanical/fluidic modeling frameworks. The magnetic
recording applications contributes to the development of data storage devices
which are pervasive in modern society. The effort also develops a set of
educational materials covering the proposed theory, simulation framework, and
device study.