* 1202798
* EarthScope RAPID: Geodetic and seismological response to the Mineral, VA Earthquake,  23 August, 2011
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Seth Stein, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 12/31/2014
* USD 28,330.00

The overall goal of this research is to instrument the central Virginia seismic
zone (CVSZ) in the region surrounding the Mineral, VA earthquake with
seismometers and global positioning system (GPS) receivers that are designed to
record aftershocks and subtle ground movements respectively for a year. These
measurements allow geoscientists to visualize the fault that ruptured on 23
August 2011 and better understand the state of stress in the crust that lead to
the earthquake. Eastern North America has a long history of infrequent, but
sometimes large and damaging earthquakes. Unlike the seismic activity that is
concentrated along plate boundaries, earthquakes in the passive margin of
eastern North America are not clearly identified with active faults nor are the
processes that drive them well understood. Earthquakes in eastern North America
are clustered into well-defined seismic zones, like the CVSZ where small to
moderate-sized events including the Mineral, VA earthquake seem to occur every
few decades. The seismic zones are interspersed with seismic gaps, one of which
surrounds the nation's capitol, where there is little history of earthquake
activity. One possible explanation of these observations is that the earthquakes
cluster in areas because there is a localized, underlying geologic weakness in
the crust that periodically releases accumulated stresses. Alternatively, the
observed earthquakes, including the Mineral, VA event are all aftershocks of
pre-historic, infrequent, but very large earthquakes and represent a crustal
fracture healing over a period of several centuries. Examples of such
earthquakes with estimated magnitudes of 7.0 or greater are known from the
Charleston, SC (1886) and Grand Banks (1929) events and both of these locations
are now recognized seismic zones characterized by frequent small to moderate-
sized earthquakes. The tools that are being employed in this research are seven
seismometers available from the Incorporated Research Institutions for
Seismology (IRIS) instrument pool and two new GPS receivers that will be
constructed following Plate Boundary Observatory (PBO) specifications. The small
earthquakes that are now occurring in the Mineral, VA area are all aftershocks
of the 23 August, 2011 main event that are migrating away from that rupture and
traveling up along the fault plane towards the surface. As this happens, precise
pinpointing of their location with a seismometer network builds a three-
dimensional picture of the fault plane. At the same time, the GPS receivers are
being positioned to record, with millimeter accuracy, the horizontal and
vertical position of the ground surface on either side of the suspected fault
plane. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Together, the seismological and GPS geodesy data
document how the crust and land surface deforms in the year following a
moderate-sized earthquake. These data inform geological thinking on the state of
stress in the crust that is used to constrain models of earthquake recurrence
and hazards. Eastern North America requires more of this kind of research
because many old faults inherited from the construction of the Appalachian
Mountains and opening of the Atlantic Ocean are embedded in the crust and are
evidently loaded and capable of generating earthquakes that cause structural
damage and threaten human life. The ability of the geologic community to inform
infrastructural engineers, planners, and communities as to the relative hazards
associated with eastern North American faults and earthquakes will be greatly
aided by a close and detailed study of the Mineral, VA event.