* 1202508
* Advanced Modeling and Design of High-Performance ADC-Based Serial Links
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Samuel Palermo, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Hao Ling
* 12/31/2015
* USD 360,000.00

Intellectual Merit: The high-speed serial link architectures and design
techniques proposed in this work aim to significantly improve inter-chip
interconnect energy efficiency and bandwidth density, which is necessary for
continued scaling of future compute systems. While significant progress has been
made in increasing serial link data rates through the use of analog/mixed-signal
equalization, there are limits to the amount of channel loss that analog/mixed-
signal equalizers can compensate and also challenges in scaling these circuits
to nanometer technologies. This motivates the use of analog-to-digital
converter-based analog front ends in inter-chip interconnect receiver design.
The work's research goal is to develop high-performance energy-efficient
converter-based high-speed serial link architectures applicable to future
computing systems. To accomplish this goal, an ultra-fast statistical-modeling
optimization framework for converter-based serial links that investigates trade-
offs in resolution and analog/digital equalization complexity will be developed
and leveraged in the design of the proposed architecture. Novel circuit
topologies will be developed that enable efficient modulation agile transmitters
and the embedding of partial analog equalization in the converter. The
combination of system level optimization with circuit-level accuracy and new
ultra-efficient circuit topologies enables architectures capable of leveraging
more digital equalization whose efficiency improves with each technology
generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The explosion in interconnect
bandwidth capacity provided by this converter-based serial link architecture
will allow the realization of numerous transformative applications, such as
future smart mobile devices capable of Tflop/s performance, multi-channel high-
resolution magnetic resonance imaging, and exascale supercomputers necessary for
climate modeling and protein folding simulations. Interconnect architectures
developed with the proposed optimization framework will have a broad impact on
not only the semiconductor industry, but also on the sustainability and security
of the nation as a whole, as it will dramatically reduce the energy these
integrated systems demand. This project will include an interdisciplinary
educational program involving 2 Ph.D. and 3 undergraduate students, with a
commitment in several engaging outreach activities to foster the representation
of women and minority groups. Project results will be broadly disseminated by
inclusion in the syllabi and website of the graduate course entitled "High-Speed
Links Circuits and Systems" and through publication in national and
international journals and conferences.