* 1202858
* From High School Students to College Geoscience Majors: The Critical Math Connection
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Eleanour Snow, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2014
* USD 144,576.00

The GeoFORCE Texas Critical Math Connection targets a group of high school
juniors and seniors who have a strong interest in majoring in geology in
college, and provides them with critical interventions while in high school in
order to 1) improve their math knowledge, confidence, and preparedness, and 2)
engage their geoscience problem solving skills. The target students are
participants in a high school outreach program called GeoFORCE Texas. The group
is 82% minority, from challenged schools in rural southwest Texas and inner-city
Houston. While GeoFORCE gives them a strong interest in geosciences, their high
schools leave them poorly prepared for college level math. This project is
investigating two critical research questions: 1. Can the persistence of
students in geoscience majors be affected by improving math preparedness in high
school? 2. Can an engaging geologic problem sustain interest in the geosciences
and prove to be a critical incident in moving students from liking geology to
majoring in geology? It is expected that together these activities will result
in an easier path from high school into a college geology major, and that this
will be reflected in retention and persistence data. Ultimately, the project
seeks to identify an effective model for engaging more minority youth in the
geosciences.