* 1202709
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: Transfer, Renovation, and Integration of the Otolith Collection of the Alaska Fisheries Science Center
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Theodore Pietsch, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Roland Roberts
* 04/30/2015
* USD 466,430.00

This project seeks to (1) enrich and enhance the Fish Collection of the
University of Washington (UW), (2) secure and improve a unique and irreplaceable
biological resource, and (3) resolve a critical hazardous materials issue by
relocating, curating, and integrating a huge and diverse collection of fish
otoliths (which have enormous realized and unknown potential value) built over
the past 40 years by NOAA Fisheries personnel at the Alaska Fisheries Science
Center (AFSC).

In addition to resolving an urgent hazardous-materials issue, educational
opportunities for student training in collection management will be offered to
graduate students as well as undergraduates. Otolith biology is already a part
of the lab portion of the PI's 300-level "Biology of Fishes," which attracts
about 130 undergraduates annually but, to further undergraduate participation,
the PI will serve as UW sponsor for two, 10-week, "otolith" internships as part
of AFSC's long-standing summer internship program. Aspects of the project will
also be added to our well-established and ever-popular program of public
outreach, which provides educational opportunities to an average of about 550
visitors to the Fish Collection annually. Project personnel will also work
closely with AFSC personnel in assisting with their on-going contributions to
education by way of the annual NOAA Science Camp for local high schools, Seattle
Science Center research exhibits, and Seattle Aquarium events.