* 1202424
* Planning Visit for Developing New International Collaborations
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2012
* Richard Finno, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2012
* USD 23,600.00

This planning trip focuses on developing an international collaboration between
US researchers and researchers at the new Innovation and Knowledge Centre for
Smart Infrastructure and Construction (IKC) at the University of Cambridge.
Profs. Richard Finno of Northwestern University, Thomas O?Rourke of Cornell
University and Andrew Whittle of Massachusetts Institute of Technology, along
with and five PhD students, will travel to the University of Cambridge in the
United Kingdom to meet with Professor Kenichi Soga and other members of the
recently-established IKC. The purpose of this visit is to find mechanisms and
strategies for catalyzing an international collaboration regarding development,
maintenance and management of underground infrastructure. A unique opportunity
exists for US researchers to combine their experience and expertise with those
of researchers at the ICK. Such a partnership will leverage the capabilities of
both the US and UK sides to broaden the research agenda for infrastructure
improvements and catalyze innovations derived from the collaboration of academic
experts, who are internationally recognized in underground technology. The
research groups in the US and UK have focused on advanced construction, adaptive
management, and monitoring of underground infrastructure. They have developed
techniques to predict, monitor, and control ground movements during
construction, wireless sensor networks to monitor and control urban
transportation, energy delivery, and water supply facilities, and geographical
information systems (GIS) and network analyses to protect geographically
distributed infrastructure systems from the effects of earthquakes and other
natural disasters. A unique aspect of the work of the US participants is their
long-term involvement with real systems, which are used as full scale
laboratories to learn about complex soil-structure interaction and understand
the implications of component behavior on system-wide performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The anticipated collaborative research projects that will
result from this planning visit will have outcomes that result in: (1) the
development of an integrated approach to safer, more efficient and more
economical designs and construction procedures of underground space and
infrastructure, (2) significant advances in geotechnical site characterization,
construction monitoring and data management, (3) development of novel
computational models for underground construction, (4) development of long-term
monitoring, maintenance and protection measures for underground structures and
underground infrastructure, and 5) improved graduate and undergraduate
education. This planning grant will allow the research team to incorporate best
practices and recent research advances in the US and UK to develop and promote
technologies for the efficient, cost effective and environmentally sound use and
maintenance of underground infrastructure to meet the increasing demand for
sustainable space and services in urban areas. The research will target
technologies to enhance quality of life in congested urban and suburban centers,
and incorporate sustainability principles in the development and renewal of
underground space. The research concentrates on technologies that integrate
"intelligence?into the construction and operation of underground infrastructure.
The team will focus on emerging technologies in sensors, wireless transmission
of data, power scavenging to energize sensor systems, data management and
mining, GIS visualization of infrastructure and spatially variable relations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly funded by the Division of Civil,
Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation and the Office of International Science
and Engineering.