* 1202680
* Awash in a Stream of Asteroids: Using ground-based facilities to observe NEO "fly-bys"
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Nicholas Moskovitz, Moskovitz               Nicholas       A
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2015
* USD 267,000.00

Dr. Nicholas Moskovitz is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. This project is focused on understanding the physical
and compositional properties of asteroids as they pass by Earth at very small
distances. The fellow will explore an area of planetary science that has only
recently been enabled by the rapid rate of new near-Earth asteroid (NEO)
discoveries. This will not only have wide implications for understanding the
compositional and physical properties of NEOs but will also be relevant to
multidisciplinary studies involving the topics of impact hazards, meteoritics
and cosmochemistry, space craft missions, radar astronomy, and Solar System
dynamics.

With steadily increasing numbers of catalogued NEOs, investigators are reaching
a point where close encounters with Earth are no longer detected just a few days
beforehand but can be predicted months or years in advance. During close
encounters small bodies in unexplored size regimes become observationally
accessible across a wide range of wavelengths and with a variety of ground-based
facilities. The fellow will take advantage of these encounters by conducting
targeted spectroscopic and photometric campaigns in each year of his fellowship.
These observations will (1) provide insight on the compositional properties of
small asteroids, (2) establish links between meteorites on Earth and their
immediate parent bodies in space, (3) investigate the role of observing geometry
on reflectance measurements of planetary bodies, and (4) look for asteroid
surface heterogeneity which could provide clues about regolith and thermo-
physical properties.

The broader impacts of this project include a significant educational component.
The fellow's educational plan involves a combination of mentoring, curriculum
development, and teaching, all focused on training undergraduates in innovative
ways on the foundations of observational astronomy. The fellow will mentor
several undergraduates over the course of the fellowship in a structured manner
using inquiry-based methods. By the second year the fellow will have developed a
set of lessons and exercises that he will incorporate and teach in an
observational astronomy course. The program is designed to not only advance the
learning and understanding of undergraduates through personalized mentoring and
real research projects, but it will also incorporate new components into MIT?s
observational astronomy course. The undergraduates involved in this program will
receive at an early stage in their careers the training necessary for future
success as observational astronomers. In the long-term this experience will
provide the fellow an opportunity to develop a course curriculum that can
continue to be implemented in the years beyond this fellowship. More broadly,
the topic of NEO close encounters garners significant public curiosity and
provides an excellent opportunity for the fellow to give public talks to enhance
scientific understanding within our society throughout his fellowship.