* 1202703
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Heritage Turn in Rural Milieu: Using Heritage Preservation to Sustain the Local in a Globalized World
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Helene Ducros, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2013
* USD 12,000.00

Globalizing forces have impacted people living in rural areas all over the
world. In industrialized nations, the decline of extractive industries and
small-scale agriculture has caused the devitalization of rural life, places, and
identities. Different efforts have emerged attempting to palliate this trend and
retain the meaningfulness of local life for rural residents not only in economic
terms but also in cultural terms. One approach has been to use or reinvent local
heritage in a place-making endeavor. Projects involving heritage-making and
heritage preservation range from labeling exceptional sites as "world heritage,"
as some UNESCO programs have done. Other efforts have sought to promotion
everyday vernacular landscapes in a grass-root effort to keep them on the map as
living places where people can make a durable livelihood. This doctoral
dissertation research project seeks to understand what happens in rural areas
when local places turn to heritage-making as a way of confronting globalization.
The doctoral student will examine a French model, because France long has
displayed an interest in local heritage and pondered its significance, whether
this heritage is seen as exceptional or ordinary, tangible or intangible. The
student will explore communities in rural France that have responded to the
socioeconomic pressures of globalization by using the concept of cultural
heritage as a tool of territorial development by seeking membership in the
Association of the Most Beautiful Villages of France. The objectives of this
research project are to unravel the process of local place-making occurring
through heritage-making; contribute to an understanding of the social, cultural
and personal processes through which people come to value the past for practical
ends; unveil the kind of places and identities that result; and document the
ways heritage places and patrimonialized landscapes are viewed and lived-in by
the actors involved and the people embedded in them. The student will use
qualitative analysis and case-studies to identify the social and political
processes through which rural landscapes become heritage, the motivations and
expectations of the actors, the effect of heritage-based economic development
strategies on rural restructuring and landscape evolution, and how preservation
impulses face sustainable development challenges in the 21st century. She will
use cartographic, land use and cadastral archival research, and unstructured
interviews with local residents and officials to examine how heritage places are
lived-in, how they sustain local identities and memories, and how the
relationship are shaped between residents within the place and between residents
and the place.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine what is not
readily visible in the heritage landscape. Landscape is viewed as lived-in
places that evolve over time and where past, present, and future intertwine in a
politics of local territorial development. Project results will contribute to
debates challenging local communities and policy-makers. Those debates include
the radical transformation of the peasant world and its effect on rural
livelihoods as well as what it means to consider oneself a rural resident; the
tension between local and global perspectives in a time of cultural and economic
anxiety; and the articulation between preservationist policies that shift living
culture into static, museum-like conditions, and the exigencies of dynamic local
development. The products of this project will serve local communities and help
them understand the stakes of heritage-based development policies. They also
will inform applied geography ventures, such as planning and development
projects, and they will enlighten local and state policy making in nations where
similar associations are in place as well as in other nations that are
considering the model as a viable solution to their difficulties. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.