* 1202126
* High-Performance Vertical Nanowire Heterojunction Transistors
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Wei Lu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

The objective of this program is to develop high-performance vertical tunneling
transistors and circuits based on Ge nanowire/Si heterostructures. There is a
growing interest in "green electronics" as continued scaling of semiconductor
devices has resulted in increasing power dissipation. The proposed study intends
to fabricate high-performance, low-power, tunneling transistors in the nanowire
form with optimal gate coupling and controlled Si/Ge junction interface. The
ultimate goal is to integrate the vertical nanowire transistors with
conventional silicon circuits for future electronics
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is to simultaneously
improve the on-current and reduce the sub-threshold slope of the tunneling
transistor by utilizing a vertical Ge nanowire structure with an abrupt Si/Ge
junction. Optimized nanowire growth will in turn address the lattice mismatch
problem associated with integrating germanium on silicon, and produce desired
doping profiles and junction interfaces. Junctionless transistor formation,
high-k incorporation, hybrid circuit integration and potential contamination
problems will also be addressed. These studies will further advance knowledge in
materials growth, interface control and hybrid device integration at the
nanoscale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are the potential
disruptive effect the new device can have on semiconductor research, and the
societal impacts this program will bring when research is tightly coupled with
education. The education and outreach program includes training of undergraduate
and graduate students, incorporating knowledge learned from research into
graduate and undergraduate courses, and broadly disseminating the knowledge
through publications and outreach activities. Students from underrepresented
groups and high-school students in inner-city, high-need school districts will
be specifically engaged.