* 1202069
* QMHP: Nonequilibrium Green function modeling of coupled electron and phonon transport in nanoscale thermoelectric devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Branislav Nikolic, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 04/30/2015
* USD 328,256.00

This project will help us understand the fundamental barriers to higher
efficiency in chips used as energy sources, in hopes that we can achieve future
breakthroughs in energy by harnessing that understanding.&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, the project will develop a quantum transport framework,
implemented via massively parallel computation, to study coupled electron and
phonon (i.e., vibrations of atoms) propagation in realistic nanostructures. The
recent experimental and nanofabrication advances have ignited the exploration of
heat flow and thermoelectricity in nanowires and molecular junctions. However,
the theoretical and computational studies of such systems are lagging behind by
considering electron and phonon currents independently. The approach is
nonequilibrium Green function formalism combined with either first-principles
methodology in the case of molecular junctions or with sermi-empirical models in
the case of nanowires.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The
nonequilibrium quantum many-body problem posed by the inelastic coupling between
electrons and phonons has enormous computational complexity which has prevented
microscopic consistent treatment of both charge transport and energy transport
on an equal footing. The proposed novel algorithm development to tackle this
challenging problem has a potential to be the first of its
kind.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;Thermoelectrics transform temperature
gradients into electric voltage and vice versa. The optimization of the
thermoelectric figure of merit for the proposed devices combining graphene
nanoribbons or silicon nanowires with small molecules or nanopores could lead to
commercially viable technologies for generation of electricity from waste heat
or solid-state coolers for electronic circuits. The proposed research will offer
excellent training for graduate students in advanced techniques of
nonequilibrium quantum statistical mechanics, nanoscale device engineering, and
high-performance computing. The outreach activities will include organization of
workshops on "Nanoscience and nanotechnology for high school teachers and
students," lecturing at summer schools, and organization of international
workshops on computational electronics.