* 1202329
* Collaborative Research: Polymer RF electronics with Co-integrated tuning and thermal cooling using microfluidics
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Rhonda Franklin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 07/31/2016
* USD 199,990.00

ECCS-1202329/1202431&lt;br/&gt;Rhonda Franklin, University of
Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;Ioannis Papapolymerou, Georgia Institute of
Technology&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: Polymer RF Electronics with Co-
Integrated Tuning and Thermal Cooling Using
Microfluidics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Lightweight integrated Radio-Frequency (RF) front ends in mobile communications
and radar systems require adequate RF power, tuning capability and low cost.
Yet, the demand for multi-function operation inevitably increases circuit
densities leading to higher heat production. Integrated tuning with RF
electronics exists; however, cooling solutions are developed separately and
incorporated in a back-end post-assembly process that results in larger heavier
systems that are costly. Tunable RF electronic technology platforms with
integrated cooling systems are needed to satisfy growing mobile application
requirements. However, they have not been successfully integrated into
lightweight, low-cost materials that offer suitable high performance. This
collaborative research project between the University of Minnesota and the
Georgia Institute of Technology seeks to develop an all-in-one RF electronics
and wireless communication/radar system with integrated tuning and cooling
designs, using a 3-D System-on-a-Package (SOP) approach for RF front-ends. Low
cost Liquid Crystal Polymer (LCP) organic substrates that can be laminated will
be used to develop for the first time integrated microfluidic channel designs
for heat removal and/or RF tuning. The objectives are (1) to understand
dielectric fluids use for tuning in printed RF circuits while offering
simultaneous cooling, (2) to develop designs/circuit models that describe RF and
thermal interactions in RF designs with fluid interfaces, and (3) to demonstrate
feasibility by creating an RF power amplifier circuit with co-integrated
tuning/cooling approach with a microfluidic systems in organic polymer
substrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The 21st century RF mobile
electronics market continues to grow at unprecedented rates. Thus, RF
electronics can potentially consume enormous amounts of energy and produce
significant amounts of hardware waste due to frequent upgrades if design
approaches to minimize or alleviate hardware failure and extend hardware
lifetimes though reconfiguration are not developed. The outcomes of this
research can slow down such trends and therefore reduce environmental waste
production caused by disposed electronics. This research combines RF electronics
with microfluidics technology to provide a rich training experience for the next
generation of students and researchers working on complex integrated systems
that can preserve the environment. The educational effort will provide energy
awareness from RF electronics and involve developing strong ties with local K-12
schools in Atlanta and Minneapolis, active minority student participation (i.e.
K-12 and undergrad level), collaborations with K-12 educators to develop
suitable age appropriate curriculum/demonstrations, and presentation
talks/events to educate the public on energy use and consumptions in wireless
devices.