* 1202264
* Chance-Constrained and Robust Optimization for Power Systems with Intermittent Renewable Generation
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2018
* Yongpei Guan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2018
* USD 234,843.00

The objective of this project is to discover robust and cost efficient power
generation scheduling, in order to maintain a smart and secure power grid while
ensuring high utilization of renewable energy. The approach is to study
innovative robust and chance constrained optimization models along with solution
methodologies to provide thermal unit commitment decisions incorporating
intermittent renewable generation. Intellectual Merit: This project proposes one
of the first studies on two-stage robust and chance-constrained optimization
methods to solve power grid optimization problems. The proposed project will
enrich scientific methods to solve power grid optimization problems under
renewable generation uncertainty, while ensuring system reliability. In
addition, the proposed solution approach will lead to methodology innovations
for robust and chance constrained optimization, including deriving exact
separation algorithms for two-stage robust unit commitment problems and proving
the convergence of the sample average approximation algorithm for two-stage
chance constrained stochastic programs. Broader Impacts: The proposed research
is extremely beneficial for the reliability runs for system operators to achieve
cost efficiency and security. It will also provide a tool to estimate the
storage capacity requirement in order to guarantee a certain percentage (e.g.,
80%) of electricity usage coming from renewable. In addition, the collaboration
with national research labs facilitates testing real data and implementation at
energy markets in short time, which will immediately benefit the society.
Finally, results from this project will be disseminated through multiple means,
including journal publications and conference presentations, and
underrepresented students will be involved in all aspects of this research
effort.