* 1202328
* Topics in Computable Structure Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Valentina Harizanov, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2016
* USD 133,557.00

Harizanov and her students and their collaborators investigate algorithmic
properties of general and concrete mathematical structures arising in algebra,
model theory, and topology. This requires intricate interplay of computability
theory with algebra, topology, and geometry. Harizanov?s goal is to understand
the computability theoretic properties of countable structures and their
isomorphisms, and of natural relations on the domains of the structures. She
studies the connections between definability and computability. The Turing
degree spectra of structures can be related to the degree spectra of relations
via spectrally universal structures, which are often obtained as Fraisse limits.
Harizanov?s project includes model-theoretic complexity of computable structures
measured by their Scott rank. It also includes classification problems such as
the isomorphism problem and the embedding problem for natural classes of
algebraic structures. Harizanov studies the left orders and bi-orders of various
torsion-free groups, including free groups, surface and braid groups, and how
the topological properties of the spaces of orders relate to the computability-
theoretic properties of orders. The project involves important new directions in
computable structure theory, including the study of Turing degrees of the
isomorphism types of geometric objects, such as varieties and schemes, and of
structures with a nonassociative binary operation of importance in low-
dimensional topology, such as quandles. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Computable
structure theory is a very active research area that has blossomed in the last
few decades. It is of importance in theoretical mathematics and computer science
and in the philosophy of mathematics. Some mathematical constructions are
essentially nonalgorithmic, while the others are algorithmic, or can be replaced
by algorithmic ones yielding the same results. Computability theory has
developed powerful and unique techniques to further analyze and classify
nonalgorithmic mathematical objects. Such methods involve syntactic descriptions
using computable infinitary language, as well as Turing and other degree
theoretic measures of relative computational complexity of sets and problems
they encode.