* 1202906
* Field Research for High School Students in the Billion Year Rock Record of New England
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Erica Wallstrom, Rutland City Public Schools
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2014
* USD 39,992.00

Rutland High School (RHS) in socio-economically diverse Rutland, Vermont, is
piloting a new program for engaging upper level high school students in learning
about Earth system science through integration of chemistry, physics, biology,
and technology in classroom- and field-based experiences. A new semester-long
course called "New England Landscapes: A Field Based Study of Local Geology
through Chemistry, Biology and Physics" is helping students develop the critical
thinking, problem solving, observation, and science writing skills that will
engage them in the geosciences and better prepare them for the collegiate level.
This course, which emphasizes instruction and use of field methods and
introduction to local geology, is being road-tested by 24 students. The course
incorporates multiple weekend and day-long field excursions through-out the New
England region, during which students engage in hands-on implementation of the
methods they learn in the classroom. Through the Year End Studies (YES) plan
program, half of these students participate in a two and a half-week, intensive
opportunity to conduct authentic research, building on individual research
proposals developed during the semester course. This abbreviated semester
provides a focused enrichment opportunity for students especially interested in
the geosciences. During that time, students will return to the field to collect
relevant samples and data, utilize collaborator Princeton University's
laboratory space for sample analysis, and produce a final paper on their
findings. Evaluation activities during the pilot phase are being used to
identify the potential of the program to serve as a model that could be
replicated elsewhere.