* 1202135
* Modeling, Monitoring, and Optimization of Cognitive Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Georgios Giannakis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Hao Ling
* 04/30/2016
* USD 370,567.00

The objective of this proposal is to establish transformative novel solutions to
fundamental problems in cognitive network modeling, monitoring and optimization
with significant impact to both theory, algorithms, and implementation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit comprises the novel concept of
network cartography as the tool for distilling and summarizing the "network
state" for the purpose of network management. The resultant holistic approach to
network monitoring offers modular and scalable statistical representations
driven by past (and driving future) measurements and system design
specifications. Further, it enables inference of global network behavior and
adaptation of protocol designs to enhance network robustness and quality-of-
service. Dramatic improvements in CR network performance will be attained by
augmenting the vivid description of the network global state with models that
account for the intrinsic non-tangible connectivity of cognitive wireless links,
and the interference challenges arising from spectrum sharing hierarchies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include advances of the IEEE 802.22
compliant cognitive radio technologies, and smart grid, surveillance, geo-
monitoring, and institutional networks. Furthermore, tangible advances in the
fundamental tools exploited will permeate benefits to bio-informatics, speech
and image compression, machine learning and data mining for social networks, and
the emerging smart grid communication network protocols. Through Honors Theses
and Senior Design Projects, the proposed research will also impact student
training with hands-on experience in state-of-the-art wireless cognitive systems
and network optimization subjects that are not fully provided by coursework.