* 1202078
* Theory of Trace Gas Distributions in the Lower Stratosphere and Near the Tropopause
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* R. Alan Plumb, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2015
* USD 384,659.00

The aim of this research is to advance the theory of trace gas transport and
trace gas distributions on the global scale, and of tracer-tracer relationships.
Existing theory has been quite successful in describing global trace
distributions in the stratosphere and in explaining the observed different
tracer-tracer relationships in the partly isolated regions of the tropical and
midlatitutde stratosphere and the wintertime polar vortex. Yet existing theory
has not been sufficiently well developed to exploit the full information content
of these remarkably compact and reproducible relationships and, moreover, the
theory fails near the tropopause where large vertical gradients of trace gas
mixing ratios render some of the underlying assumptions invalid. To address
these issues, theoretical development is conducted in concert with modeling of
trace gas transport, the model results both guiding the theoretical development
and providing tests of theoretical predictions. The four main tasks are: (1)
modification of existing theory to render the theory valid near and through the
tropopause, (2) investigation of factors controlling the location and shape of
the tropopause as defined by trace gases, (3) clarification of the relationship
between gross global trace gas fluxes and the shape of tracer-tracer
relationships, and (4) analysis of non-compactness in tracer relationships.

Broader impacts center on training of young scientists in this type of
scientific activity. This training involves a postdoctoral scholar through
direct involvement in the work; graduate students taking the principal
investigator's regular course on stratospheric meteorology and transport, which
will incorporate the latest results of the work; and undergraduates who are
offered the opportunity to involve in components of the work through MIT's
Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program.