* 1202309
* Collaborative: Room-temperature electrophosphorescence from all-organic OLEDs
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Joseph Shinar, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 07/31/2016
* USD 174,321.00

The objective of this program is to develop room-temperature
electrophosphorescence (RT-EP) utilizing purely organic materials. These
materials termed ?molecular alloys? are efficient phosphors as they transport
charge, induce intersystem crossing from the singlet to triplet excited state,
and lock the phosphors in a matrix preventing their nonradiative relaxation. The
materials displaying RT-EP will be investigated using optical spectroscopy and
force microscopy (AFM, STM, C-AFM, KPM). Studies of polaron/exciton dynamics in
films via photoluminescence (PL)- and photoinduced absorption (PA)-detected
magnetic resonance (PLDMR and PADMR, respectively) will be carried out together
with studies of polaron and exciton dynamics in the OLEDs using
electroluminescence (EL)- and electrical current-detected The intellectual
merit: Electrophosphorescence from purely organic materials has so far been
observed only at low temperature (~15 K), which prevents practical applications.
The PVD materials termed ?molecular alloys? allow for efficient (EQE~3%) RT-EP
in experimental devices. Thus, studies aimed at detailed understanding of the
processes taking place in the all-organic phosphors-based devices are important.
The broader impacts are: Basic science proposed: An understanding of new all-
organic materials that facilitate ISC while limiting nonradiative relaxation of
the triplets and investigating physics of corresponding OLEDs will be achieved.
Energy-conservation relevance: OLEDs as efficient light sources that would not
require precious/heavy metals would be more environmentally friendly.
Interdisciplinary Education: Collaboration between the two research groups with
expertise in PVD, materials chemistry, condensed-matter physics, device
fabrication and characterization will enrich education, encourage
interdisciplinary thinking, and facilitate student exchange.