* 1202075
* Distortion-Tolerant Communications for  Ultra-Low Power Wireless Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Jingxian Wu, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 06/30/2017
* USD 279,425.00

Distortion-Tolerant Communication for Ultra-Low Power Wireless
Networks&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jingxian Wu, Proposal No.
1202075&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Ultra-low power
consumption is one of the most formidable challenges faced by the next
generation wireless sensing systems, which are expected to operate uninterrupted
over years or decades under extremely limited battery capacity or small energy
scavenging devices. The goal of this research project is to advance the
knowledge of ultra-low power wireless networks with a new paradigm of
distortion-tolerant communication, which deliberately allows controlled
distortion in a system. If we accept the fact that distortion is inevitable in
practical communication systems, why not directly design a system that is
naturally tolerant to distortion? Allowing instead of minimizing distortion, the
proposed distortion-tolerant communication can operate in rate regions beyond
the constraints imposed by Shannon channel capacity, the ultimate limit of
distortion-free communications, thus achieving significant power reduction
unrivaled by conventional technologies. The research approach is to
systematically construct the theories, design tools, enabling technologies, and
prototypes of ultra-low power distortion-tolerant wireless networks, which can
be used for applications such as long-term structure health monitoring,
biomedical sensing, and other wireless monitoring systems. The distortion-
tolerant communication design approach is radically different from the error-
minimization, throughput-maximization, and/or latency-minimization design
criteria that dominate the current communication research. The new theories and
technologies are developed by exploiting the unique features of wireless
monitoring systems, such as delay-tolerance, distortion-tolerance, low data
rate, and spatial data correlation, which provide extra degrees of freedom in
the network design. The distortion-tolerant communication will enable innovative
theories and technologies that are capable of coping with the unique challenges
and opportunities arising from ultra-low power communications.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The outcomes of the proposed research and education
activities will accelerate the wide range deployment of ultra-low power wireless
networks for environmental and structure monitoring, surveillance, and
biomedical sensing, which can provide early warning to prevent catastrophic
results, improve public safety and homeland security, and promote the health and
well-being of the general public. Outreach activities, such as annual visits to
high schools and minority institutions for interactive project demonstrations,
will attract more underrepresented students to pursue a career path in science
and engineering.