* 1202857
* Nanoengineered, Manufacturable, Ion-Implantation Seeded Silica Nanowires for Sensitive BioScreening
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/05/2011,04/30/2012
* Shekhar Bhansali, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 04/30/2012
* USD 73,331.00

The goal of this research is to develop a cost effective, robust, reproducible,
stable SERS (Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy) substrate with high spatial
resolution for ultra-sensitive biodiagnostics. SERS is a powerful, versatile
bioscreening technique based on molecular vibrations that currently lacks a
tunable, homogenous, repeatable, inexpensive and sensitive substrate of uniform
geometry. The central focus of this research is to address the existing SERS
challenge through the development of a robust, mass manufacturable, ultra dense,
reproducible ordered array of ion implantation seeded silica nanowires of well
defined geometry as an effective SERS substrate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objectives of the proposal are to (a) investigate and study the growth
kinetics of ion-implantation seeded selective nucleation of silica nanowires,
(b) synthesize ultra-dense massively parallel array of vertically aligned wires
of controlled geometry, (c) develop and apply robust, dynamic nanomanufacturing
schemes to achieve reliable and reproducible fabrication of these batch
fabricated nanowires, (d) validate the spatially confined SERS substrate for
active bioscreening by real-time detection of the desired species and (e)
develop a strong interdisciplinary, laboratory-based research, education and
outreach program focusing on integration of biology, nanomanufacturing, and
microsystems that will have an impact on the training of middle school, high
school, community college students and teaching fraternity from all
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The research opens the gateway for
using ion implantation as a general purpose nanoscale catalysis tool towards
mass manufacturing bottom-up controlled nanosystems for wide variety of
applications. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Advancements in the field of nanoscale
science, tools and techniques with emphasis on emerging disciplines like
nanomanufacturing would be widely disseminated through the innovative "K- PhD"
program. Moreover, the research has participation of the underrepresented groups
(minority, women) and fosters partnerships through ongoing international
collaboration and exchange. The results of the research will translate into case
studies in course modules and seminars/presentations rendered by the
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;