* 1202118
* NOISE-BASED HIGH RESOLUTION ULTRASOUND IMAGING USING MICROENGINEERED SURFACES AND TRANSDUCERS
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Levent Degertekin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 12/31/2016
* USD 359,319.00

The objective of this research is to develop ultrasonic imaging methods using
the ubiquitously available but rarely exploited broad band thermal-mechanical
noise in electromechanical systems. The theoretical approach is based on Green's
function retrieval from diffuse noise sources and deep sub-wavelength resolution
imaging with evanescent waves on engineered propagation surfaces. Micromachined
ultrasonic transducers are used to record thermal-mechanical noise and provide a
tunable microscale engineered surface for evanescent waves, forming the
experimental platform to achieve sub-wavelength resolution imaging.

Optimal configurations for controlling evanescent wave velocity, hence the
effective sub-wavelength resolution, will be investigated and implemented
through microscale engineering. Effects of noise field characteristics on the
wave excitation and detection, and imaging performance will be explored.
Feasibility of high resolution ultrasonic imaging within the diffraction limit
(F-number 0.1-0.5) will be demonstrated in the 3-10MHz range using micromachined
arrays integrated with low noise electronics. The results would impact design
and implementation of microsystems for bio-imaging and bio-microfluidics.

This project will impact integrated low-power biomedical systems such as medical
implants through imaging and monitoring mechanical properties down to the
cellular level. Noise-based high-frequency ultrasonics using microscale
engineered surfaces can provide a transformative tool for many imaging
applications requiring high resolution at lower frequencies. The project
involves science teachers from predominantly minority enrolled high schools to
create modular curriculum materials in physics and provides opportunities for
student site visits to university laboratories. It will also lead to modular
curriculum materials for undergraduate classes, and an interdisciplinary
component for graduate classes taught by the PIs.