* 1202991
* New Superfluid States of 3He in Coherence Length Scale Nanofabricated Geometries
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Jeevak Parpia, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 06/30/2018
* USD 660,000.00

****Technical abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual impact of the
understanding of superfluid 3He extends across many fields in Physics. The
program funded in this proposal will combine the field of nanofluidics with low
temperature physics, to expose new size effects in a quantum fluid. By
examination of the flow behavior of the quantum fluid the researchers seek to
understand the influence of surface roughness on quantum transport. They will
characterize the surface roughness necessary to allow the fluid to be locked to
the surface or to slip at the surface. The surface roughness should also add
quantifiable disorder to the quantum fluid. In planned experiments, the effect
of confinement on the phase diagram will be examined with a view to exposing new
(perhaps even handed or chiral) phases. The compressibility of 3He will allow
the length scale of the coherence length to be pressure-tuned. By combining low
temperatures and nano fabrication, two graduate students and several
undergraduates will be exposed to the exciting training ground that has prepared
scientists for lead roles in academia and high-technology industries. The
proposed research will expose the stability of the superfluid order parameter to
confinement, and look for new forms of superfluid under confinement on the way
to a quantum phase transition where the superfluidity is extinguished. Such new
superfluids might be of interest in quantum computation, and exposing in new
types of vorticity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Many of our everyday devices (think of cellphones,
computers) originate from fundamental advances engendered by condensed matter
research. In turn, future advances will rely on exploration of new regimes
presently accessible only in a laboratory environment. The research to be
conducted in this program will examine the special properties of superfluid 3He
when confined in ultra small engineered cavities less than a thousandth of a
millimeter tall, marking the transition from bulk 3 dimensional behavior to a
new 2 dimensional regime. The flow of helium in these cavities should be
dominated by the roughness of the surface and will slip if the surface is too
smooth, or will be locked to the surface if the roughness is "just right". By
examining flow, the researchers hope to better understand how quantum (as
opposed to classical) fluids are different from each other. Quantum fluids
display a "graininess" rather than a continuous behavior, and this quantum
behavior is emphasized in reduced dimensions because the "grain" size increases.
The reduced size will also be exploited in other ways to demonstrate new types
of superfluid states that may show handedness like a spinning top. By combining
low temperatures and nano fabrication, two graduate students and several
undergraduates will be exposed to the exciting training ground that has prepared
scientists for lead roles in academia and high-technology industries. The
project will test what size range is relevant for the transformation from
ordinary 3 Dimensional behavior to 2 Dimensional behavior.