* 1202001
* Optical MIMO and Hybrid Communication Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Deva Borah, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 07/31/2016
* USD 261,358.00

Objective:

The objective of this research is to develop and analyze multiple-input
multiple-output optical communication systems using light-emitting diodes and a
focal plane receiving array to provide reliable and secure communications under
both static and mobile scenarios. The proposed approach explores novel spatio-
temporal processing, effective modulations that exploit diversity and
multiplexing, and hybrid optical/radio frequency communication.

Intellectual merit:

The intellectual merit includes: (1) development of transmission techniques and
receiver signal processing algorithms to provide high data rate communication
using light-emitting diodes under channel impairments and varying transmitter-
receiver distances, (2) modulations and adaptive mode analysis for hybrid
optical/radio frequency systems, (3) investigation of indoor and outdoor channel
effects on the proposed algorithms including acquisition and tracking, (4)
testing and validation of key ideas on an experimental test bed, and (5)
exploring design optimization using channel codes.

Broader impacts:

The broader impacts include high speed optical communication system development
that can integrate well with energy saving light-emitting diode lighting
technology. The proposed research can offer secure communication solutions to
inter-vehicle and vehicle-to-hub communications, and communications in indoor
and factory facilities. The work can also inspire new receiving device
developments with novel sensing and communication architectures offering
potential benefits to society. Students will be trained in theory and in the
laboratory, and efforts will be made to attract students from underrepresented
groups. Plans are included to demonstrate this research to local high school
students to help motivate them to pursue engineering studies.