* 1202747
* Local to Global: Using Science Visualizations to Improve Earth System Science Literacy
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2012,02/28/2015
* Richard Allen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 02/28/2015
* USD 149,177.00

Local to Global (L2G) is a project conducted by the Lawrence Hall of Science
(the Hall) and the Berkeley Seismological Laboratory (BSL), both divisions of
the University of California, Berkeley. The proof-of-concept project seeks to
merge two display systems - the Active Earth Display kiosk from the NSF-
sponsored Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology (IRIS) and the
Science On a Sphere (SOS)® from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) - to tell compelling local seismic stories in a global
context. The project is creating a model for using local seismic events, data,
and research to develop public understanding of key geoscience concepts. Seismic
activity has a motivating immediacy - people want to know more when something
happens (or could happen) that impacts their lives. As a phenomenon the public
is already aware of, this is a springboard to learn how local seismic events fit
into the global picture of seismology. Science centers like the Hall and
research facilities like BSL are both actively sought out by the public and the
press when questions arise about seismic events. By linking two real-time data
display systems, the public will have a tool to delve into the science behind
current seismic events that pique interest and questions. L2G will build on the
Hall's earlier work using large-format scientific data visualizations to promote
public understanding by encouraging visitors to look for patterns, make
predictions, and compare their findings to scientists' findings. This model will
be disseminated to existing networks, including over 70 SOS institutions with
the infrastructure to support its implementation.