* 1202986
* Resources to Increase Geoscience Literacy: Leveraging Earth Science Research to Educate Teachers, Students, and the Public
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* James Short, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2014
* USD 149,388.00

The American Museum of Natural History (AMNH) is developing and implementing a
Track 1 pilot project involving innovative professional development and teaching
resources based on current geoscience research to improve public Earth Science
literacy, particularly through strengthening Earth Science education in grades
7-12 and teacher preparation for secondary school science. These resources
include: (1) a short video documentary (in AMNH's Science Bulletins video
program) for exhibition and online distribution that features the work of a
geoscience researcher and (2) an "Earth Science Teaching Case" (Teaching Case)
comprised of a suite of resources to support pre-service and in-service teacher
professional development, as well as the implementation of these resources in
the classroom to teach students. The Teaching Case includes video segments, text
passages, and inquiry-based classroom activities that engage students in the use
of geoscience data. These resources are being based on content relating to
current research in the area of geological hazards and risks, with a focus on
earthquakes and climate change, thereby supporting content in the Next
Generation Science Standards. By including the analysis of large geoscience data
sets as a catalyst for teaching educators and their students about Earth Science
and scientific practices, these resources meet a need currently not met by
existing geoscience professional development materials. These resources are
being piloted in conjunction with AMNH's new Masters of Arts in Teaching (MAT)
program with a specialization in Earth Science for grades 7-12. AMNH's MAT
program, supported by New York State and the DR K-12 and Noyce programs in
NSF/EHR, is the first of its kind to be offered through an informal science
education institution.