* 1202510
* Urban Massachusetts Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (Mid-Level Alliance)
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Winston Langley, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2018
* USD 2,500,001.00

The proposed Urban Massachusetts LSAMP (UMLSAMP), consisting of eight
institutions located in the Eastern Region of the Commonwealth, will expand and
scale up its existing programs that help URM students start on-track and stay
on-track, thus significantly improving the probability of their successful and
timely graduation. The Mid-Level Alliance will assist the participating
institutions with implementing a proactive student-centered approach, which
employs student learning communities as fundamental elements. The specific
project goals are:

-A 50% increase in the number of Black, Hispanic, and Native American students
with majors in STEM fields -A 150% increase in the number of BS STEM degrees
awarded to Black, Hispanic, and Native American students -A 150% increase in the
number of students who successfully transfer from Alliance community colleges
into BS STEM majors The Broader Impacts of the Mid-Level Alliance will be
generated through several foundational project objectives: 1. Increase
recruitment, retention and graduation rates, particularly for underrepresented
students; 2. Provide LS-AMP Scholars with research and internship opportunities;
3. Promote institutionalized adoption of successful models; 4. Create synergies
for STEM student success through interactions across the Alliance.

Lessons learned, success stories and other programmatic outputs will be
documented and disseminated through online communication channels, participation
in national and international student success and STEM related conferences and
workshops, and peer-reviewed publications.