* 1202016
* Support for the 4th International Congress on Ceramics; Chicago, IL; July 15-19, 2012
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Ricardo Castro, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 12/31/2012
* USD 49,215.00

This award by the Ceramic program in the Division of Materials Research to
Northwestern University is to meet the expenses related to travel and
registration of up to six US students to attend the 4th International Congress
on Ceramics to be held from July 15 to 19, 2012 in Chicago, Illinois.
Additionally, this award will support up to four invited speakers working in
non-ceramic areas. This Congress is the third in a series of biennial meetings
designed to facilitate discussion on emerging opportunities and technologies,
and critical areas for scientific advancement and process innovations that face
the ceramic and glass community. The meeting will focus on the following areas:
environment, energy, infrastructure, transportation, aerospace, biology,
medicine, security, electro- magnetic- and optical ceramics and devices, and
other ceramic related areas. Workforce development and strategies for
cultivating a diverse workforce would be other topics of presentation. This
Congress like it's previous ones is organized by a consortium of the American
Ceramic Society, the European Ceramic Society and the Ceramic Society of Japan,
under the auspices of the International Ceramic Federation. Selection of student
participants will be based on the quality of the abstract submitted and the
letter of recommendation from the student's research advisor. Availability of
travel support will be advertised through the Material Advantage website and
direct contact with Material Advantage advisors in universities and colleges
throughout the US. Special consideration will be given to diversity (both for
females and underrepresented minorities) for the meeting. To enhance interaction
among the participants at poster sessions, a novel Interactive Technology Forum
using liquid crystal displays (LCDs) will be introduced at this Congress. This
Forum would provide a unique opportunity for individuals to interact one-on-one
with the presenter and to actively exchange information, ask questions, and
explore the implications of the scientific results displayed in the poster. For
wider dissemination of the outcomes from this Congress on Ceramics, synopses of
this congress will be published in the International Journal of Applied Ceramic
Technology and International Journal of Applied Glass
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students participating in this Congress on
Ceramics would benefit greatly from presenting their work, hearing concrete
ideas for enhancing their research, gaining overviews of different thematic
areas of ceramic research, and learning about emerging opportunities. In
addition to presenting their own research in a high level scientific
environment, they will be able to interact with both junior and senior
investigators from academia, industry and national laboratories working in the
ceramics field from around the world. In addition, synopses of the 4th
International Congress on Ceramics will be disseminated by through publications
in the International Journal of Applied Ceramic Technology and International
Journal of Applied Glass Science. These synopses will include an outlook of the
global ceramics field and projections for future research and development. An
innovative Interactive Technology Forum using liquid crystal displays will be
introduced at this Congress during the poster sessions. These electronic poster
sessions are expected to provide enhanced interactions among the presenters and
the Congress attendees.