* 1202559
* Ferrimagnetic Insulator Enabled Quantum Spintronic Effects and Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Jing Shi, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2016
* USD 368,000.00

In this proposed research, the PI proposes to first synthesize epitaxial
magnetic insulator or FMI films (e.g. Y3Fe5O12 or YIG) using pulsed laser
deposition, fabricate FMI-based nanoscale spintronic devices, and investigate
the unique physical properties and novel functionalities of these spintronic
devices. FMI thin films have not been well studied or widely used in electronic
devices, but have become increasingly important because they could enable a host
of brand new spintronic devices. For example, in FMI, spin waves or magnons can
be excited, transmitted, and exploited to efficiently drive domain walls via
spin momentum transfer in nanoscale devices that can potentially serve as non-
volatile memory. Another example is that the spin current carried by a heat
current in FMI can be converted into a voltage signal which is known as the spin
Seebeck effect. Furthermore, by bringing FMI in proximity to materials that have
the Dirac energy dispersion (e.g. graphene and topological insulators), the
exchange interaction at the interface can result in the quantized anomalous Hall
effect, an effect produced by quantized edge channels in the devices. These
novel phenomena have been recently predicted or are currently being explored
experimentally. The PI aims to study FMI materials and FMI-enabled quantum
spintronic devices in this proposed research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: The proposed research will integrate several unique materials (e.g. FMI,
graphene, and topological insulators) to discover distinct collective phenomena
and functionalities, although many properties of individual materials are being
vigorously investigated by researchers including the PI himself. This proposed
research will likely yield very exciting new results that can advance our
fundamental understanding of materials, their interfaces, and related new
physics. Currently, the experimental work in this particular area is scarce.
This proposed research represents a significantly new effort aiming to advance
the field.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The broad impacts of this
proposed research contain the following two aspects. First, Spintronics is a
relatively young and thriving field. A primary objective of Spintronics is to
introduce new spin related functionalities to existing devices, such as spin-
based non-volatile memory devices that are ubiquitous in our modern lives. The
proposed research will explore new device concepts for spintronic non-volatile
memory and quantum information processing. The breakthroughs will likely inspire
the researchers in industrial labs to develop more energy efficient and high-
performance non-volatile memory devices. The PI himself has extensive experience
in adopting new concepts for advanced device applications. Second, this proposed
research will integrate the undergraduate and graduate education with the
cutting-edge research activities. In particular, the PI will actively engage
into this research the under-represented minority students which make up a
significant portion of the student population in PI?s institution. Aligned with
PI?s departmental ambitious goal in involving all physics majors in
undergraduate research, which has been aggressively pushed by the PI in the past
four years as the chair of the Undergraduate Advising Committee, the PI will
continue to recruit more undergraduates into this and other funded research
projects. The PI will incorporate the outcomes of this proposed research into
the new graduate and undergraduate courses that he recently developed and
taught. He will continue to pursue the education and outreach activities with
K-12 that he initiated independently or jointly with the Physics Department.