* 1202667
* Nature and Nurture at the Peak of Cosmic Star Formation: A Census of Galaxy Environments at z=2
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Tomer Tal, Tal                     Tomer
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 06/30/2014
* USD 167,660.00

Dr. Tomer Tal is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the University of
California, Santa Cruz. Precisely how galaxies initially form and how they
change throughout their lifetimes are among the least understood problems in
astrophysics. The properties of nearby galaxies depend strongly on their host
environment with observed correlations among color, morphology, and local
density. It remains unknown whether the physical characteristics of galaxies
were determined at the time of their formation or are the result of ongoing
evolution through environmentally induced processes. In this project the fellow
will perform a statistical analysis of galaxy environments at the peak of cosmic
star formation, when a large fraction of local galaxies were formed and
assembled. He will apply a unique method that he demonstrated at intermediate
galaxy distances and will extract luminosity functions for a large sample of
galaxy groups and clusters at a redshift of z = 2, revealing the typical
environments of the high redshift Universe. He will then employ these results to
test whether the local correlations between galaxy properties and environment
were already in place 10 billion years ago. To do so, the fellow will utilize
the data sets of the Cosmic Assembly Near-infrared Deep Extragalactic Legacy
Survey (CANDELS) and the 3D-HST survey, complementary surveys of the early
Universe with the new infrared camera on the Hubble Space Telescope. This is the
first time that such a study will be possible at redshift of z ~ 2, and it will
unveil clues regarding the balance between internal and external processes at
great distances.

The broader impacts of this project include a significant educational component.
First, the fellow will develop and teach a high-school level extragalactic
astronomy class as part of COSMOS, the California State Summer School for
Mathematics and Science. Second, he will volunteer at the public observing
nights hosted by the Santa Cruz Astronomy Club at the Harvey West Park Scout
House. Both of these activities promote scientific literacy through direct
involvement and contact with the public.