* 1202265
* Collaborative Research: CMOS Compatible On-Chip Optical Isolator
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Michal Lipson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 05/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

The objective of this program is to demonstrate one of the most critical
components of Silicon nanophotonics - systems consisting of optics and
electronics in a single chip for low power high data computing- an on-chip
optical isolator. The program will investigate the feasibility of the device
from its theoretical requirements and performance to a fully demonstrated
device. Optical isolators used to eliminate parasitic reflections that are
detrimental to the stability of the system. The program will aim to demonstrate
a small footprint isolator device that is electrically operated and is CMOS
compatible.

The intellectual merit of the program is the advancement of nanophotonics
research and all of its practical implementations as it will provide a solution
to the long-standing problem of on-chip optical isolation while maintaining CMOS
compatibility. Furthermore, the fundamental knowledge gained in this research is
also applicable to other novel photonic structures as its foundation lies in
studying allowed photonic transitions in different optical structures.

The broader impacts are the enhancement of knowledge and broader participation
of undergraduate and graduate students across a variety of disciplines related
to photonics. Among the proposed activities the PIs will develop a seminar
series to provide a forum to enhance the knowledge transfer between students
across different field, introduce novel research areas in the ECE curricula and
involve undergraduate students in the research program. The PI will also expand
the current Women ECE program in Cornell university which has already impacted a
large number of female graduate students in Cornell University.