* 1202960
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Investigating the origins of the Shell Mound Archaic: Occupational histories and interaction among shell-bearing sites in western Tennessee
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2014
* Thaddeus Bissett, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2014
* USD 19,448.00

Under the supervision of Dr. David G. Anderson, Thaddeus Bissett will study the
origins of cultural traditions associated with the midcontinental Shell Mound
Archaic (SMA), using archaeological materials from four stratified shell mound
sites in western Tennessee. Freshwater shell mounds first appeared in that
region during the early centuries of the Mid-Holocene Warm Interval (ca. 8,900 -
5,700 cal years before present [cal yr BP]), corresponding to the Middle Archaic
cultural period. Sites of the SMA are known from Tennessee, Kentucky, and
Alabama, and collectively span more than 6,000 years of history (ca. 8,900 -
3,200 cal yr BP). However, despite extensive archaeological investigation of
these often massive accumulations of shell, stone, cultural material, and human
burials for nearly a century, the origins and nature of the cultural practices
associated with the creation of such sites are not well understood.

This study will assess how models of social interaction and group identity
formation can be applied to archaeological data, and will address key questions
regarding the history of population movement, group interaction, and
ethnogenesis during the early development of the SMA. The work will refine
methods used to investigate stratified shell sites, which are known from nearly
every region of the world. Finally, this research will produce a high resolution
chronology for the early Mid-Holocene in the Midsouth that will serve as a
baseline for future research in the region.

Traditional models have viewed shell mounds as accumulated refuse from routine
subsistence behaviors, but recent alternative models suggest that SMA sites were
ritual locations where hunter-gatherer social groups gathered periodically for
ceremonial feasting using shellfish and for ritual interment of the dead. These
models further posit that such practices originated from the active
renegotiation of group identities, representing the development of new cultural
traditions after the arrival of outsiders to the area and their subsequent
interaction with peoples already inhabiting the region. The proposed research
will evaluate these arguments.

Multiple AMS 14C dates from cultural strata at four Middle Archaic shell mounds
will be used to estimate the duration of occupation at these sites. These data
will permit the comparison of depositional rates of shell and other artifact
classes within and between strata to assess relative occupational intensity and
history of site use. Intra-site variation in deposition rates will be compared
to determine if changes in site use occurred over time. Contemporaneity of
strata will be assessed to evaluate whether these changes occurred during the
same period over a large area. Stylistic analyses of artifacts from strata of
similar age at multiple sites will address whether changes in cultural practices
resulted from interaction between groups, and whether and how differing cultural
traditions may have emerged in the region.

Because SMA sites are threatened by natural factors like flooding and from
ongoing looting, an important contribution of this study will be the
documentation of their utility for understanding the origins of complex
societies and the effect of Mid-Holocene climate change on human populations in
eastern North America. The results are of broad public as well as academic
interest, and will be useful in teaching and public education. This work will
make use of under-reported museum collections from fieldwork dating to the New
Deal era, and all results will be made available to the general public, and will
be presented at scientific meetings and in peer-reviewed journals.