* 1202632
* FESD Type I: PLIOcene MAXimum sea level (PLIOMAX): Dynamic ice sheet-Earth response in a warmer world
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2018
* Maureen Raymo, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Simone Metz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 4,249,956.00

Knowing the maximum eustatic sea level rise that occurred during the mid-
Pliocene warm period (~3 Ma ago) is critical to understanding the response of
Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets to a modest global warming. Achieving this
objective will require advances in modeling ice sheet dynamics, mantle
processes, and the interactive coupling of solid Earth, ocean, atmosphere, and
cryosphere components of the climate system. An essential missing element is a
comprehensive database of globally distributed and dated Pliocene shoreline
elevations, capable of providing the data constraints needed to test and guide
the development of ice sheet and crustal deformation models that will be used to
predict the magnitude and distribution of sea-level rise in a warmer world.
Simulations of the mid Pliocene using state-of-the-art climate-ice models with
400 ppm atm CO2, as suggested by proxy data, fail to produce air temperatures
capable of causing significant surface melt in East Antarctica. These results
are at odds with the +25 m sea level rise typically cited for the mid-Pliocene
(e.g., PRISM) and imply: a) Pliocene CO2 levels may be underestimated; b)
climate model sensitivity to CO2 may be far too low; c) the current generation
of ice sheet models do not adequately represent important ice sheet physics; d)
most sea level estimates for this time period are too high; e) some alternative
major influence on climate that has yet to be identified; or f) some combination
of the above. Here we propose to collaboratively and systematically work to
reduce these uncertainties. We submit that our expertise in four distinct
disciplines, focused on the three objectives described below, will ultimately
result in one internally consistent solution to a long-standing question, namely
that of Antarctic ice sheet stability in a slightly warmer world. Our proposed
five-year plan will deliver: 1) A dramatically improved database of Pliocene
shoreline elevations from around the world. 2) A series of experiments (and
mapped results) that predict the global isostatic response and expected modern
elevations of Pliocene shorelines under different ice sheet, mantle, and dynamic
topography scenarios. 3) A coupled high-resolution atmosphere-ocean-ice
sheet/shelf-Earth model, the first of its kind. M. Raymo, a marine geologist
with expertise in geochronology and paleoclimatology, and P. Hearty, an expert
in field geology of near-shore environments, will lead the data collection
effort. J. Mitrovica, an expert on mantle-crustal dynamics with a specific focus
on glacial isostasy, will lead the mantle-crust modeling effort. R. DeConto, a
climatologist and Earth System modeler, will work with D. Pollard, a leading
numerical ice sheet modeler, on climate-ice model construction efforts including
coupling, for the first time, to a dynamic Earth model accounting for mantle and
gravitational processes (with Mitrovica). Intellectual Merit: Evidence for
ongoing warming of the climate system is unequivocal [IPCC 2007] and sea level
rise due to melting glaciers is accelerating [Rignot et al., 2011]. Conservative
estimates suggest a further 1-2 ¢ªC of global temperature rise will occur, even
if massive reductions in GHG emissions were made. Building a fully-coupled ice-
ocean-atmosphere-mantle-crust model capable of predicting future climate and sea
level response of the Earth system and providing the data that can help modelers
evaluate the fidelity of their ice sheet/climate simulations under different
forcing scenarios, are the primary intellectual goals of this proposal.
Improving predictive model capability is an essential need in the face of
ongoing warming and no greater uncertainty (or potential catastrophe) exists
than that of sea level rise. Broader Impacts: The need for a global array of
Pliocene sea level estimates lends itself to a broad, multi-investigator
approach and we are committed to engaging as many scientists as possible in this
endeavor. This will be accomplished through outreach and collaboration, as well
as with a wiki site that will serve as a repository for information relevant to
undertaking field studies, including customizable access to modeling results of
predicted global eustatic, dynamic topography, and isostatic effects. An NSF-
funded companion project, Sea Change, is already creating outreach material for
a general audience and these efforts, including our Magic Planet project, will
continue in this project as well. In addition to involving two early career
scientists as project collaborators (O¡¯Leary and Inglis), the PIs, who
collectively have a strong record of teaching and mentoring, will train and
mentor post-doctoral, graduate student, and undergraduate researchers as part of
this project. One PI (Hearty) will supervise and mentor students at an
institution serving students under-represented in the Geosciences.