* 1202537
* Structure and Dynamics of the Diffusion Region During Asymmetric Magnetic Reconnection
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Roy Torbert, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Janet U. Kozyra
* 06/30/2015
* USD 525,735.00

This project concerns the physics of the nonlinear energy conversion in
collisionless plasmas, which has crucial applications to space, solar and
astrophysical physics as well as laboratory plasma physics. It is aimed at
producing new knowledge of how kinetic-scale plasma processes couple to
macroscopic phenomena. The overall objective of the effort is to understand the
physics of the diffusion region of magnetic reconnection current sheets that
separate plasmas of different densities, temperatures, and magnetic fields - so
called asymmetric reconnection. Motivated by the lack of knowledge on 3D
asymmetric reconnection and discrepancies on 2D asymmetric reconnection, space
observations, simulations, and laboratory experiments will be combined to build
a body of new knowledge on particle and field characteristics and evolution in
the diffusion region of collisionless asymmetric reconnection. Space-based
observations from the multi-spacecraft Cluster mission during magnetopause
reconnection events will be used. Accompanying simulations consisting of 2- and
3-dimensional Particle-In-Cell and global Hall-MHD studies will be undertaken in
collaboration with scientists at Los Alamos National Laboratory. The laboratory
experiments will be carried out in the Magnetic Reconnection Experiment (MRX) at
the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from the
investigation are of interest broadly in the space and basic plasma physics
communities. Two graduate students will participate in the project for their
Ph.D. thesis work and the results of the project will also be incorporated into
various courses for undergraduate and graduate students at UNH and will be used
in introductory courses for pre-college students.