* 1202522
* High Performance Flexible Silicon Photovoltaics: Studies of Multifaceted Engineering Platforms Enabled with Nanophotonic Light Management and Spectral Modification
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Jongseung Yoon, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2016
* USD 318,569.00

Research Objectives and Approaches&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
to study new methods for crystalline silicon photovoltaics that allow
significant reduction of active materials as well as integrated module designs
for enhanced optical absorption. The approach is (1) to fabricate ultrathin,
monocrystalline silicon solar cells as nanostructureddevice platforms, (2) to
integrate them in engineered luminescent medium for spectral modification, and
(3) to implement nanostructure-enabled light trapping schemes for optimized
system performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The
research will lead to the development of innovative materials platforms and
fabrication strategies that can offer high performance, flexible silicon solar
modules with significant reduction of materials cost. The proposed studies will
provide deeper &lt;br/&gt;understanding of optical processes associated with
spectral upconversion and down-shifting when combined with schemes of
nanophotonic light trapping, and their resultant synergistic effects on overall
system performance of ultrathin silicon photovoltaic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;Scientific and
technological advances from this research will contribute to the progress of
making photovoltaic technologies cost-competitive with earth-abundant materials,
providing a practical solution for the future global energy demand. Both
graduate and undergraduate students will gain unique, interdisciplinary
educational experience and training by engaging in the proposed
&lt;br/&gt;research, where participation of students from underrepresented group
will be highly encouraged. The PI will develop and &lt;br/&gt;conduct outreach
programs for educationally-disadvantaged K-12 students in local community
through the Center for Engineering Diversity at the University of Southern
California.