* 1202525
* Workshop on Barycentric Coordinates in Graphics Processing and Finite/Boundary Element Methods
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Natarajan Sukumar, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 12/31/2012
* USD 49,253.00

The objective of this award is to conduct a three-day workshop on the campus of
Columbia University. The overarching theme of this workshop is to exploit the
intimate connection between geometry-and-computations towards the development of
more efficient and robust computational methods for the simulation of mechanics
phenomena. Emanating from the work of Wachspress in 1975 (Wachspress basis
functions on convex polygons), the ideas of barycentric coordinates and
barycentric interpolation have been extended in recent years to arbitrary
polygons in the plane and general polytopes in higher dimensions, which in turn
has led to novel solutions in geometric processing and new applications in
computational mechanics. The aims of the workshop include: to foster mutual
exchanges and dialog between researchers in computer graphics and mechanics on
emerging areas in the field of geometric-based computational methods; and to aid
in promoting and advancing graduate education for the next generation of
researchers in computational science and engineering. Tutorial sessions on
generalized barycentric coordinates will be held on the first day of the
workshop; the second day will include poster presentations by students; and the
second and third days of the workshop will feature invited and contributed talks
by leading experts in the fields. The research agenda for the workshop will be
aimed at significantly advancing the state-of-the-art in computational mechanics
and computer graphics.

The workshop will be strengthened by inviting a culturally diverse group of
researchers and practitioners from academia, national laboratories, and
industry. Travel awards will be offered to a number of graduate students as
well, thereby enabling these researchers to frame their research using the
latest computational techniques in their field. Efforts will be made to include
participants from different levels (junior, senior) and from underrepresented
groups in science and engineering. The main topics in the workshop will have
broad impact in advancing simulation technology for applications in energy,
defense, and manufacturing. The cross-disciplinary interactions between
researchers from mechanics and graphics will also promote future collaborations
and partnerships. The outcomes of the workshop will be crafted in a report,
which will highlight current accomplishments, existing challenges and potential
future research opportunities at the intersection of geometric methods and
computer simulation of physical phenomena.