* 1202225
* Collaborative Research: SMURFS: Statistical Modeling, SimUlation and Robust Design Techniques For MemriStors
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Yiran Chen, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 04/30/2016
* USD 250,001.00

SMURFS: Statistical Modeling, SimUlation and Robust Design Techniques For
MemriStors&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fourth fundamental
passive circuit element &amp;#8722; memristor, has demonstrated great potentials
in massive data storage, neuromorphic computing, signal processing, biomedical
lab-on-a-chip, sensing etc. The objective of this research is to investigate the
design implications of process variations and environmental fluctuations to
memristor-based VLSI systems, to exploit a fast statistical simulation
technique, and to explore new circuit techniques to improve the memristive
system reliability and robustness.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research
includes three integrated components: (1) The statistical device models for
representative memristor technologies, i.e., the TiO2 thin-film and spintronic
memristors, will be developed to facilitate the process variation aware design
space explorations; (2) The fast Monte-Carlo simulation platform will be
developed for memristor-based VLSI system designs and simulations; (3) By
leveraging the statistical memristor models and simulation platform, robust
circuit design techniques that can minimize the fluctuations of the electrical
properties caused by process variations will be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This research provides a comprehensive design package for efficiently
integrating memristor into existing VLSI systems to offer better performance and
power consumption. The device engineers and the circuit designers are well
bridged and educated by the research innovations. The developed techniques can
be directly transferred to industry applications under the close collaborations
with leading industry partners, and directly impact the future memristor-based
VLSI systems. The activities in the collaboration also include the tutorials in
the major conferences on the technical aspects of the projects and new course
development.