* 1202685
* Studies on Singularities
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Claudia Polini, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2016
* USD 227,023.00

The research program proposes several problems in commutative algebra. There are
three long-term goals: the study of projective rational plane curves; the
description of the defining equations of Rees algebras; and the investigation of
cores of arbitrary ideals. More precisely, Polini proposes to investigate local
and global information on the singularities of a given curve; to set up a
correspondence between the types of singularities and the shapes of the syzygy
matrices of the forms parametrizing them; and to stratify the space of all
rational plane curves of a fixed degree according to the configuration of their
singularities. Rees algebras are instrumental in multiplicity theory and
intersection theory, in the study of integral closures of ideals, and in the
context of blowing up a variety. Although blowing up is a basic operation, an
explicit understanding of this process is still an open problem. Most notably,
it is difficult to describe the defining equations of the resulting variety.
Reductions play a crucial role in the study of Rees algebras, multiplicities,
and Hilbert functions. To investigate all reductions at once one considers the
core, defined as the intersection of these reductions. The core is related to
multiplier ideals, an essential tool in birational geometry due to their
importance in vanishing theorems. The core detects uniformity properties of
schemes, such as the Cayley Bacharach property of finite sets of points.
Although cores have been studied extensively, they remain somewhat mysterious
objects that are difficult to compute in general.

Commutative algebra deals with solutions of many polynomial equations in many
unknowns. Fundamentally, it is the study of abstract objects called rings of
polynomial functions defined on the set of solutions of systems of polynomial
equations. Commutative algebra provides the tools for understanding many
problems in pure and applied mathematics and, as of more recently, physics as
well. In many applied problems, polynomial equations and hence commutative
algebra play a crucial role. Applied areas where results from commutative
algebra have been used include geometric modeling, operations research,computer
science, robotics, control theory, coding theory and cryptography,to mention a
few. In fact, most of the problems described in this researchproposal are not
only important for commutative algebraists or algebraicgeometers but are of
interest to applied mathematicians as well. For instance,the study of curve (or
surface) singularities via their parametrizations have applications in geometric
modeling theory. In computer aided geometric design, curves are often given
parametrically and their singularities are pointswhere the shape of the graphic
gets more complicated. Thus, understanding the nature of these singular points
is extremely important.