* 1202712
* "Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Local Implementation of Global Health Priorities"
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Stefan Timmermans, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 04/30/2013
* USD 7,497.00

SES-1202712 Stefan Timmermans Tara McKay University of California, Los Angeles

Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Local Implementation of Global Health
Priorities

ABSTRACT Global health policy faces the challenge of reconciling international
and local goals. This dissertation examines how tensions and ties among
countries shape the diffusion of health programming priorities. Using a novel
dataset utilizing four waves of UN country progress reports, this study
considers how organizational ties among states and elites have shaped the
diffusion of health programming priorities and tests the role of organizational
ties against other prominent theories of social change. Additionally, the study
employs original survey and ethnographic data to examine closely the social
underpinnings of organizational and popular resistance to global health priority
diffusion.

The intellectual merit of this study rests in its focus on the social processes
that have informed the ongoing construction and diffusion of global health
policy priorities at three distinct levels: transnational elites, government and
non-government organizations, and ordinary citizens. This study draws from the
sociological literature on health to inform an understanding of the ways in
which the identification of health policy priorities is shaped by macro social
forces. The study also integrates the organizational literature on institutional
isomorphism with additional theories of social change and diffusion in order to
reconstruct the pathways of adoption and resistance to global health policy
priorities.

Broader Impacts Chronic conditions and infectious diseases continue to have a
major impact on morbidity and mortality around the world. They affect life
expectancy and quality of life for millions of people. Policies designed at the
national and supranational level that seek to prevent the transmission of
illnesses, and that regulate e.g., treatments vary greatly in their
effectiveness due to variation in implementation at local levels. If successful,
findings from this study may inform our understanding of global health policy is
made, how populations deemed at risk are identified, and the conditions under
which policy goals become uncoupled from policy outcomes.