* 1202660
* Research in finite von Neumann algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Kenneth Dykema, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2016
* USD 177,000.00

The investigator will try to answer questions about algebras of bounded
operators on Hilbert space; in particular, these questions involve finite von
Neumann algebras, which are algebras of operators on Hilbert space that are
closed under taking adjoints and strong--operator limits, and on which there
exist tracial linear functionals. The main question the investigator proposes to
work on is known as Connes' embedding problem, which asks (in one of many
equivalent formulations): can all operators in a von Neumann algebra that has a
bounded trace be approximated by matrices over the complex numbers? This
question is fundamental and its resolution would have profound ramifications on
our understanding of operator algebras and operator spaces. One important goal
is to seek a group lacking certain analogous approximation properties (i.e., a
non-sofic group), both as it's own goal and as a guide for particular von
Neumann algebras to investigate vis-a-vis Connes' embedding problem. In other
directions, the investigator proposes to use the "practical Schubert calculus"
to learn more about finite von Neumann algebras, and to study certain natural
questions in finite von Neumann algebras, such as the single commutator question
and the Schur-Horn question, using diverse methods.

Group theory is the study of fundamental symmetries that are found in nearly all
branches of mathematics and natural sciences. On the other hand, von Neumann
algebras were invented in the 1930's and 1940's by Murray and von Neumann; they
consist of operators on infinite dimensional space and are related to the
formalism of quantum mechanics, which motivated their invention. In modern
mathematics, the study of these von Neumann algebras has important connections
to several other areas of mathematics, such as group theory and dynamical
systems. The investigator will try to answer related, fundamental problems in
group theory and von Neumann algebras, namely, "can certain infinite objects
always be approximated by finite ones?" Answers to these questions would have
broad impact; they are related to many other open problems about groups and,
respectively, operators on infinite dimensional space. The investigator will
also study certain other natural questions about von Neumann algebras. The
research effort will furthermore support the educational efforts of the
principal investigator: most directly in teaching graduate students the
prerequisites to understanding current research problems and then to guide them
to vital and important research problems and but also in educating undergraduate
students in a way that shows the utility and beauty of mathematics and teaches
them essential mathematical skills and methods of mathematical (and logical)
reasoning.