* 1202827
* Collaborative Research:   Continued Study of Ultra Low Frequency (ULF) Waves at Cusp Latitudes on Svalbard to Probe Earth's Space Environment
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2017
* Marc Lessard, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 07/31/2017
* USD 347,035.00

A large array of ground based instruments has been installed on the Svalbard
archipelago in Norway. Svalbard is frequently on polar cusp field lines that map
to the outer boundary of the Earth's magnetosphere where it interacts with the
solar wind and interplanetary magnetic field (IMF). This proposal has two parts:
One part is for support for the continued operation of and processing data from
an array of four search coil magnetometers (induction antennas). The second part
is to carry out analysis of data from these four instruments. Svalbard is the
only place in the northern hemisphere where polar cusp field lines can be
observed for extended periods in darkness at noon. In addition to the four
search coil magnetometers auroral imagers and photometers, several radars
(EISCAT, SPEAR and SuperDarn) and the northernmost fluxgate magnetometers of the
IMAGE chain are located on Svalbard. This makes Svalbard an excellent place to
carry out observations of ionospheric phenomena on magnetic field lines that map
to the magnetopause. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three main types of studies using the
data from the search coils and other instruments are:&lt;br/&gt;a.) Make a
concentrated effort to understand the observations of Pc 1-2 waves in the cusp
and their effect on radiation belt dynamics. In the Pc 1-2 frequency range
electromagnetic ion cyclotron waves (EMIC) are thought to interact resonantly
with MeV electrons in the radiation belts. The waves and radiation belt dynamics
and the persistence of waves (sometimes seen for days) will be studied as well
as waves associated with auroral precipitation. &lt;br/&gt;b.) Probe the
Ionosphere Alfvén Resonator (IAR) by using the Space Plasma Exploration by
Active Radar (SPEAR) heater facility in conjunction with the EISCAT radar. The
IAR is a region in the ionosphere bounded by the F or E region at lower
altitudes and by a peak in the Alfvén velocity at higher altitudes. This
research will characterize the quality factor (Q) of the IAR. The quality factor
relates the energy stored in the resonator with the energy dissipated. If the
IAR is driven long enough the energy contained in the resonator will be
proportional to Q. By controlling the input energy from the SPEAR heater they
will be able to determine Q. &lt;br/&gt;c.) Investigate the properties of PC3-4
waves at very high latitudes. In this study SuperDARN radar will be used along
with the search coils to determine the intensity of PC 3-4 as a function of
position with respect to the cusp. The goal will be to determine how these ULF
waves reach the high latitude ionosphere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data from
the four closely space magnetometers are very valuable for a number of space
physics studies. The team will make the data available to the scientific
community through the NASA Virtual Observatories. This proposal will support a
graduate student at the University of New Hampshire and an undergraduate
researcher at Augsburg College.