* 1202008
* UT System LSAMP: A Model Senior Alliance
* EHR,HRD
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2019
* Helmut Knaust, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2019
* USD 4,290,432.00

The primary goal of the University of Texas System Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation is to increase the quantity and quality of
underrepresented minority (URM) students that pursue and earn degrees in
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) in the state of Texas
and the nation. The Alliance, which is comprised of nine universities and five
community colleges, has promoted STEM education at undergraduate and graduate
levels and directly supported 1,565 undergraduate students. More than 90% of
these LSAMP scholars have already graduated from UT system institutions with
bachelor's degrees, and many of the remaining students are currently enrolled
and making satisfactory progress toward their undergraduate degrees in STEM. The
LSAMP has demonstrated how collaborative efforts can reap large rewards and
serve as an impressive example of a state-wide commitment to improving
enrollment, retention, performance, and graduation of underrepresented groups
that traditionally have not had access to higher education. The UT System LSAMP
will expand its membership to 16 institutions by including two additional large
community college systems to continue its state-wide work by: - Enhancing the
Summer Research Academy to ensure that a significant number of URM students,
including veteran students, participate in a sequence of research experiences in
various STEM fields, starting with on-campus training and culminating with a
summer undergraduate research exchange, a national laboratory research
experience, or a research abroad capstone. - Through close collaboration among
partnering community colleges and universities, ensuring that a majority of co-
enrolled URM students complete their STEM associate degrees in their two-year
institutions and advance toward and later earn their bachelor's degrees in their
four-year institutions. - Creating synergistic activities among closely related
NSF funded projects (including but not limited to S-STEM, STEP, REU, and AGEP)
at each one of the Alliance's partnering institutions to create pathways to
success for URM STEM students.

Intellectual Merit. The proposed activities, centered on a set of interconnected
undergraduate research experiences, will advance knowledge and understanding of
the academic factors that enable URM students to successfully earn STEM degrees.
The leadership team of the project includes a competent and diverse group of
administrators, faculty, and professional staff who are fully committed to the
notion of broader higher education participation, early talent development, and
excellence in performance. The Alliance institutions will ensure that the
project is successfully completed and that its most effective components are
sustained beyond the term of the grant. An external evaluator will provide an
impartial periodic assessment of the project to drive the decision making cycle
for systematic improvements. Broader Impacts. The core research activities in
which LSAMP scholars are engaged serve the purpose of training them to advance
discovery and understanding and also to promote further depth of learning. The
proposed activities broaden the participation of underrepresented minorities and
veterans and, in many instances, low-income first-generation college students.
Results of this effort will be disseminated broadly through journal and
conference publications, as well as regional and national presentations. The
general benefit to society is the development of a diverse STEM workforce that
is globally competitive and truly representative of the nation?s 21st century
demographics.