* 1202540
* RUI: Using a Sectored Conducting Wall to Study Normal Modes and Transport in a Toroidal Electron Plasma
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2017
* Matthew Stoneking, LAWRENCE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 05/31/2017
* USD 165,000.00

A promising route to fusion power for electricity production is the tokamak - a
toroidal (or bagel-shaped) magnetic confinement device that confines hot plasma
composed of positively charged ions and negatively charged electrons. Non-
neutral plasma, on the other hand, which is composed of relatively cold
particles all of one type (either positively or negatively charged), is
typically trapped in a straight device that uses a combination of electric and
magnetic fields. Such non-neutral systems are used to store antimatter and also
serve as candidates for quantum computing elements and next generation precision
time standards, among other uses. The project at Lawrence University, a four-
year liberal arts college, might be characterized as lying "between a clock and
a hot place," as it uses a toroidal magnetic field (like the tokamak) to confine
and study a pure electron (i.e., non-neutral) plasma. The apparatus, which was
designed and constructed with prior NSF/DOE support, is uniquely positioned to
explore untested fundamental aspects of the physics of charged particle
collections in a curved and non-uniform magnetic field that closes on itself.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide research experiences (as well as
scientific authorship and presentation opportunities) for undergraduate
students. Undergraduate research experiences in this small college environment
tend to provide more comprehensive research skills training than comparable
experiences at larger institutions, thereby contributing in significant ways to
developing the future workforce in technical fields. Thanks to Lawrence's
success in attracting women physics majors (27% of the physics graduates in the
last 5 years) and increasing minority enrollment in the university (145%
increase since 2000), the research will positively impact the engagement of
underrepresented groups in the physics PhD pipeline. The apparatus will also be
used to recruit promising high school students to the Lawrence University
physics program and expose the campus and local communities to the subject of
plasma physics.