* 1202320
* High-bandwidth, single-molecule bioelectronics using a multiplexed, field-effect sensing platform
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Kenneth Shepard, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2017
* USD 432,000.00

Over the last two decades, fluorescent techniques have become the standard
method for experimentally probing the conformational dynamics of molecules at
the single-molecule level both in vitro and in vivo. Though fluorescent probes
are highly specific, they use light as an intermediary between the biological
system and measurement electronics, which results in fundamental constraints in
resolution and bandwidth due to the countable number of photons emitted. Single-
molecule kinetic measurements of fast biomolecular processes are often difficult
or impossible to access through fluorescent techniques, as they lack the
necessary temporal resolution. Long time scales are frequently also difficult
and sometimes impossible to access due to fluorophore photobleaching.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this multidisciplinary project, charge-based field-
effect-transistor (FET) electronic single-molecule methods are developed for the
analysis of biomolecular interactions in in vitro biomolecular systems. These
techniques will dramatically improve the temporal dynamic range for single-
molecule studies, enabling bandwidths approaching 10 MHz as well as the ability
to examine single-molecule events over hours of observation time. Integration of
these electronic sensors with complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS)
integrated circuits will enable the high throughput techniques that currently
characterize many current, fluorescence-based approaches. This project focusses
on two specific single-molecule studies involving nucleic acid and protein
interactions which demonstrate the benefits of improved temporal resolution.
State-of-the-art single-molecule techniques have been actively employed to study
these systems; as a result, they represent an interesting vehicle to apply the
FET devices proposed here.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;This research program seeks to combine these efforts and is centered
around four specific research aims: (1) optimization of field-effect-transistor
(FET) devices for high-bandwidth single-molecule sensing; (2) CMOS integration
of these field-effect sensors into a large multiplexed platform; (3) single-
molecule FET studies of riboswitch folding and function; and (4) single-molecule
studies of the dynamics of lactose repressor protein interacting with DNA.
Specifically, in the first two Aims, we develop a nanoscale FET platform for
single-molecule detection, enabling bandwidths approaching 10 MHz with massively
parallel, high-bandwidth integrated CMOS electronics as well as the ability to
examine single-molecule events over hours of observation time. The second two
Aims focus on target application of these sensors in the study of nucleic acids
and proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt; In this project,
the PIs will train graduate and undergraduate students in a truly cross-
disciplinary research environment combining biochemistry, nanofabrication,
circuit design, and biological applications. The proposed program will also
impact curricula, as described below, allowing us to influence a broader group
of students. Based on an established track record of the PIs, significant effort
will be made for K-12 outreach by systematically training highly motivated high
school students within the program and also enhancing the interactions with
local K-12 educators to introduce front-line research to students, especially
targeting underrepresented groups. We also intend broader impacts related to the
commercialization and dissemination of this proposal?s technology.