* 1202707
* Aligning Learning Outcomes and Workforce Competencies for Terminal Geography and Geology Master?s Degree Programs
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Heather Houlton, American Geological Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2015
* USD 109,842.00

The American Geological Institute (AGI) and the Association of American
Geographers (AAG) are conducting a survey of 50 different terminal Geography and
Geology master's degree programs in an effort to determine the types of
competencies taught and developed in graduate curricula (including internships
and related professional training experiences). The results are being compared
to the outcomes of recent workforce studies conducted by AGI, AAG, and other
organizations that indicate the skills qualifications that geoscience employers
seek for entry-level positions across the public and private sectors. Through
this research, the project is developing resources and toolkits that can help
academic programs better align curricula and advising practices with workforce
demands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The surveys developed for this project build
directly on prior work by AGI and AAG to create conceptually valid measures of
professional competencies and studies of industry trends in the geosciences. In
practical terms, the results can be used to assist Geography and Geology
terminal master's programs by providing them with additional approaches to
assess learning outcomes in relation to workforce demands. This is an important
issue for all graduate programs, but especially for terminal master's programs
for which little is known empirically about curricula, students' career paths,
and advising and mentoring practices by faculty. As the graduate degree for most
entry-level professional careers in geology and geography, a focus on master's
education is needed as part of a broader engagement by AGI, AAG and their sister
organizations to address future workforce needs in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) geoscience careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is expected to improve the preparation of the STEM workforce in broad
geoscience fields by providing information that can be used to guide students in
their selection of academic courses and other educational experiences that will
equip them with the competencies they need for entry-level positions. By
establishing and enhancing dialogues and relationships between academic programs
and employer organizations, the project may also communicate the value of
academic and professional training in the geosciences for work in various public
and private sector careers. Although this is conceived as a pilot project
focusing on geography and geology programs, there is potential for future
expansion to other sub-fields through partnership with other professional
societies and academic programs in the geosciences.