* 1202019
* Micrometeoroid Mass Flux Influences on Space Weather and Middle Atmosphere Aeronomy Studied Using the Six NSF Radars and Modeling
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* John Mathews, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 08/31/2016
* USD 559,998.00

The investigators will conduct observational and theoretical studies of
meteoroid-related processes in the mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT). The
study will utilize observations at the six NSF radars (and associated lidars),
as a diversity of frequencies, viewing angles relative to the geomagnetic field,
and latitudes/seasons is required to determine the whole earth meteoroid mass
flux, explore the head/trail-echo scattering mechanisms, and to reveal details
of the meteoroid interaction with the atmosphere including fragmentation,
ablation, sputtering, and the resultant plasma physics and aeronomic effects.
The complex role of the meteoroid mass flux to the Mesosphere & Lower-
Thermosphere (MLT) on the aeronomy and electrodynamics of this region as
represented by, e.g., sporadic-E, sporadic metal layers, and Polar Mesospheric
Summer Echoes (PMSE), remains an illusive and even unrecognized component of
space weather. Detailed understanding of the radio science of the radar
head/trail-echo radar scattering processes is required to correctly interpret
how the plasma surrounding the meteoroid--and that then forms the meteor trail--
is generated and evolves, thus revealing important insights into sputtering,
fragmentation, and terminal processes. Details of these processes remain a
source of controversy. The investigators will also study how the meteoroid
metals arrive in tidal ion, sporadic-E layers, noctilucent clouds, and PMSE.
Modern high-power, large-aperture (HPLA) radar meteor observations have greatly
stimulated the entire field of meteor physics and associated aeronomy.
Observational and modeling/simulation studies of the radar meteor head/trail-
echo scattering processes provide unique insight into meteoroid interaction with
the atmosphere and also into the contribution of meteoric ions and "smoke" to
the ionospheric D- and E-regions. The observations will provide details on how
the meteoroid plasma trail evolves into geomagnetic field aligned plasma
structures and will explore the surprising and instructive meteoroid flare
generated plasma waves that produce non-thermal radar scattering. Together with
radar observations, Rayleigh and metal lidar results provide a new dimension to
meteoroid flux aeronomic studies. The meteoroid flux into the MLT is linked to
solar system and local galactic processes. These are "systems of systems" space
weather issues where meteoroid energy dissipation heating of the upper
atmosphere is of the same order as Joule and particle heating of the auroral
zones--an apparently unrecognized property of the meteoroid flux. This study
will also lead to the development of new radar imaging techniques and help
address issues such as the role of the meteoroid mass flux in many lower
atmospheric processes such as cloud formation and stratospheric chemistry.
Exploration of meteor-related electrodynamics and non-equilibrium plasma physics
may stimulate other areas of research in, for example, the ionospheric heating
community. This research will involve both graduate and undergraduate
researchers, featuring discovery and learning to communicate knowledge
concerning the meteoroid processes, related spaceweather and systems issues, and
associated aeronomy.