* 1202692
* Comparative Island Ecodynamics in the North Atlantic
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Thomas McGovern, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 09/30/2014
* USD 746,393.00

The proposed project seeks to improve scientific understanding of the complex
interactions of human governance, climate change, human environmental impact,
and world system effects on the diverging fates of two closely related
Scandinavian communities in Greenland and Iceland. While the Icelanders survived
centuries of adverse climate, volcanic eruptions, large-scale soil erosion,
epidemic disease, and harsh world-system economic impacts to develop a modern
society now ranking high in international assessments of quality of life, their
relatives in Norse Greenland suffered complete extinction by the mid-15th
century CE. Why did one northern community achieve sustainability on the
millennial scale, while its near neighbor underwent genuine social-environmental
system (SES) collapse despite centuries of successful adaptation and what we now
recognize as comparatively resilient economic management? How can the lessons of
these thousand year cases of long term human ecodynamics and their radically
different outcomes be more effectively understood and interpreted for the wider
effort to mobilize the past to serve modern efforts to secure a genuinely
sustainable future? What lessons of survival and extinction can be learned and
taught for both local northern community heritage and for global education for
sustainability? These questions are not only relevant to Norse in the 14th -15th
centuries but have the potential to inform research that can provide insights
into social decisions that are key to the long-term sustainability of human and
environmental systems on earth. The project combines the data and expertise of
history, human bioarchaeology, zooarchaeology, archaeobotany, geoarchaeology,
artifact distribution, stable isotopic analysis, geochronology, environmental
modeling, and K-12 and college education professionals. It brings together teams
of scientists, educators, and local residents from across the region and create
genuinely transdisciplinary and genuinely transformative approaches to shared
problems of human survival and sustainable adaptation in the north.