* 1202384
* Novel Optically-Activated High-Voltage and Single-Bias Wide-Bandgap High-Frequency Thyristor for Next-Generation Smart Grid
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Sudip Mazumder, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2017
* USD 344,075.00

Research Objectives and Approaches:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this
project are as follows: 1) To realize and optimize a high-gain, high voltage
(HV) (&gt;10 kV, &gt;35 A), and high-temperature SiC Integrated Thyristor, which
is triggered in a non-latched manner using a very low power and short-wavelength
single monochromatic photonic source by hybrid integration; 2) To reduce the
optical-triggering power requirement of the SiC-based Integrated Thyristor by
optimization of optical-absorption efficiency, lifetime control, and localized
photogeneration-recombination process; and 3) Experimental characterizations of
the fabricated prototype device for performance
validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
novel all-optical and single-bias (i.e. only the power bias) SiC Integrated
Thyristor improves upon all core all-electrical multi-bias HV integrated
thyristors including ETO/IGCT/MTO. Further, the Integrated Thyristor also
provides a superior solution to the state-of-the-art SiC DMOSFET and SiC IGBT
for the HV power systems in multiple aspects. The bipolar device provides
numerous device and system level advantages with regard to response time and
switching frequency, reliability, ease of triggering, on-state drop, current and
voltage scalabilities, fabrication, thermal conductivity, electromagnetic-
interference immunity, electrical isolation, and energy-conversion
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
impact of the HV SiC Integrated Thyristor is expected to be radical with
applications including direct-grid-interface solar, wind, fuel-cell inverters,
energy-storage systems, FACTS, power-quality conditioners, HVDC systems, motor
drives, solid-state transformers, fault-current limiters, and pulsed-power
systems. The proposed project will provide doctoral education to a Ph.D.
researcher. Further, multiple undergraduate (including minority) students and
middle-school students will be provided research/educational opportunities.
Results of the research will be integrated into an undergraduate and a graduate
course at UIC.