* 1202832
* Structure-Function Design Strategies for Bio-enabled Materials Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2013
* Harry Bermudez, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* David A. Brant
* 01/31/2013
* USD 5,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1202832 PI: Dillen, J. A. ORG: Materials Research
Society&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Spring 2012 MRS Symposium OO: Structure-
Function Design Strategies for Bio-Enabled Materials Systems
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: This symposium, to be held in the
context of the 2012 Spring Meeting of the Materials Research Society (MRS), will
focus on developing novel strategies to design and construct novel materials
useful for a broad range of biologically relevant functions. It is one of eleven
scheduled symposia with a bioimaterials theme. Abstracts have been solicited in
the following topic areas: (1) peptide, oligonucleotide, or virus-mediated
assembly or precipitation, (2) peptide or oliogonucleotide-based aptamers for
specific targeting, (3) 3D cellular mimics as therapeutic or diagnostic
vehicles, (4) 2D ligand-functionalized SAMS or bilayers, and (5) hierarchically
structured biomaterials. These approaches are appropriate for development of
materials that may be employed for gene and drug delivery, of self-assembled
nanoscopic arrays that may be used for biosensing or bioactivation, of cellular
mimics that may have therapeutic or diagnostic applications, and of
functionalized surfaces and matrices that may be used to support tissue culture
or to suppress bacterial colonization or fouling by protein
deposition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: Recently, bio-enabled
strategies in which biological components are incorporated into otherwise
abiological systems, have proven powerful approaches to obtaining intricate
hierarchical structures with unique properties that are not otherwise
accessible. The challenges involved in these strategies include successfully
interfacing nonbiological materials with biomacromolecules, cellular components,
or cellular mimics to achieve the desired function. Successful realization of
these bio-inspired or bio-enabled hybrid materials often stems from specific
associations between heterogeneous components that enable unique synergistic
behavior such as controlled precipitation events, precise pattern formation, or
molecular recognition-based assembly. Recent successful examples include
peptide-driven nucleation of inorganic particles, spontaneous organization of
organic and inorganic components to form nanocomposites, and self-assembled
monolayers or bilayers to promote cellular activity on a material surface. The
symposium will provide opportunities for younger and more established scientists
to learn of recent developments from the leading practitioners.