* 1202060
* Collaborative Research: Development of an Ice-Tethered Winch for the Seasonal Ice Zone
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Richard Krishfield, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Erica L. Key
* 08/31/2014
* USD 436,115.00

The ice-tethered winch (ITW) will combine the design of two established
technologies, the Ice-Tethered Profiler and Arctic Winch. Merging these
technologies will expand upon their individual capabilities by creating a new
instrument that can both telemeter subsurface data from beneath the ice and
profile the water column over variable depths. The ITW will complement other
existing Arctic observational efforts (e.g., icebreaker surveys, gliders, and
moorings) by providing relatively high resolution (four profiles daily with less
than 10 cm vertical resolution) time series of year-round, near-surface physical
and biological properties, including temperature, salinity, pressure, turbidity,
and chlorophyll. The ITW will transition between a Eulerian platform when
tethered to landfast ice and a semi-Lagrangian drifter when in open water. Year-
round data from the ITW will be freely provided in realtime via a newly created
ITW website and the Cooperative Arctic Data and Information Service in
accordance with the guidelines provided by the Arctic Observing Network. The ITW
website will not only provide a portal for data, but will also include an
overview of the project and region targeted to the general public. A public talk
will be given in Barrow, Alaska prior to deployment. ITW data will be integrated
into the Physical Oceanography curriculum of the Nippon Foundation-POGO Centre
of Excellence in Observational Oceanography (CofE) hosted at the Bermuda
Institute of Ocean Sciences. Analysis of ITW data will be used in a student
research project during CofE.