* 1202634
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Patterns of Incorporation Among Mexican-Origin Young Adults
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Vilma Ortiz, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 04/30/2013
* USD 6,750.00

SES-1202634 Vilma Ortiz and Laura Enriquez University of California, Los Angeles

Doctoral Dissertation Research: Patterns of Incorporation among Mexican-Origin
Young Adults

Abstract Generations of researchers have examined the intra- and inter-
generational experiences of immigrant adults and their U.S.-born children.
However, we know relatively little about the experiences of immigrants who
arrived in the United States as children and are now young adults. This project
is grounded in existing empirical and theoretical literature on immigrant
assimilation. It examines how these young adults have experienced both social
exclusion and inclusion, and how this affects their feelings of belonging, their
identification with and their participation in U.S. society. This dissertation
will also address the degree to which their experiences differ by educational
status and gender, as well as the immigration and naturalization process per se,
which typically takes many years and has had a profound impact on their
formative childhood and adolescent years. To address these research questions,
the project relies on 120 interviews with young adults of Mexican origin.

Broader Impacts This research seeks to inform our understanding of the
conditions under which young immigrants adjust to and identify with U.S. society
and culture. Improving our understanding the factors that facilitate the
successful incorporation of young immigrants may influence public discourse
regarding immigration policy reform. It may also contribute to efforts that
promote immigrant integration, social mobility, and social cohesion. Finally,
findings may be of interest to a variety of stakeholders, including but not
limited to community and social service organizations, education officials, law
enforcement, and policy makers.