* 1202841
* Student Travel Fellowships: 2012 Reasoning Web Summer School and the Web Reasoning and Rule Systems Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Alessandra Mileo, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 01/31/2013
* USD 14,850.00

The project supports graduate student participation in the Sixth International
Conference on Web Reasoning and Rule Systems (RR 2012) Conference and the
Reasoning Web Summer School to be held in Vienna, Austria during September
10-12, 2012 and September 3-8, 2012 respectively, in Vienna, Austria.
Specifically, the project provides funds to defray the cost of travel for
students enrolled in doctoral programs at US institutions who might not
otherwise be able to attend the conference or the summer school because of
financial reasons. The recipients of student travel fellowships will attend and
the Reasoning Web Summer School designed to introduce graduate students to
current research topics and recent advances in web reasoning followed by the RR
2012 conference which includes a scientific program of talks and a doctoral
consortium that provides a venue for the students to have one-on-one discussions
and receive mentoring from some of the leading researchers in semantic web and
semantic technologies. The project offers natural integration of research and
education and contributes to the training of a new generation of researchers in
semantic technologies, an area of growing importance and impact in not only
Computer Science but also many application domains that rely on advances in
knowledge representation and reasoning on the web e.g., information retrieval,
e-science, e-commerce, e-government, e-health, among others. Additional
information about the RR 2012 conference and the Reasoning Web Summer School can
be found at: http://www.rr-conference.org/RR2012/.