* 1202181
* The Virginia-North Carolina Alliance for Minority Participation: Mid-level LSAMP
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Archie Holmes, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2018
* USD 3,500,000.00

The Virginia - North Carolina Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(VA-NC Alliance) will broaden the participation of underrepresented minority
populations (UREP) in the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) disciplines. The VA-NC Alliance consists of eight colleges and
universities in Virginia and North Carolina: four historically black colleges
and universities including Bennett College for Women, Elizabeth City State
University, Johnson C. Smith University, and Saint Augustine?s College; and four
doctorate-granting/research-extensive universities including George Mason
University, the University of Virginia, Virginia Commonwealth University, and
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, which will continue to lead
the consortium. The Alliance will be expanded with the addition of Piedmont
Virginia Community College.

The VA-NC Alliance integrates students into their academic institutions and
provides disciplinary socialization opportunities; in addition, partner schools
collaborate to retain students across the critical junctures between secondary
schools, two-year institutions, four-year colleges or universities, and graduate
programs. The VA-NC Alliance?s goal is to substantially increase the number of
STEM baccalaureate degrees earned annually by UREP students. Alliance students
are equipped with the knowledge, skills, and experiences to transition
successfully to graduate school. As a secondary goal, the Alliance will increase
the number of UREP STEM students entering graduate school. The Alliance offers a
broad array of activities including research experiences, symposia, workshops,
and graduate school preparation retreats which are open to all students and
faculty at partner schools. The synergy created by sharing resources across
institutional lines in order to achieve a common goal is exemplified by the VA-
NC Alliance Summer Research Program, which brings select students from partner
schools to one campus to engage research projects with faculty.

Intellectual Merit The VA-NC Alliance project will create new knowledge,
innovations and models for broadening the participation of underrepresented
groups in STEM disciplines and the STEM workforce. Results of these efforts will
be disseminated. Project evaluation and monitoring activities will yield
evidence-based knowledge concerning the effectiveness of the various broadening
participation models and innovations.

Broader Impacts The VA-NC Alliance will yield broader impacts by increasing the
quantity and quality of UREP STEM graduates well prepared to succeed at the
graduate level, and contribute to the STEM workforce. In order to address the
challenges of the 21st century, particularly in the science and technology
sectors, the increased diversification of the United States labor force is
critical to enhancing the nation?s competitiveness. By tapping into a workforce
underrepresented in the STEM fields, the VA-NC Alliance will ensure that diverse
perspectives are applied to complex and global problems, benefitting its
geographic region and the nation as a whole.