* 1202803
* NSF NPGI Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2012
* BIO,IOS
* 10/15/2012,09/30/2015
* Rachel Meyer, Meyer                   Rachel         S
* Fellowship Award
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 09/30/2015
* USD 195,900.00

This action funds a National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship for FY 2012. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in
a host laboratory for the Fellow to focus their studies in plant genomics with
an emphasis on quantitative genetics, modern breeding approaches, and
bioinformatics. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship
to Rachel S. Meyer is "Selection for Salt Tolerance in African Rice (Oryza
Glaberrima) in Indigenous Riverine Agricultural Habitats of Western Africa". The
host institution for the fellowship is New York University and the sponsoring
scientist is Dr. Michael Purugganan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One major factor
limiting worldwide crop production is high salinity, which affects 50% of global
irrigated land area. Farmers in the Atlantic Coast region stretching from
Senegal to Liberia plant indigenous crops that are tolerant to saline
conditions. This project focuses on one such crop that is a major staple:
African rice (Oryza glaberrima Steud.). O. glaberrima is irrigated by rivers
with a conspicuous salinity gradient. Thus, the agricultural system developed
for O. glaberrima implies that varieties have been arranged with matched fitness
to local saline levels. However, farmers also practice agriculture in unique
ways including dyking of mangrove swamps, soil overturning, and sometimes
desalination, which spurs several critical questions. How has the O. glaberrima
genome been modified to tolerate salinity? To what extent do specific
agricultural practices play a role in the ability of O. glaberrima to be
cultivated in saline environments? Is it geographic characteristics or cultural
practices that guide selection for this crop? To address these questions, the
genomes of 100 germplasm accessions from three agricultural river systems will
be surveyed in order to build a SNP map for O. glaberrima and identify DNA
regions that distinguish germplasm from saline coastal versus freshwater inland
environments. Interviews will be conducted to gather information about land
conditions, farming techniques, and community roles in seed trading along these
rivers. DNA sequence data will be correlated with the salinity at collection
locales, culturally specific agricultural practices, and salt injury tests.
Results will connect aspects of human innovation to agroecology and selective
crop breeding, while specifically addressing challenges faced by a need to
practice agriculture on areas of high salinity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training
objectives include data management of entire genomes and population analyses,
in-depth agroecological analysis, and cross-training between NYU and
international institutions. Broader impacts include include capacity-building
and advanced training for students from the United States to engage in
interdisciplinary research in plant improvement and associated sciences such as
physiology, quantitative genetics, and computational biology. Outreach
activities include training workshops in West Africa and other countries to
enhance utility of genome sequence generated and use of agroecological data to
design tools to help farmers, and K-12 DNA barcoding mentoring.