* 1202018
* Integrated Approach to Reconnection: State-of-the-Art Kinetic Simulations of MRX Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Vadim Roytershteyn, SciberQuest
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 03/31/2015
* USD 37,182.00

Magnetic reconnection is a ubiquitous phenomenon in magnetized plasma that is
thought to play a key role in the dynamics of many systems in nature under a
wide range of plasma conditions. Examples of such systems are the Earth's
magnetosphere, solar corona, laboratory fusion experiments, etc. Significant
progress in understanding of magnetic reconnection has been made, but many
important basic questions remain open. The aim of this project is to execute an
extensive simulation program designed to significantly advance the state of
knowledge on reconnection by working in parallel with Magnetic Reconnection
eXperiment (MRX), one of leading experimental facilities dedicated to studies of
magnetic reconnection. This work targets the following scientific question of
great significance: What is the influence of microscopic turbulence originating
from instabilities of thin reconnection layers on the dynamics of magnetic
reconnection in various parameter regimes? A unique aspect of this collaboration
is a close coordination of simulation and experimental efforts, where
experiments are used to verify and challenge theoretical analysis, while
simulations help interpret and guide experimental campaigns. The work utilizes
state-of-the art simulation technologies and makes use of a variety of modern
petascale computers.

We expect that this work will have broad implications for the studies of
reconnection. The results will be presented at scientific meetings and published
in the appropriate scientific literature. The simulation data will be made
widely available to the community. This research is based on our ongoing
collaboration with MRX team at Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory. An important
element of this work is participation of graduate and undergraduate students
from Princeton University in all aspects of the research. Access to simulation
data and theoretical expertise provides the students with fundamentally new ways
of analyzing their measurements and greatly enhances their expertise. In
addition, the students have opportunities to participate in summer internship
programs at SciberQuest and at Los Alamos National Laboratory, where they have a
chance to get hands on experience with modern simulation techniques.