* 1202907
* MAESTRO - Mathematics and Earth Science Teachers Resource Organization
* GEO,GEO
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Andy Jackson, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 04/30/2015
* USD 149,577.00

The Mathematics And Earth Science Teachers' Resource Organization (MAESTRO) is a
Track 1: Proof-of-Concept partnership project between James Madison University
and Harrisonburg City and Page County Public Schools in Virginia. MAESTRO
focuses on improving public Earth System Science literacy, through a regional
collaboration of in-service and preservice teachers with STEM faculty, as well
as the strategic goals of developing the future geoscience workforce and
supporting regional networks that strengthen geoscience education. The
partnership is combining mathematics and Earth science instruction in middle and
high schools by developing an integrated mathematics and Earth systems science
approach to instruction in Grades 6 and 9, where Earth science concepts are
typically taught, along with pre-algebra and algebra. This curricular
integration is intended to enhance the mathematical skills and confidence of
students through concrete, Earth systems-based examples, while increasing the
relevance and rigor of Earth science instruction via quantification and
mathematical modeling of Earth system phenomena. MAESTRO emphasizes the
development of mental networks and inquiry as means to support student
metacognition in multidisciplinary aspects of quantitative Earth systems
science. The project involves two summer professional development workshops and
academic year Lesson Study (structured teacher collaboration). Site-based case
studies, developed in collaboration between teachers and JMU faculty members,
provide a tangible, relevant setting in which students can apply and understand
mathematical applications and scientific processes related to evolving Earth
systems. The research component of MAESTRO is focused on the impact of local
field-based case studies on student performance in, and perception of,
mathematics and Earth science, as well as the impact of Lesson Study on the
teachers' ability and willingness to integrate STEM concepts in the classroom.
It is anticipated that the proposed integration across grade bands will first
strengthen students' interests in mathematics and science (a problem in middle
school) and subsequently reinforce the relevance of other sciences (a problem in
high school), both in support of Earth systems literacy. Quasi-experimental
evaluation of the impact of this program on participating educators is being
used to document project outcomes and indicate the potential of this integrated
approach as a model.