* 1202779
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2012
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Kathleen Greenham, Greenham                Katie          M
* Fellowship Award
* scott jackson
* 05/31/2015
* USD 197,700.00

This action funds a National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship for FY 2012. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in
a host laboratory for the Fellow to focus their studies in plant genomics with
an emphasis on quantitative genetics, modern breeding approaches, and
bioinformatics. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship
to Kathleen M. Greenham is "Computation analysis of global gene expression
changes at the intersect of the circadian clock and the response to drought in
the crop plant Brassica rapa". The host institution for the fellowship is
Dartmouth College (New Hampshire) and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. C.
Robertson McClung.

The plant drought response includes numerous physiological and gene expression
changes. The circadian clock regulates both the physiological and gene
expression processes that respond to drought, as well as the magnitude of the
response. Understanding the circadian regulation will enable us to modify this
complex network of signaling events following water deficiency. In this project,
global gene expression changes in response to drought, measured by RNAseq, will
be determined in a population of Brassica rapa recombinant inbred lines (RILs)
under water sufficient and deficient conditions. These results, along with
previous measurements of period length, will be used to identify expression
quantitative trait loci (eQTL) contributing to the circadian regulation of water
use efficiency. In addition, a network analysis will be used to uncover
expression modules important for the drought response. The data will enhance the
annotation and functional analysis of the Brassica genome and these analyses
should be generally applicable in the translation from model organisms to
important crop species.

Training objectives include bioinformatics, quantitative genetics and plant
genomics. Broader impacts include capacity-building and advanced training for
students from the United States to engage in interdisciplinary research in plant
improvement and associated sciences such as physiology, quantitative genetics,
and computational biology. Outreach activities include participation in an
existing educational outreach program that involves developing resources for
enhancing K12 and undergraduate programs using B. rapa.