* 1202033
* Magnetic Correlations and Control in Nanoscaled Molecule-based Magnets
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Mark Meisel, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2016
* USD 345,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** This research explores the interplay between the
electromagnetic and structural properties of cyanometallate coordination
polymers. Specially, the fabrication of heterostructured films and particles
increases the interface to bulk ratio, thereby allowing the stress/strain
effects at the boundaries between the constituents to dominate the properties.
Notably, irradiation with light allows persistent photocontrol of the magnetism
up to liquid nitrogen temperatures, and this work seeks to explore different
paths to extend this property to room temperature. In parallel, quantum spin
chains will also be studied, and the emphasis is placed on S = 2 materials. The
boundary between quantum and classical spins in one-dimension will be probed,
and the influence of the anisotropy of the local magnetic environment will be
explored. Both research thrusts will employ pressure as an external parameter,
and these molecule-based magnets are significantly more pliable than their
traditional solid-state counterparts. Physics and chemistry graduate students
participate directly in every aspect of the research program and receive unique
training in a variety of techniques, including magnetometry, X-ray and neutron
scattering, and high-field, high-frequency magnetic resonance techniques. The
tools are available in the local laboratories of the investigators or at
national facilities like the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL),
and the Spallation Neutron Source (SNS) and High Flux Isotope Reactor (HFIR) at
Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL).

****Non-Technical Abstract**** The discovery of novel phenomena and the
development of new devices have now reached levels of maturity where
increasingly complex materials are required as constituents of nanometer sized
films and particles. Along this direction, molecule-based magnets are excellent
materials because their properties can be tuned by synthesis protocols and
controlled by external stimuli such as temperature, magnetic field,
pressure/stress/strain, and irradiation by light. In this research program,
materials historically generated as paint pigments are modified and employed in
nanoscaled films and particles whose novel magnetic and optical properties can
be externally controlled. The sensitive response results from stress and strain
developed at the interface between the different constituents, and the nanometer
length scales are required to diminish the static background that the bulk
material contributes. The research seeks to extend this control to higher
temperatures and in novel morphologies that can provide new magneto-optical
switches and light harvesting devices. A variety of interdisciplinary tools,
including magnetometry, electron microscopy, X-ray scattering, and magnetic
resonance, are used to characterize the samples. Physics and chemistry graduate
students are trained using state-of-the-art instrumentation and data analysis
techniques, and undergraduate students are integrated into various aspects of
the work. Ultimately, the goal is to increase the knowledge of the interplay
between magnetic and electronic interactions in environmentally sensitive
materials that are inexpensive to generate.