* 1202932
* Collaborative Research:   The role of network topology and environmental filtering in shaping the ecology of spatially structured communities
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Bryan Brown, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2014
* USD 168,238.00

Why are species found in certain combinations and not others? Why are some
species not found in habitats that seem suitable for their needs? A fundamental
goal of ecology is to understand the processes that drive patterns in species
occurrence. An organism's "local" environment can exert influence on where it
occurs, e.g., climate, competition for resources, and disturbance. However,
"regional" factors - such as the ability of organisms to colonize available
habitat - are also important. This project addresses two fundamental questions:
1) What is the relative importance of local versus regional factors in
controlling species composition? 2) How does that relative importance shift with
elements of landscapes, and the ability of organisms to move across those
landscapes? The project will address these two questions using communities of
aquatic invertebrates in river networks. These organisms include the larval
forms of many insects, such as mayflies and caddisflies, and animals like snails
and crayfish. These communities are ideal for addressing the questions because
rivers have a very distinct, branching configuration. Furthermore, rivers endure
intense human degradation, and aquatic invertebrates are often used as
indicators of water quality. The project takes advantage of stream restoration
activity, which almost always includes large-scale habitat modification: the
ultimate manipulation of "local" factors. Three types of approaches will be
employed to address the research questions: surveys of restoration sites,
experimental manipulations of local factors - specifically stream-bottom habitat
features - in river systems, and experiments using artificial streams to control
for both local and regional processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
have important implications for applied ecology because stream assessment often
involves characterizations of aquatic communities under the assumption that
local habitat alone determines their composition. Stream restoration efforts
(estimated at &gt;$1 billion annually in the U.S.) are often evaluated based on
such bioassessment techniques. Previous findings suggest that this assumption
may apply only to specific portions of a stream network. This research will be
the first to begin to explore spatial dependence of habitat factors in detail,
not only advancing the field of ecology, but providing information about the
importance of river network position in developing expectations for restoration.