* 1202620
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2012
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Joe Baio, Baio                    Joe
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 05/31/2015
* USD 232,800.00

Understanding the Molecular Mechanisms Driving Spider Adhesion

One of the most well studied adhesion systems are the adhesive pads found in the
feet of spiders. These pads are made up of hair-like bristles called setae. When
in contact with a substrate the combined attachment force of these groups of
setae can be hundreds of times the animal's body weight. Previous work has
focused almost exclusively on the mechanical and kinematic aspects of adhesion,
and not on the molecular interactions at the seta - substrate interface. This is
a direct result of the difficulties associated with the surface characterization
of biological interfaces. However, recent advances in surface analysis
techniques now finally provide a way to fully characterize these surface
interactions. Thus, the overall goal of this project is to use surface
analytical techniques to construct a detailed characterization of the chemical
environment at the surface of a spider spatula. These chemical characterizations
will then be put into an evolutionary context - by comparing and contrasting the
surface chemistry of setae taken from a range of spider species.

Upon the successful completion of this highly interdisciplinary project -
preliminary connections, between the behavior and mechanics of spider adhesion
to the molecular interactions driving this process, will finally be formed. This
molecular level understanding will lead biologist to expand on their current
understanding of how adhesion organs evolved while also providing engineers with
details that can be exploited in the future design of adhesives. The proposed
project also directly fulfills the NSF's goal of broadening research
opportunities by providing opportunities for scientists, from underrepresented
groups, to learn the techniques and concepts of both biomechanics and surface
analysis.

This award is co-funded by the PRFB Program and the International Research
Fellowship Program (IRFP) in the Office of International Science and
Engineering.