* 1202330
* Particle Acceleration during Collisionless Magnetic Reconnection
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* James Drake, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Janet U. Kozyra
* 08/31/2015
* USD 390,000.00

Magnetic reconnection is a fundamental process underlying important phenomena in
nature, including solar flares, magnetospheric substorms and disruptions in
laboratory fusion experiments. While great progress has been made on
understanding the mechanisms for the fast release of magnetic energy seen in
nature and the laboratory, the mechanisms for electron and ion heating and
acceleration are not as well understood and are the focus of the extension of
this research grant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solar flare observations suggest that
a large fraction of the magnetic energy released appears in the form of
energetic ions and electrons and recent over-the-limb events suggest that the
pressure of the energetic electron component approaches that of the magnetic
field. Impulsive flares reveal abundance enhancements of high mass-to-charge
energetic ions compared with coronal values. Satellite observations in the
magnetotail indicate that reconnection directly produces very energetic
electrons and that the small magnetic islands that are often associated with
reconnection events are filled with energetic electrons. The revelation that the
termination shock in the outer heliosphere is not the local source of Anomalous
Cosmic Rays leaves open the possibility that reconnection of the sectored
heliospheric field may be the source of these energetic
particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research program is to
understand electron and ion heating and acceleration during magnetic
reconnection and develop a model that can be compared with spacecraft
observations. Particle-in-cell and Hall MHD simulations will be used to address
key issues related to electron and ion acceleration during reconnection.
Specifically, building on the results from their previous work, the team will
pursue four distinct scientific objectives: 1) address the roles of parallel
electric fields versus Fermi acceleration for electrons and the impact of
firehose and other anisotropy instabilities through the study of magnetic island
development and electron and ion acceleration in large-scale 2-D multi current
layer systems; 2) asses how 3-D flux ropes interact and accelerate particles
using a PIC model of reconnection and particle acceleration for a modest sized
3-D current layer system; 3) understand abundance enhancements in impulsive
flares by studying ion pickup behavior and non-adiabaticity in reconnection with
a guide field, including the relative acceleration rates of multiple ion
species; 4) Use the results from the first three studies to develop a Fokker-
Planck model of electron and ion acceleration during reconnection that predicts
the spectra of energetic electrons and ions for comparison with observations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will be done in collaboration with scientists
working on laboratory reconnection experiments and with satellite data to
benchmark the theoretical predictions with observations. Magnetic reconnection
is the driver of space weather and the resultant threat to satellites. The
exploration of the dynamics of reconnection and particularly the development of
a predictive capability for energetic particle spectra has broad importance for
assessing both the safety of astronauts and our countries space-based
technological assets. The active involvement of undergraduate students in
research under this program and support for female graduate students will
further the broad educational goals of NSF.