* 1202666
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2012
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Shelby Ellison, Ellison, Shelby L
* Fellowship Award
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 07/31/2015
* USD 196,800.00

This action funds a National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship for FY 2012. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in
a host laboratory for the Fellow to focus their studies in plant genomics with
an emphasis on quantitative genetics, modern breeding approaches, and
bioinformatics. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship
to Shelby L. Repinski is "Genome-wide Association Study of Domestication Traits
in Carrot (Daucus carota L.) Inbred Lines". The host institution for the
fellowship is the University of Wisconsin - Madison and the sponsoring
scientists are Drs. Philipp Simon, Patrick Krysan and Brian Yandell.

Carrots are among the top-ten most economically important vegetable crops in the
world and have many health-promoting characteristics such as being the richest
source of provitamin A carotenoids in the U.S. diet. Though the carotenoid
biosynthetic pathway has been unveiled, many of the underlying genetic
components are still unknown. Several other key agronomic traits in carrot such
as lateral root prominence, storage root sugar type, and ease of flowering also
lack a known genetic control. This project will generate molecular markers to
facilitate rapid screening for agronomic traits in carrot. Specifically, the
project will employ next generation sequencing technologies and a recombinant
inbred line (RIL) population to begin to identify quantitative trait loci for
sugar, carotenoids, and root prominence as a first step to identifying gene(s)
for carrot improvement.

Training objectives include bioinformatics, quantitative genetics, biochemistry
and plant genomics. Broader impacts include capacity-building and advanced
training for students from the United States to engage in interdisciplinary
research in plant improvement and associated sciences such as physiology,
quantitative genetics, and computational biology.