* 1202977
* A "Global Viewport" for Virtual Exploration of Deep-sea Vents: Using Spherical Displays to Advance Public Literacy in Earth System Science
* GEO,GEO
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Stace Beaulieu, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 06/30/2015
* USD 456,699.00

The Global Viewport for Virtual Exploration of Deep-Sea Hydrothermal Vents is a
Track 2 project using spherical display systems to educate the public about the
global significance of vents in the world's oceans and in the dynamic processes
of Earth as a whole. The project is a collaboration between the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution and the Ocean Explorium at New Bedford Seaport,
members of the Magic Planet Community and Science On a SphereÂ® (SOS) Network,
respectively. The proximity of the two institutions enables a unique evaluation
of the learning attained with a stand-alone spherical display vs. live
presentations with an SOS. The new content for spherical display systems will
address key principles of Earth Science Literacy and Ocean Literacy. Imagery and
data from research cruises are being used to: show how hydrothermal vents link
dynamic processes in the lithosphere, hydrosphere, and biosphere; promote
stewardship of life in remote environments; and excite viewers about the deep
ocean frontier including exploration, research, and resources. The Global
Viewport project is geared towards informal science education but also includes
a component for teacher professional development from schools in towns with
populations underrepresented in STEM fields. An online portal for content on
Google Earth enables virtual exploration of deep-sea vents from home, extending
the learning experience beyond a single visit to an informal science education
institution. The online content, including interactive learning modules and
games, is being promoted to marine educators and scientists at national
conferences and through the COSEE social network.