* 1202793
* NSF NPGI Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2012
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Patrick Edger, Edger                   Patrick        P
* Fellowship Award
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 07/31/2015
* USD 197,100.00

This action funds a National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship for FY 2012. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in
a host laboratory for the Fellow to focus their studies in plant genomics with
an emphasis on quantitative genetics, modern breeding approaches, and
bioinformatics. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship
to Patrick P. Edger is "Constructing Plant Metabolic Networks and a Comparative
Framework to Identify Genes to Manipulate Biosynthetic Pathways in Crops". The
host institution for the fellowship is the University of Arizona and the
sponsoring scientists are Drs. Michael Barker (University of Arizona) and
Michael Freeling (University of California - Berkeley).

In order to begin addressing more complex questions in biology (e.g. elucidating
genotype to phenotype relationships and plant-environmental interactions), the
next phase of biology must involve integrating the wealth of diverse biological
resources (e.g. sequenced genomes, gene expression data, protein data, and
metabolic data) available to the scientific community. This study seeks to
investigate how metabolic networks, the complete set of biochemical reactions in
the cell (e.g. photosynthesis, respiration, and biosynthesis of defensive
secondary metabolite compounds, have evolved over time (e.g. topology and
content), to distinguish plastic portions from more conserved sections, and
ultimately identify sub-networks that are more amenable to modification for crop
improvement.

Training objectives include bioinformatics, biochemistry, and plant genomics.
Broader impacts include capacity-building and advanced training for students
from the United States to engage in interdisciplinary research in plant
improvement and associated sciences such as physiology, quantitative genetics,
and computational biology. Outreach activities include the development of a
visualization tool that will allow plant biologists to more easily analyze gene
expression differences at the global network level and to calculate differences
in metabolic costs. In addition the Fellow will be participate in introductory
bioinformatics workshops that will train both undergraduate students and more
advanced researchers in basic computer programming skills and in the use of
available tools to analyze and interpret various datasets.