* 1202532
* Tailoring the Functionality of ZnO via Highly Lattice Mismatched and Lattice Matched Alloying
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Matthew McCluskey, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2015
* USD 432,931.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Zinc oxide (ZnO) is emerging as one of the materials
of choice for ultraviolet (UV) applications, but only at a narrow energy range.
ZnO is attractive because it is a very efficient light-emitter in a wide range
of temperatures, and has a benign chemical nature. Creating an alloy is one
route for tailoring optical properties and achieving additional light emissions
at desired energies. Thus alloying ZnO with certain atomic constituents can add
new optical and electronic functionalities to ZnO. The optical properties of the
alloys depend on their material quality, and on how amenable to mixing, or
soluble, are the atomic constituents in the ZnO matrix. This project focuses on
the study of two ZnO-based alloy systems, Mg(x)Zn(1-x)O and ZnS(1-x)O(x), with
the objective of achieving high-quality alloys with known solubility and
material properties that enable optical properties by design at energy ranges
above and below that of pure ZnO, respectively. In particular, the alloys may
provide materials with tunable bandgaps and new optical emissions in the deep-UV
as well as in the blue-green spectral ranges. This research has broader impact
in the potential use of these alloys in the highly vital field of blue and UV
semiconductor light sources and sensors, as well as in coating technologies for
the protection of sensitive electronic devices operating in harsh environments.
As part of this research effort, an educational outreach program is also being
initiated that presents a series of lectures to the local community on the role
of materials in consumer technology. The educational effort is coordinated with
a professor from the Department of Philosophy at the University of Idaho, whose
expertise is in enhancing communication in cross-disciplinary research and on
the transfer of scientific and technical knowledge to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: In this research, Mg(x)Zn(1-x)O
with a high percentage of Mg composition that promotes the cubic phase is
investigated with the goal of achieving bandgap engineered alloys in the UV
range of 4 - 6 eV, while ZnS(1-x)O(x) is studied with the objective of creating
materials with bandgap in the blue-green part of the visible spectrum.
ZnS(1-x)O(x) is a highly-lattice mismatched alloy system, and may prove useful
for enabling new electronic and optical properties, such as strong bandgap
bowing into the visible spectrum, and modification of valence band to acceptor
level separation for the case of doped samples. For this research, sintered
ceramics, as well as films that are grown via a sputtering technique, are
synthesized. Due to the different thermal equilibrium conditions of these two
growth techniques, studying both types of materials is expected to yield
comprehensive knowledge into key aspects of the alloys such as solubility
limits, sample homogeneities, and metastabilities. The material properties are
studied via several high-resolution atomic imaging techniques and X-ray
diffraction, while the optical properties are studied via photoluminescence,
Raman scattering, absorption, and infrared spectroscopy. Additionally, Hall
effect measurements are employed for the investigation of doped ZnS(1-x)O(x) for
understanding the valence - acceptor levels relation. The experimental studies
are complemented with analytical modeling. The outcome of this research enables
the creation of materials with a broad range of bandgaps and new emission lines
in an important part of the spectrum. Another significant impact of this
research is that for the advancement of ZnO as a viable material in quantum-well
based devices, knowledge concerning its alloy systems is necessary, as the alloy
constitutes the barrier component. The research is a collaborative effort
between two PIs from the University of Idaho and from nearby Washington State
University. A postdoctoral researcher, one graduate student, and an
undergraduate student are supported by and participate in this research. As the
PIs are strongly committed to educational efforts, several other undergraduates
from diverse backgrounds take part in the research. The two laboratories provide
an excellent opportunity for the students and the postdoctoral researcher to
gain basic knowledge in optical materials as well as be trained in cutting-edge
research techniques.