* 1202240
* Collaborative Research: A Novel Wireless Power Transmission Architecture for Devices Implanted in Human Bodies
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Dan Meyer, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* chengshan xiao
* 06/30/2016
* USD 128,257.00

The objective of this program is to verify a distributed power transmission
architecture to deliver radio frequency power to devices implanted in human
bodies. The proposed architecture aims to construct efficient and reliable
wireless channels in complex in-body environments for power transfer. If proved
feasible, it would fundamentally resolve a few problems associated with the
state-of-the-art wireless charging technologies, including low efficiency,
potential hazard to human health, and large and heavy apparatuses.

The intellectual merit is the proposed distributed power transmission
architecture, which is potentially transformative to enable next-generation
systems for wireless power delivery. Specifically, it has two major innovations.
First, radio frequency power is transmitted via multiple antenna elements
physically attached to a large area of skin and electrically matched to the
skin. Second, the multiple antenna elements jointly behave as a retro-reflective
beamformer: guided by the pilot signal sent from an implanted device, their
radiations spatially converge to the target device with power intensities at all
other locations below safety levels regulated for human.

The broader impacts include (i) promoting the contemporary Body Area Networks to
the next level of integration; (ii) supporting both graduate and undergraduate
students and provide them with excellent research opportunities; (iii) making
constructive impacts to the science and engineering curricula at the three
participating institutes; (iv) offering local high school students and teachers
to participate in the proposed research activities; and (v) impacting both
research and educational aspects of North Texas' high-tech industries.