* 1202229
* Collaborative Research: Resiliency against Coordinated Cyber Attacks on Power Grid
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Chen-Ching Liu, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2015
* USD 200,000.00

The modern electric grid is a cyber-physical system that increasingly depends on
a variety of sensors, control systems, and communication networks for the
purpose of monitoring, protection, and control. The increased attack surface
presented by the cyber components provides adversaries with ample opportunities
to perform coordinated cyber attacks on the power grid. These attacks have been
recognized as High-Impact Low-Frequency events by the North American Reliability
Corporation (NERC). The attacks when smartly structured, can significantly
affect the power infrastructure?s security and adequacy.

This project will develop a comprehensive cyber security framework, with
associated algorithms and analytical methods, to protect the power grid against
coordinated cyber attacks. This includes: (i) the development of innovative risk
models that capture cyber vulnerabilities as well as the resulting consequences
in the grid, due to successful attacks, in terms of and system adequacy and
instability; (ii) the development of novel system resiliency algorithms
leveraging synergy between domain-specific anomaly detection and power system
mitigation strategies; (iii) testbed-based security evaluations to quantify the
risks and evaluate the effectiveness of resiliency algorithms under plausible
and sophisticated attack scenarios. The outcome of this research will
significantly advance power system planning to design the future grid beyond the
traditional (N-1) contingency criteria, which requires resiliency with the loss
of any single component. The results will also lay a solid scientific foundation
to model, analyze, and mitigate coordinated cyber attacks against critical
infrastructure systems. The project will develop a novel curriculum that
includes offering a new course in cyber security of smart grid and engaging
undergraduate students, with emphasis on underrepresented minorities, in testbed
design and cyber-defense competition. The outreach activities will include
promoting cyber security research and education in professional conferences and
exposing students to cyber security issues by leveraging university outreach
program. This project outcome will make broader impacts in securing nation?s
power grid against cyber attacks and contributing to the development of a highly
skilled workforce in this critical area of national need.