* 1202724
* NSF NPGI Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2012
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Cory Hirsch, Hirsch                  Cory           D
* Fellowship Award
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 07/31/2015
* USD 197,400.00

This action funds a National Plant Genome Initiative Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship for FY 2012. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in
a host laboratory for the Fellow to focus their studies in plant genomics with
an emphasis on quantitative genetics, modern breeding approaches, and
bioinformatics. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship
to Cory D. Hirsch is "A Systems Biology Approach to Understanding Anthocyanin
Biosynthesis and Regulation in Potato". The host institution for the fellowship
is Michigan State University and the sponsoring scientists are Drs. Robin Buell
and David Douches.

Anthocyanins, the purple and red pigments found in plants, have numerous health
benefits including a high anti-oxidant content with human health benefits. The
scientific goals of the proposed research is to investigate anthocyanin
production at the genetic, biochemical, molecular, and systems level in potato,
a crop species that is emerging as an important component of the 21st century
world food needs. This project will couple classical plant breeding approaches
with modern technology enabled genome-wide approaches to generate and integrate
multiple data types to provide a genome-scale understanding of the mechanisms by
which genes govern anthocyanin production in potato.

Training objectives include classical breeding, biochemistry, quantitative
genetics and plant genomics. Broader impacts include capacity-building and
advanced training for students from the United States to engage in
interdisciplinary research in plant improvement and associated sciences such as
physiology, quantitative genetics, and computational biology.