* 1202430
* Conference: Northeast Bioengineering Conference 2012, Philadelphia, PA, March 16 - 18, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Iyad Obeid, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 12/31/2012
* USD 18,500.00

1202430, Obeid

Intellectual Merit Rapid advances in engineering are facilitating an enhanced
understanding of biology and providing novel transformative solutions to
biomedical problems. The NEBEC will provide a multidisciplinary forum for
dissemination of these advances in biomedical engineering at all levels, and
will facilitate the sharing of knowledge across interdisciplinary barriers. The
conference serves as an open forum for discussion of new directions, ideas and
approaches in research and education. Furthermore, the conference provides a
setting to reinforce existing contacts and to establishing new collaborations.
To support these goals, sessions will be organized covering a broad range of
topics related (but not limited) to: - Stem Cells - Instrumentation - Imaging -
Biomedical Design - Biomechanics The NEBEC has traditionally served as a
platform for students to present their research and to obtain constructive
feedback. This conference also provides an opportunity for students to discuss
potential career choices with individuals from academia, government, and
industry.

Broader Impact The 38th NEBEC will have a broad impact for the Northeast
bioengineering community and for engineering education. The knowledge shared at
the conference by researchers from over 40 institutions in the Northeast will be
captured electronically and broadly disseminated via abstract books, USB thumb
drives, and the IEEE website. The conference?s emphasis on students, with
multiple opportunities for them to present their work and discuss current
obstacles to progress with leading researchers in an intimate setting, will
better prepare them for careers in both research and industry. One of the main
goals of the conference is to nurture exceptional students and to help develop
an environment to support future leaders in the field. In addition, the exposure
to research in diverse fields will help spawn innovations and create ground
breaking bioengineering technologies and bench benefit the society at large.