* 1202235
* Fundamental Properties of Micromagnetics for Peripheral and Central Nervous System Stimulation
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Richard Normann, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2017
* USD 381,658.00

Recent neuroengineering research has demonstrated that motor function and
sensing in patients that are affected by neurodegenerative diseases can be
partially restored by means of electrical neurostimulation. However, electrode
arrays currently used to replace endogenous electrical activation present
several drawbacks, including exposure of metal contacts to conductive tissue,
potential need for excessive charge density to achieve stimulation when
electrode size is small, and lack of tolerance with respect to imperfect contact
between the electrode contacts and the neural tissue.&lt;br/&gt;The PIs have
recently demonstrated that a new class of microcoils can effectively stimulate
the peripheral nervous system, leading to the idea that magnetic
microstimulators for implantable devices and neuroprostheses can be devised.
Since the mechanisms of magnetic stimulation are centered on eddy currents and
their gradients, coils do not need direct contact with the tissue and therefore
they can be completely insulated, thus avoiding the possibility of material
reactions with conductive neural or surrounding tissues. Further, arrays of
coils can potentially offer more options to control the shape of the induced
magnetic fields, and therefore eddy currents, and their operation is not
affected by contact capacitance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
goals of the proposed work capitalize on our theoretical and experimental
findings that contact magnetic stimulation of the nervous system is feasible,
and investigate new classes of microcoils and magnetic stimulators that will be
particularly suited for micromagnetic stimulation. Specifically, a major goal is
to investigate coil geometries that allow control of the microcoil?s magnetic
fields; this will increase the magnetic flux density levels well beyond those of
traditional coils and alter the orientation of the fields in the proximity of
the target neurons. Ferrite-backed microcoil arrays have the potential to
provide increased field strength, sharp gradients, and control of the magnetic
field needed for selective neurostimulation. In this work, the PIs investigate
novel devices that could provide a paradigm shift compared to traditional
electrical neurostimulators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This work
has the potential to offer a highly innovative solution to peripheral and
central system neurostimulation devices. Providing an alternative solution to
surface or penetrating electrodes could positively impact a number of
implantable systems, which currently suffer from the significant drawbacks of
electrical neural stimulation. Besides the important clinical impact, the
proposed program offers unique opportunities to train engineering students in a
highly interdisciplinary activity at the forefront of engineering technology and
medical research. In addition to utilizing the proposed research activity in
various existing programs designed to have a lasting impact on current and
prospective undergraduate students, the proposed project will increase the
interest of engineering students in the emerging field of neuroprosthetics and
demonstrate the benefits of engineering to medicine. The PIs will provide
additional learning opportunities targeted at K-12, 2-year, and 4-year feeder
schools and colleges through outreach programs.