* 1202428
* Collaborative Research: Experimental and Theoretical Study of the Plasma Physics of Antihydrogen Generation and Trapping
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Carlos Ordonez, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

Last year, antihydrogen was trapped for the first time by the ALPHA
collaboration at CERN. By this point hundreds of antiatoms have been trapped for
times as long as 1000 s. While this was a remarkable achievement, the ALPHA
apparatus is not well configured for most measurements of the properties of
antihydrogen, and must be rebuilt to allow laser and better microwave access.
Furthermore, the trapping rates, while sufficient to begin studies of the
properties of antimatter, are lower than optimal. There are two broad challenges
to improving the trapping rate: (1) Understanding the behavior of the positron
and antiproton plasmas from which the antihydrogen is synthesized; and (2)
Understanding the atomic processes by which positrons and antiprotons recombine.
Antihydrogen synthesis lies on the boundary between atomic and plasma physics,
and cannot be studied properly without employing tools from both fields. The
long term goal of antihydrogen research is to search for differences between the
properties of hydrogen and antihydrogen. Such differences might occur between
the spectra of the two species. Differences in the spectra could only result
from CPT violation. Another place differences might occur is in the
gravitational interactions of hydrogen and antihydrogen. Such differences could
solve the baryogenesis problem. A third area of potential difference is in the
fractional charge of antihydrogen. The net charge of antihydrogen is only known
to about 10^-7 relative to the unit charge. Positive results from any of these
measurements would completely change our understanding of fundamental particles
and fields. The physics issues will be studied with experiments at CERN, with
classical trajectory Monte Carlo, molecular dynamics, and 3D PIC codes, and with
analytic theory. Some of the questions that will be addressed include: achieving
improved (lower) lepton and antiproton temperatures; studying how leptons
interact with the background radiation field; studying how leptons interact with
resonant cavities; improved plasma diagnostics; and improved mixing of positrons
and antiprotons, so that more of the resultant antihydrogen can be held in a
very shallow neutral trap. While the motivation for seeking answers to these
questions comes from antihydrogen research, many of these questions raise novel
and deep issues in plasma and atomic physics.

The long-¬term goals of this research address the very basis of our
understanding of the world around us. Potentially, it has deep implications on
the nature of particle interactions, on the question of matter-¬antimatter
symmetry, and on cosmology. At the same time, this research is uniquely visible
because the study of antimatter is accessible and fascinating to the public. The
trapping of antihydrogen last year was extraordinarily widely noted in the lay
and scientific press. Antihydrogen experiments are sufficiently simple that they
can be comprehended in their entirety by graduate students. Consequently, they
offer students a broad education. Experimentalists learn beam and plasma
physics, experimental planning and design, instrumentation, UHV practice,
electronics, cryogenics, magnetics and software development. Along with theory
development, theorists can make critical contributions to the design, operation,
and analysis of the experiments. The relative accessibility of the material
makes it easy to integrate undergraduate students into both the experimental and
theoretical program. The proposed research includes significant participation by
members of underrepresented groups.