* 1202958
* Development of a Novel Dark Matter Search with the GAPS Experiment
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Kerstin Perez, Perez                   Kerstin        M
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 12/31/2014
* USD 235,996.00

Dr. Kerstin Perez is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at Columbia
University. The current cosmological paradigm includes two significant and
unknown entities called "dark matter" and "dark energy." The physics of the
Universe is dominated by their presence even though their nature remains
unknown. Current investigations into the identity of dark matter focus on
finding entirely new massive particles. Many dark matter search experiments are
currently planned or ongoing, and many of them are challenged by the large
background signal from conventional astrophysical processes and a vast array of
signatures that could indicate a dark matter interaction. This project, part of
the General Antiparticle Spectrometer (GAPS) experiment, aims to characterize
the dark matter by detecting the low-energy subatomic particles predicted to be
created as dark matter particles self-annihilate in the halo of our Milky Way
Galaxy. The postdoctoral fellow of this award will lead the commissioning of the
detector system that would detect these particles in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strength of the GAPS experiment is that it
promises to provide an essentially background-free signature of dark matter, and
the anticipated measurements will probe large portions of the theoretical
parameter spaces of both supersymmetry and extra-dimensional theories, the
leading models of dark matter production, and will complement and extend the
reach of current experiments. Layers of semiconducting Si(Li) tracking detectors
with excellent time and energy resolution are essential to the success of the
GAPS detection and background rejection scheme. GAPS will utilize over 1000 of
these detectors, and thus a consistent procedure for qualification and
calibration will be the bridge between the ideal experimental design and its
final performance. The fellow will spearhead the analysis of data from a
prototype balloon flight and will lead the commissioning and calibration of
these detectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project
include a significant educational component. The fellow will work with the
Columbia University Double Discovery Center (DDC) to implement a laboratory
course and mentoring program aimed at encouraging underrepresented students to
pursue an education in a scientific field. The fellow will establish a
laboratory science course for junior high school students with lessons based on
research pursued by members of the Columbia University community. A key aspect
of this course will be to confront students' preconceived notions of where a
science education leads by promoting interaction with role models from science
backgrounds who have pursued a variety of professions.