* 1202575
* Terabit per second Data Processing to Extract Features of Interest in Enormous Amount of Data
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Alan Willner, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 06/30/2017
* USD 380,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Fields as diverse as physics, environmental science, and
sociology have all been dramatically transformed by the ability to utilize large
amounts of data, whether it comes from computers, sensors, storage or imaging.
However, the relatively "slow" speed of electronic signal processors compared to
the rate at which new data is acquired is creating a bottleneck in the timely
processing of data. Signal processing may involve: (a) image refining requiring
signal processing on all parts of the data, and optical processing can operate
with high data rate, or (b) pattern recognition requiring "scanning" (i.e.,
correlating) of the large data to locate a desired feature, and optical
processing can potentially take Terabytes of data, rapidly identify key
requested features, and then allow electronics to process Gigabytes with more
detail. This proposal is to research tunable, reconfigurable complex-coefficient
tapped-delay-line optical processors to enhance the processing speed for pattern
recognition and data processing. The approach utilizes multiple lasers as
optical pumps, a dispersive element with a wavelength-dependent propagation
speed, nonlinear wave mixers, and a phase/amplitude programmable filter. All
parameters of the proposed scheme (i.e., tap delays and coefficients) can be
tuned by varying the power and wavelength of the pump lasers. This allows for
bit-rate tunable, data-modulation-format transparent phase/amplitude processing
of an optical data signal. This scheme can be used as a building block to
realize more advanced functionalities, such as 2-dimentional discrete Fourier
transforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This technology has the
potential to directly advance many areas that use sophisticated data and image
processing (e.g., environmental science, energy and sociology) by providing the
capability to sift through very large data sets at faster speeds due to the
high-speed ability to encode and manipulate multiple aspects of an optical wave.
It can potentially enable new schemes for signal processing and reduce the time
of searches within images and video data sets. This proposal hopes to utilize
the large bandwidth of optics to perform digital data processing in a fully
tunable and reconfigurable fashion, and to hopefully change the way Terabytes of
data is processed by significantly improving the processing speed. Given the
inter-connection between optics and electronics in this approach,
multidisciplinary aspects can be pursued and potentially inspire novel hybrid
optical/electronic architectures. Moreover: (a) high-school students will be
exposed to the research, and (b) undergraduate and graduate students from
diverse backgrounds will receive research training in a multidisciplinary
experimental lab environment.