* 1202983
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Using Phylogeography To Understand the Spatiotemporal Clustering of Dengue Cases in Bangkok
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Derek Cummings, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 05/31/2014
* USD 12,000.00

The spatiotemporal dynamics of infectious diseases in endemic settings often are
poorly characterized. In settings where infections are continuously occurring,
it is difficult to elucidate transmission chains and the movement of pathogens
in space. The field of phylogeography presents a potential solution. By
combining the spatiotemporal location of individuals who become infected with
the genetic sequence of the infecting pathogen, it is possible to track
individual viral lineages as they move through a region. This information can be
extremely useful for mounting responses and for understanding the mechanisms
that create and maintain pathogen diversity. This doctoral dissertation research
project will use geocoded home addresses and infecting serotypes of 6,659
patients who were diagnosed with one of the four serotypes of dengue fever at a
Bangkok hospital between 1995 and 2010. In addition, the genome of the infecting
virus will be sequenced for a subset of cases from 2006. The doctoral student
will analyze spatiotemporal dependence between dengue cases using adapted space-
time statistics to understand how far, both in distance and space, cases from
the same viral lineage tend to occur from each other. Furthermore, the
clustering behavior of cases across time lags will be characterized to describe
the changing patterns of spatial dependence at small spatial scales through time
that could be induced through serotype-specific community immunity
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dengue fever is a potentially life-threatening
mosquito-borne viral disease that causes at least 36,000,000 symptomatic cases
every year across the globe. By understanding the spatiotemporal clustering of
individuals infected with viruses from the same lineage, this project will
provide insight into what may be driving the dispersal of the disease.
Furthermore, understanding the spatial and temporal extent at which
transmission-related cases occur will facilitate the identification of
populations at risk of infection and will provide guidance regarding the spatial
distances at which to implement insecticide spraying of neighboring homes upon
detection of an index case. This project will provide an opportunity to
understand the potential drivers of disease ecology in a large endemic urban
setting that have become the key location for dengue infections. The approaches
developed in this project will be generalizable to other spatiotemporal point
patterns for which there are heterogeneities in the labels attached to points
(such as genotype or species) or in dynamic systems where there are changing
patterns in underlying spatiotemporal dependence. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research career.