* 1202447
* EAGER: LbL Polymer Thin Films for Reaction-Assisted Acid Gas Removal
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Benjamin Wilhite, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 02/28/2014
* USD 102,000.00

1202447-Wilhite&lt;br/&gt;Single composite membrane for reaction-assisted
separations. Hydrogen, which can be produced via catalytic reforming of
virtually any hydrocarbon resource, has emerged as a promising global energy
currency. However, no elegant solution for mitigating the undesired by-products
of hydrogen production (e.g., CO, CO2) currently exists- thus, presenting a
grand challenge. We propose to simultaneously purify H2, destroy CO and isolate
CO2 using a single composite membrane comprised of a layer-by-layer (LbL)
assembled polymeric thin film for selective removal of CO2 and an inorganic
catalytic membrane for converting CO to CO2 via water-gas-shift reaction. The
resulting composite catalytic-permselective membranes represent a unique and
transformative approach to hydrogen purification by integrating layer-by-layer
assembly techniques for constructing permselective polymer films with
washcoating methods to construct catalytic films to achieve reaction-assisted
gas separations in a single composite membrane. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proton-
exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs), which use hydrogen as a fuel, are a
leading candidate for next-generation power systems, owing to their durability,
portability and/or scalability. However, by-products from hydrogen production
such as CO can poison the PEMFC and dramatically limit lifetime and performance;
CO2, another by-product, dilutes the hydrogen stream and must be removed prior
to endpoint usage. Current strategies for reducing CO-levels involve coupling of
the equilibrium-limited water-gas-shift catalysts (WGS) with palladium-based
hydrogen-permselective membranes. Because of palladium's cost and low hydrogen
permeability, replacing palladium with alternative materials is viewed as a
grand challenge in realizing cost-effective high-purity hydrogen. In the
proposed work the LbL membranes may compete with or even surpass palladium.
Recent work in reverseselective polymeric membranes indicates that select
polymers (i.e., poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) and poly(allylamine) (PAH)) are very
cost-effective at separating CO2 from H2. The proposed LbL thin films containing
PAH, coupled with WGS catalyst to destroy CO, may potentially produce high-
purity, high-pressure hydrogen from hydrogen reformate streams containing
undesired by-products at low cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This exploratory grant
will explore the use of LbL membranes for permselective gas separation, their
compatibility with reforming chemistries and with catalytic thin-film deposition
techniques, with the ultimate goal of demonstrating a prototype composite
catalytic-permselective membrane capable of permselective CO2 removal from
reformate mixtures at typical (100 - 180C) reaction temperatures. The proposed
research is high-risk, as all three central hypotheses are untested to-date. Gas
transfer in LbL assemblies is relatively unexplored, partly because there is
little crossover in the fields of LbL assembly and gas separations. The
compatibility of LbL deposition techniques with catalytic washcoating methods
has not been explored in the literature to-date. Lastly, the durability and
performance of LbL thin films have not been investigated under reaction
environments or at elevated temperatures. Scientific results regarding each of
these hypotheses are of substantial intellectual value to the separations
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Validation of the proposed coupling of
catalytic and LbL polymeric films in a composite catalytic-permselective
membrane will enable the rigorous development of an innovative approach to
realizing low-cost, highly selective gas separation membranes. For the specific
case of a water-gas-shift catalytic layer enhancing the permselectivity of a
CO2-selective LbL film, recent theoretical predictions by Wilhite indicate that
H2-CO permselectivities in excess of 250:1 (comparable to Pd films) may be
achieved at roughly 1/100th the cost. By itself, this achievement could
transform the field of hydrogen purification membranes. Planned outreach
activities include mentoring of undergraduate researchers through the Department
of Chemical Engineering's REU program and Engineering Scholars program. The PIs
will also host an international research internship through the International
Scholars Program at TAMU. Summer research opportunities will also be available
to K-12 teachers through the College of Engineering's RET program.