* 1202892
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2012
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Erin Mordecai, Mordecai                Erin           A
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 12/31/2014
* USD 123,000.00

Community ecology of infectious diseases: mechanisms maintaining pathogen and
host diversity

Identifying the causes and consequences of biological diversity remains a major
challenge in ecology. Although pathogens are highly diverse, we lack a more
general understanding of how the rules of community ecology apply to them. The
objective of this research is to examine what maintains pathogen diversity in
nature, and how pathogen diversity affects host community dynamics. The model
system being studied is the barley and cereal yellow dwarf viruses (B/CYDVs) in
California grasslands. B/CYDVs are a group of viruses spread by aphids that
infect hundreds cultivated and wild grasses, such as wheat and barley, causing
significant damage. The consequences of pathogen diversity include decreased
yields and poor grain quality. Mathematical modeling will help researchers
understand the causes and consequences of pathogen diversity.

The fellowship training will enhance the postdoctoral fellow's mathematical
skills and lab skills such as molecular techniques for identifying viruses.
B/CYDVs are important not only as a model system for studying disease in
wildlife, but also as a crop pest, so results of this fellowship may inform
agricultural practices. The postdoctoral fellow will involve undergraduates in
research, deliver department seminars, give guest lectures in Population Ecology
and Disease Ecology and participate in public outreach via programs at the UC
Hopland Research and Extension Center.