* 1202232
* 2012 Plasma Processing Science GRC &amp; GRS, July 22-27, 2012, at Bryant University, Smithfield, RI
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2012,09/30/2012
* Jane Chang, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 09/30/2012
* USD 10,000.00

1202232&lt;br/&gt;Chang&lt;br/&gt;The world faces significant grand challenges
in the areas of energy, human health, and environmental sustainability. Plasma
science and technology, due to its intrinsic nonequilibrium nature, is expected
to be at the heart of many key enabling technologies that are needed to provide
breakthrough solutions for these grand challenges. The 2012 Gordon Research
Conference on Plasma Processing Science will feature a comprehensive program
that will highlight cutting edge scientific advances in plasma science and
technology as well as explore the applications of this nonequilibrium medium in
possible approaches relative to many grand societal challenges. Fundamental
science sessions will focus on plasma kinetics and chemistry, plasma surface
interactions, and recent trends in plasma generation and multi-phase plasmas.
Application sessions will explore the impact of plasma technology in renewable
energy, the production of fuels from renewable feedstocks and carbon neutral
solar fuels, and plasma-enabled medicine and sterilization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is to advance the knowledge and
understanding in basic plasma science by bringing together leaders in the field
in an informal atmosphere with junior investigators and graduate students. The
special format of the Gordon Conferences, with programmed discussion sessions
and ample time for informal gatherings in the afternoons and evenings, will
provide for a fertile atmosphere of brainstorming and creative thinking among
the attendees. These planned activities focus on exploring creative original
concepts as well as transformative concepts in plasma processing science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the conference is best demonstrated
by the planned weekend-long Gordon Kenan Research Seminar, which will take place
associated with 2012 Gordon Research Conference on Plasma Processing Science
(GRC-PPS). This seminar features attendance limited to graduate students and
post-doctoral associates, allowing for scientific interaction in a non-
threatening environment. It is designed to foster exchanges of advance discovery
and understanding while promoting mentorship, peer review and learning amongst
young researchers in this field. The seminar has been and will continue to help
broaden the participation of underrepresented groups (e.g. gender, ethnicity,
disability, geographic etc.). The benefits to the society includes the education
of the future generation of the scientists in plasma processing science and the
advancement in technologically important areas utilizing plasma processing
science.