* 1202910
* Construction of Vera C. Rubin Observatory under the Major Research Equipment and Facilities Construction (MREFC) Account
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2014,12/31/2024
* Steven Kahn, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Edward Ajhar
* 12/31/2024
* USD 532,504,676.00

The Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST) is not just another telescope, but a
new approach to survey science and data-based astronomy. Existing 6-meter to
10-meter ground-based telescopes all have relatively small fields of view and
are operated in the traditional mode where a given project is pursued for a few
nights at a time, after which different astronomers pursue data addressing a
different scientific goal, possibly with a different instrument. Although this
approach can make great advances, there are some crucial scientific problems
that need to be tackled more like a physics experiment, whereby a dedicated
instrument is used for a finite period of time to address well-defined
objectives. This is the LSST: a large survey telescope using a wide field camera
to image the accessible sky repeatedly to very faint limits over a ten-year
period. The LSST data products will change every field of astronomical study,
from the inner Solar System to the large scale structure of the
Universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LSST will map the inner and outer Solar System,
study stellar populations in the Milky Way and nearby galaxies, reveal the
structure of the Milky Way disk and halo and other local objects, find transient
and variable objects at both low and high redshift, and survey the properties of
normal and active galaxies at low and high redshift. Turning to far-field
cosmological topics, LSST will explore the properties of supernovae to redshifts
around one, uncover strong and weak lensing, the large-scale distribution of
galaxies and baryon oscillations, and show how these different probes may be
combined to constrain cosmological models and the physics of dark
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LSST will be built on the El Peñón peak on Cerro
Pachón in northern Chile. LSST will have an effective aperture of 6.7 meters and
an imaging camera with field of view 9.6 square degrees, and will be devoted to
a ten-year imaging survey over 20,000 square degrees south of +15 deg. Each
pointing will be imaged 2000 times with fifteen second exposures in six broad
bands at wavelengths from 0.35 to 1.1 microns, to a total point-source depth of
r~27.5 magnitudes. LSST's three large mirrors are actively controlled to
minimize distortion, and the telescope structure is especially compact and stiff
to reduce image motion and to enable rapid travel across the sky, maximizing the
observing duty cycle. The project is an interagency public-private partnership,
with the Department of Energy accepting responsibility for the world-leading
camera, while NSF as overall lead agency will support the site facility, the
telescope, and the extensive and sophisticated data management. Private
donations have supported initial construction work that significantly reduces
project risk, including the innovative primary-tertiary mirror, early site work,
and development of sensors for the camera. LSST will produce on average 15
terabytes of raw data per night and an uncompressed data set for the full ten-
year survey of some 200 petabytes. Dedicated facilities will process the image
data in near real time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The image archive and resulting
catalogs will be widely and freely available. A sophisticated data management
system will enable work ranging from simple queries from individual users to
computationally intensive scientific investigations that could use the entire
data set. The LSST Project is at the forefront of the information technology
revolution and includes investments in technology, cyber-infrastructure,
education, and outreach. With one of the largest scientific databases in
existence, the LSST project presents challenging opportunities for research into
database architecture and data mining. Education and public outreach programs
are fully integrated with the research program and include engaging experiences
for non-specialists, partnerships with museums, schools, and industry, and
opportunities to challenge and encourage tomorrow's innovators.