* 1202985
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Political Ecology of Waste Management in India
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Erica Schoenberger, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2013
* USD 11,984.00

Discourses and practices of development consistently have held that urbanization
is the key to progress. But urbanization also brings a set of problems, two of
which are an informal sector that perpetually escapes the purview of the state
and mounting piles of unmanaged and oft-times unmanageable garbage. At the
intersection of these two problems are waste-pickers, individuals who informally
manage the city's garbage. In the city of Delhi, India, the waste-pickers
livelihoods are threatened as the city of Delhi privatizes its waste management
services in its aspirations to be become a "world-class" and "global" city. This
doctoral dissertation research project seeks answers to the following broad
question: How can the problem of dealing with garbage tell us about relations
within and between classes, the state and private capital in the process of
urbanization in Delhi? More specifically, the doctoral student will pursue the
following questions: (1) How has the state treated garbage and waste-pickers as
objects of urban planning? (2) What information about the urbanizing process is
provided from an examination of the tactics and strategies of private waste
firms? (3) How have middle- and upper-class desires for a particular kind of
urban modernity been enacted through the management of garbage? (4) How are
informal sector waste-pickers organizing and contesting the discourses and
practices of city-making? Drawing upon existing work in urban metabolism, the
role of class relations in shaping urban spaces, the place of the informal
sector in the urban economy, urban infrastructure privatization, and the growth
of the waste management industry, the student will seek connections among these
research areas by examining the different facets of the urban waste management
problem in developing countries. The student will use semi-structured interviews
with government officials, non-governmental organization, and development agency
personnel and waste-firm managers; participant observation at six Resident
Welfare Association (RWA) meetings, a waste picker organization (Safai Sena),
and a waste firm; and household surveys in six neighborhoods where participant
observation at RWA meetings will be conducted.

This project will provide alternatives and guidance for municipal managers to
develop policy solutions that are more just and inclusive for some of the city's
most vulnerable populations by pointing out the distributional impacts of waste
management program implementations. From a theoretical perspective, the project
will contribute to the growing literature in urban political ecology; draw
attention to garbage as a unique form of a common pool resource; contribute to
the debates on the relationship between waste and value from a political economy
perspective; and pose new questions for studying agglomeration economies and
diseconomies. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award
also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.