* 1202716
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2012
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Paulo Olivas, Olivas                  Paulo          C
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 12/31/2014
* USD 123,000.00

Determining the effect of climate change on the carbon dynamics of the high
elevation tropical humid puna&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent scientific evidence
shows that global temperatures are increasing. The effects of increased
temperatures are expected to be more dramatic in polar regions, however, the
tropics may also be especially susceptible to warming as a result of the
specialization of tropical species to a narrow range of climatic conditions
coupled with rapid rates of warming. Nevertheless, investigation of the
potential effects of warming in tropical ecosystems has been extremely limited.
Humid puna lands - grasslands located at high elevations in the Andes Mountains
of South America - harbor fragile ecosystems with a high level of endemism; puna
areas also are under high pressure as a result of fire, grazing, and climate
change. Human populations, such as native Quechua, depend on puna ecosystems for
subsistence. To better understand potential responses of high elevation tropical
ecosystems to climate change, a thermal and hydrological manipulation experiment
will be conducted to determine the potential effects of climate change on the
high elevation humid puna ecosystem of the tropical Andes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the tenure of the fellowship, the Fellow will focus
effort on the development and strengthening of quantitative skills, statistical
analysis and model development. The Fellow will work on establishing
experiments, and training and mentoring local Peruvian technicians and
undergraduate and graduate students from the USA. Additionally, the proposed
sponsoring institution, The Fairchild Tropical Botanic Garden (FTBG), represents
a unique outreach opportunity by translating research into activities and
programs that can be used for environmental education of K-12 students and the
general public.