* 1202168
* Combining Large-area Electronics with High-performance Computation for Scalable Ambient Intelligence
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Naveen Verma, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Hao Ling
* 06/30/2016
* USD 360,000.00

Intellectual merit. The objective of this research is to investigate how high-
performance silicon integrated circuits can work synergistically with a
technology known as large-area electronics to increase the scope of
functionality that electronic systems can provide. The proliferation of
integrated circuits into our environments means that electronics has the
potential to acquire a large number of signals that can be of high importance to
us. It also means that electronics must exist unobtrusively in this space. This
raises the need for systems that are (1) capable of large-scale physical
interfacing through many sensing channels and (2) able to power themselves
through embedded energy-harvesting devices, all in a compliant form factor.
Large-area electronics is based on low-temperature processing of thin films.
This enables diverse materials to be integrated to form a broad range of
transducers. It also enables the use of plastic substrates, which can be
conformal and physically large. Although transistors are also possible, these
have orders of magnitude lower performance and energy efficiency than high-
performance silicon integrated circuits. To enable extensive physical interfaces
while also retaining high-performance signal-acquisition and computation
capabilities, the two technologies must be combined. Such an approach, however,
poses substantial scalability challenges. This study investigates methodologies
and architectures that leverage devices from both technology domains to achieve
highly-scalable and efficient means of exchanging data and power signals across
the technology boundaries. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. Electronics
has demonstrated tremendous value in a wide range of applications. This research
lays the ground work for electronics to interface with physical systems on a
very large scale. This could lead to transformational systems for applications
such as high-resolution sensing skins for monitoring structural health,
interactive surfaces for visual computing, etc. In addition to important
societal implications, such applications, due to their scale, could become a key
driver for the electronics industry. This research develops specific design
methodologies that will enable directed technical efforts in conjunction with
the increased application scope, helping to focus industry efforts. This
research will engage a new generation of engineers, particularly from
underrepresented groups, by developing systematic principles for system design,
from devices to applications. Both in outreach activities and in university
education, the new forms possible for electronic systems will serve to
illustrate the diverse applications that engineering has the potential to
impact.