* 1202884
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2012
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Chris Nasrallah, Nasrallah               Chris          A
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2014
* USD 123,000.00

A Population Genomic Approach to Modeling Insertion-Deletion Evolution Between
Species

One of the key ways in which genomes differ is that they have segments of DNA
that have been inserted or deleted. These are known as indels, and they comprise
an important class of variation both within and among species. If species are
distantly related their genomes may contain many indels, potentially making the
same stretch of DNA unrecognizable. But because the genomes of members of the
same species are very similar, indels present are easier to identify. Genomes of
many individuals will be compared in the same species to discover indels in the
population. Estimates of the strength of natural selection acting on these
indels of different sizes and in different parts of the genome will be used to
develop a mathematical model of the evolutionary process that accounts for the
size and genomic context of indels. This model will help to better understand
the important role that indels play in the genomic evolution of different
species.

Training objectives include the strengthening of skills in genomic analysis,
probabilistic modeling, and computer programming. This project bridges the
fields of population genomics and statistics and will foster collaborations
between researchers in different areas while directly involving undergraduate
students in scientific research.