* 1202133
* Advanced Real-Time Battery Characterization and Management: Safe, Reliable, and Optimal Operation of Battery Systems for Electric-Drive Vehicles and Grid Support
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Le Yi Wang, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 04/30/2017
* USD 419,970.00

Advanced Real-Time Battery Characterization and Management: Safe, Reliable, and
Optimal Operation of Battery Systems for Electric-Drive Vehicles and Grid
Support&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this research is to develop new methods for real-time characterizing and
adaptively managing battery systems to ensure their optimal and healthy
operation, which is critical for accomplishing clean, efficient and sustainable
energy development in transportation and power sectors. The research approach
is: (1) Joint estimation of battery's State of Charge, State of Health, and
model parameters; (2) adaptive battery management with optimal battery charging
and cell balancing control; (3) integration and management of used electric
vehicle batteries for grid energy storage via State of Charge weighted power
control. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits: (1) Fast, robust and
accurate battery characterization via real-time and joint estimation for
achieving adaptive and optimal battery management. (2) Facilitating the second
use of retired electric vehicle batteries. (3) Versatile and transformative
technologies for different types of batteries and model structures, and for new
or old batteries. (4) Complementary educational tools and programs to enhance
the educational effort in vehicle electrification and sustainable energy
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The success of this project
will help achieve cleaner and more efficient transportation, along with more
reliable power grids capable of integrating higher quantities of electricity
from intermittent renewable sources. All these will eventually lead to a more
secure and sustainable energy development in the U.S.A. This project will have
significant educational, societal, and economical impacts by advancing
technology and workforce development for the industry of electric-drive vehicle,
battery, renewable energy and smart grid, which are all the critical areas for
the nation's security and future development.