* 1202676
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2012
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Megan Rua, Rua                     Megan          A
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 07/31/2015
* USD 189,000.00

Exploring the relative importance of biotic and environmental sources of
selection for pine-fungal interactions

Research that considers mechanisms by which plants evolve in response to complex
environments including mutualists, enemies, and variable environmental factors
is important for understanding what the most important selective factors are in
driving trait evolution in plants. Interactions among plant hosts and their
diverse associated microbes may provide an ecologically unique arena in which to
examine the nature of selection in multispecies interactions. In particular,
interactions between coniferous plants and their associated microbes provide a
good system for experiments exploring the relative importance of sources of
selection, as conifers interact with a suite of belowground microorganisms, and
these interactions vary along environmental gradients. Using experimental
approaches, this research will investigate the evolutionary dynamics of traits
surrounding the interaction among plants, enemies and mutualists under changing
environmental conditions. Novel field estimates of selection will be conducted
and key predictions of coevolutionary theory will be tested.

Training objectives include developing expertise in statistical, empirical and
analytical techniques. Career enhancement activities comprise the development of
a unique research program including developing skills related to publication and
presentation of research. The broader impacts of this project include training
for underrepresented undergraduates in research skills such as field collection,
molecular work, statistics and scientific presentation. Finally, while Monterey
pine is considered threatened in its native range, it is widely cultivated as a
plantation timber species in many temperate parts of the world so research which
considers its response to changes in biotic and abiotic selection forces will
inform both conservation and agricultural practices.