* 1202517
* Algebraic Methods of Designing Spatially Distributed Control Systems and Their Approximations
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Nader Motee, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 06/30/2017
* USD 335,500.00

Objective:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many engineered large-scale systems,
automatic control implementations are still centralized, in the sense that the
controller interfaces with the physical system at a fixed and relatively small
number of actuators and sensors. However, recent technological advances have
opened up new possibilities to change this picture by making the idea of micro
devices with actuating, sensing, computing, and telecommunications capabilities
feasible. Distributing a large array of such micro devices in a spatial
configuration gives unprecedented capabilities for control that result in
spatial distribution of the control variables in addition to the internal states
of the underlying dynamical system. Important questions that arise are how to
design controllers for these systems with regard to global objectives; how to
determine the communication requirements in the controller array; and how can
these control algorithms be implemented in a distributed fashion. The primary
goal of this project is to develop some of the fundamental insights and tools
that will allow us to exploit architectural properties of the underlying systems
to design optimal controllers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will provide a novel approach
to design and implementation of automatic control systems for spatially
distributed systems. The main tool used in this research is the notion of
spatial localization, approximation, and interpolation, which is established
using spatial decay property of spatially distributed systems. The exploitation
of spatial decay and development of approximation tools pose significant
intellectual challenges. The research is based synthesis of new theoretical
results in control, operator, and distributed
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research program is highly relevant for optimal control of most spatially
distributed systems. Successful completion of this research will provide
necessary tools and components in facilitating the design and integration of
distributed control systems on real platforms and fostering their adoption in
various applications such as power networks, transportation networks, and
biological systems. An integral part to this research program is an educational
agenda involving K-12, undergraduate and graduate students with a broader impact
of educating the next generation of engineers and researchers that are fluent in
multidisciplinary research collaborations.