* 1202465
* GOALI: Plasmonically Enhanced Bulk Heterojunction Organic Photovoltaics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Jim Coe, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 08/31/2017
* USD 356,000.00

Research Objectives and Approaches:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
to advance organic solar cells using tailored chemistries of metallic
nanoparticles that when assembled into a thin film act like tiny lenses across
the film surface to focus sunlight onto the light absorption region. When metal
nanoparticles are aligned into a perfect periodic checker-board array, they can
create a plasmonic resonance leading to a high augmented absorption. There will
be a significant leveraging through an alliance with the local company,
MetaMateria. Also, collaborations with Prof. Terry Bigioni will further expand
the scope of study. Metamateria will fashion nanoparticles to be placed adjacent
the active collection region and Bigioni will create nanoparticles to be placed
inside the active region. The addition of Prof. James Coe from Ohio State's
Chemistry provides an experienced background with modeling plasmonic optical
effects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will establish a world-class program in polymer solar cells that will
advance low-cost polymer solar cells using plasmonics. The development of unique
and tailored nanoparticles chemistries with MetaMateria will be a platform
technology for other applications, such as fuel cells and water purification,
which are key commercialization thrusts for
Metamateria&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Through
collaborations with industry, we will increase the competitiveness and position
of US industry and advance the efficiency and functionality of solar cells.
Participation of industry will broaden the culture of innovation and focus the
research output towards strategic commercialization. Undergraduate researchers
will provide valuable and substantive contributions to the proposed work.