* 1202838
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2012
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Daniel Runcie, Runcie                  Daniel
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 12/31/2014
* USD 123,000.00

Using gene network models in evolutionary ecology: Gene duplication roles in
flowering time control under natural environments

Gene duplications are a rich source for evolutionary novelty and are thought to
promote both speciation and adaptation. However, understanding why particular
duplications are preserved by evolution is difficult because the functions of
related genes tend to overlap. The Arabidopsis flowering time pathway is an
ideal system to investigate the role of ecological factors in maintaining
genetic redundancy due to a long history of detailed molecular genetic, modeling
and evolutionary ecological work on floral control in this species. This
fellowships supports research that will combine mathematical modeling to explore
the role of redundancy within gene networks and gene expression profiling in
field trials to identify functional differences among duplicate genes. These
data will be used to test the hypothesis that seemingly redundant genes in the
Arabidopsis flowering time pathway have different roles in regulating the timing
of flowering under real-world environments.

Training objectives include becoming proficient in fitting practical and
realistic models of biological systems, and carrying out effective field and lab
experiments to test predictions of these models. The broader impacts include
incorporating evolutionary simulations into an ongoing summer training programs
on genetics and evolution for high school teachers in Wyoming. Also, the
Arabidopsis flowering time gene network has analogs in many important crop
species. Models that can predict flowering under complex, natural environments
in this model species may translate into improvements in crop models useful for
agriculture.