* 1202376
* High Performance  Photoswitches Using Carbon Nanotube - Si Heterojunctions for Optoelectronic Logic devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Swastik Kar, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 04/30/2016
* USD 316,907.00

The objective of this program is to investigate a novel photoresponse behavior
in single-wall carbon nanotube - silicon based heterojunction architectures. A
combination of experimental and theoretical studies will be used to understand
the origin of this phenomenon. Using these architectures, high-performance
optoelectronic switches for proof-of-concept circuit elements such as
phototransistors, logic gates, and analog-to-digital converters will be
developed. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed work lies in
unfolding the physics of the newly observed phenomenon, and overcoming the
engineering challenges that will enable the development of high performance
devices. The role of novel mechanisms such as the multiple exciton generation
process, and the impact of band structure of carbon nanotubes-silicon
heterojunctions on carrier injection will be investigated. Understanding the
origin of this novel phenomenon and its application in advanced optoelectronic
architectures comprise a transformative research thrust, which will combine
expertise in experimental and theoretical aspects of the physics of nanoscale
devices and pioneering techniques of nanoscale materials assembly and
integration. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this program include compelling
educational and research experiences for graduate, undergraduate and high-school
students. A combination of exposure to state-of-the-art materials synthesis,
characterization and device fabrication methods, a possibility of international
research, and education in physics, chemistry, materials science and electronics
of low-dimensional systems will appropriately prepare them for both academic and
non-academic careers. Short-term "educational research" modules for
undergraduates, co-ops, and high-school students; graduate curriculum
development and educational modules for young scholars; and a focus on minority
involvement are synergistically integrated into the program.