* 1202236
* Collaborative Research: SMURFS: Statistical Modeling, SimUlation and Robust Design Techniques For MemriStors
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Hai Li, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 03/31/2013
* USD 250,148.00

SMURFS: Statistical Modeling, SimUlation and Robust Design Techniques For
MemriStors Abstract

The fourth fundamental passive circuit element &#8722; memristor, has
demonstrated great potentials in massive data storage, neuromorphic computing,
signal processing, biomedical lab-on-a-chip, sensing etc. The objective of this
research is to investigate the design implications of process variations and
environmental fluctuations to memristor-based VLSI systems, to exploit a fast
statistical simulation technique, and to explore new circuit techniques to
improve the memristive system reliability and robustness. Intellectual Merit:
This research includes three integrated components: (1) The statistical device
models for representative memristor technologies, i.e., the TiO2 thin-film and
spintronic memristors, will be developed to facilitate the process variation
aware design space explorations; (2) The fast Monte-Carlo simulation platform
will be developed for memristor-based VLSI system designs and simulations; (3)
By leveraging the statistical memristor models and simulation platform, robust
circuit design techniques that can minimize the fluctuations of the electrical
properties caused by process variations will be investigated. Broader Impacts:
This research provides a comprehensive design package for efficiently
integrating memristor into existing VLSI systems to offer better performance and
power consumption. The device engineers and the circuit designers are well
bridged and educated by the research innovations. The developed techniques can
be directly transferred to industry applications under the close collaborations
with leading industry partners, and directly impact the future memristor-based
VLSI systems. The activities in the collaboration also include the tutorials in
the major conferences on the technical aspects of the projects and new course
development.