* 1202014
* Workshop: Interdisciplinary Approaches to Understanding Ocean/Ice-Shelf/Ice-Sheet Interactions
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2012
* Alan Mix, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 11/30/2012
* USD 68,292.00

This two-day workshop is to develop a comprehensive, integrated,
interdisciplinary approach to observing, understanding and modeling ice-shelf-
buttressed, marine-based glacier systems that drain major ice sheets. Such
systems have the ability to evolve rapidly (years to decades) in response to
ocean-induced ice-shelf loss, with consequences for rapid rise of global sea
level and potentially huge impacts on society. Three components are required to
understand the potential significance of these systems: simultaneous
comprehensive measurements of all physical elements (atmosphere, ocean, ice
shelf, glacier, sea ice, sea/glacier bed); paleo history of the study region(s)
from late glacial times through the Holocene to present, to assess relative
stability and potential rates of change; and comprehensive modeling
incorporating principal physical processes including the ability to represent
system variability through the Holocene in relation to climate reconstructions
and into the future in response to projected climate change.

The workshop will assemble bring representatives of the above three disciplines
to identify key elements required to make transformative progress on
understanding processes that control the sensitivity of these systems to change.
Invitees include researchers with skills in in situ and remote-sensing
observations of all elements of the target systems including existing structure
of ocean and ice-shelf systems as well as reconstructions of past oceans and
climate, and numerical modelers with interests ranging from regional ocean
circulation and ice-shelf and glacier processes to paleo-history of large ice
sheets. International invitees include researchers with capabilities and skills
that augment US resources.

Discussions at the workshop will be centered on (1) identification of essential
components of a comprehensive study, and (2) development of a logistically
manageable interdisciplinary strategy that could be applied to study one or more
systems determined to be representative of similar systems in both Greenland and
Antarctica.

Broader impacts: The workshop will document a strategy for making transformative
advances in understanding the potential for large and rapid sea level rise from
ocean-induced retreat of marine-based glaciers and ice streams presently
buttressed by ice shelves. The specific goals of the proposed workshop will
stress the urgency of interdisciplinary collaborations between glaciologists,
oceanographers, paleo-scientists, modelers, and technology developers. Likely
attendees include early-career polar researchers and underrepresented groups.
Proposed meeting dates are adjacent to major national meetings, and students
will be encouraged to attend to experience the process of developing major
research initiatives.