* 1202413
* Planning Archaeological Infrastructure for Integrative Science
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2012,06/30/2013
* Keith Kintigh, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 49,999.00

A fundamental challenge of science is to understand the processes that shape how
human societies interact with one another and that explain how societies are, at
once, constrained by and change the natural environments in which they are
situated. Because of the complexity of the interactions, achieving these
understandings must be seen as a shared enterprise that broadly engages social,
behavioral, and economic sciences, as well as a range of natural sciences. Some
of these processes are strongly influenced by events that can be readily
observed over periods of days, months, or years. Other important processes
operate slowly - over centuries or millennia - and their effects often cannot be
detected in present-day or historical observations. Because archaeology is
frequently the only source of long-term scientific data on human societies and
their environments, it is essential that we take advantage of the unique
information that archaeology can provide. Indeed, reconstructed archaeological
sequences can be seen as completed "experiments" in the long-term operation of
social and environmental processes played out in diverse social and natural
environments. &lt;br/&gt;Systematic archaeological research has been conducted
for more than a century. In the US alone, thousands of archaeological field
projects are now conducted each year. These projects record large amounts of
archaeological and environmental data and produce lengthy reports, in addition
to published articles and books. However, overwhelmingly, this information is
not readily accessible to scholars. Even if it were accessible, the complexity
of the data - due in large part to the enormous diversity of the human behavior
it documents - make it extremely difficult to use in the context of synthetic
research on social and environmental dynamics. To move forward on this important
research agenda, the availability of archaeological data must be enormously
expanded and computational methods developed and implemented that make it
possible for synthetic research to effectively exploit this huge reservoir of
data and documents.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a plan that
would detail how major investments by NSF in the information infrastructure of
archaeology could best improve the scientific community's ability to use
archaeological data in synthetic research on social and environmental dynamics
and thereby serve the needs of contemporary society more broadly. This goal will
be achieved by a sequence of two small conferences coordinated by a steering
committee that will select the conference participants and set the agendas.
Based on the conference outcomes, the steering committee will produce a report
that details the needs for and expected benefits of substantial infrastructure
investments in archaeology and that describes and provides budget estimates for
the proposed investments.