* 1202913
* K-12 Students, Teachers, Parents, Administrators and Higher Education Faculty: Partners Helping Rural Disadvantaged Students Stay on the Pathway to a Geoscience Career.
* GEO,GEO
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* William Slattery, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 06/30/2015
* USD 142,691.00

The Wright State University project "K-12 Students, Teachers, Parents,
Administrators and Higher Education Faculty: Partners Helping Rural
Disadvantaged Students Stay on the Pathway to a Geoscience Career" is a
research-based proof of concept track 1 pilot project that tests the
effectiveness of an innovative model for simultaneous K-12 teacher professional
development, student learning, and workforce development. The project is
building a network of science experiences designed to engage eighth and ninth
grade students from the Ripley, Union, Lewis, Huntington (RULH) school district,
located in rural Appalachian Ohio, and keep them on the path to a geoscience
career. During each summer of the two-year project, teams of RULH students,
parents, teachers, administrators and college faculty travel to the facilities
of the New Jersey Sea Grant Consortium at Sandy Hook, New Jersey to study
science from an Earth system perspective. Teachers have the opportunity to
engage in professional development alongside their students. During each of the
two academic years of the project, additional professional development
enrichment is provided to RULH teachers of various disciplines by a team of
university scientists and geoscience educators from the Earth System Science
Education Alliance (ESSEA), a NSF funded project. RULH students engage in
problem-based science learning in the eighth grade and have the opportunity to
take a course in Earth system science in the ninth grade that will earn them
both high school and college science credits. Students also engage in community
outreach by hosting community science events.