* 1202746
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2012
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Tim Covino, Covino                  Tim            P
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 09/30/2014
* USD 123,000.00

Biological and physical influences on ecosystem metabolism and nutrient
uptake&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deciphering the interconnections between energy and
nutrient resources and how they combine to influence nutrient uptake and
ecosystem metabolism remains a grand challenge in the ecological sciences.
Previous research has focused on static measures of these processes and limited
information exists on the spatial and temporal variability of these dynamics.
This project uses new methods and sensor technologies to decipher the dynamic
interconnections between energy, nutrient resources, ecosystem metabolism, and
nutrient uptake. Data across two zones of differing climate, vegetation,
landforms, and ecology will allow for comparisons between regions. This research
seeks new understanding of the coupled biological and physical influences on
ecosystem metabolism and nutrient uptake.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The postdoctoral
fellow will develop advanced skills in measuring and modeling ecological and
hydrological processes. The development of an inter-university field-based
course will train students in the newly developed methods, technologies, and
data analysis techniques. Interdisciplinary interactions at the Nicholas School
of the Environment and the River Center will help expand this work beyond stream
studies to aquatic ecosystems. Data generated from this research will be made
publicly available through the hydrologic data sharing system, CUAHSI HIS, and
interaction with local water quality groups will expand the impacts beyond the
scientific community.