* 1202157
* On-Chip, Integrated, Diamond Raman Laser
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Marko Loncar, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 07/31/2015
* USD 359,998.00

The objective of this research is development of integrated photonic platform
based on single-crystal diamond and its application for realization of on-chip
optical networks that operate over wide wavelength range from visible to mid-
infrared. This will be achieved by fabricating optical devices (waveguides,
resonators, etc) and systems directly into sub-micron thick single crystal
diamond films. Several approaches to realize such thin diamond films will be
explored. The research program will introduce diamond into the family of
materials suitable for integrated, on-chip, photonics. In particular, diamond's
strong third order nonlinearity and its excellent thermal properties will be
leveraged to demonstrate low-threshold, high-output power, integrated diamond
Raman lasers, as well as wide wavelength range frequency combs based on
integrated diamond ring resonators.

This work will lay down foundations for the development of diamond photonics and
its applications in diverse fields including quantum information processing,
sensitive magnetometry, optoelectronics, life-sciences, bio-chemical sensing,
gas spectroscopy, precision measurements, and high-frequency mechanical
oscillators and switches. The research has strong educational components and
will provide a unique opportunity to train students at all levels in
interdisciplinary field that combines material science, fundamental physics,
devices and system-level integration. Public fascination and familiarity with
diamond gem-stones will enable engagement of wider audience. To achieve this,
public lectures and presentation will be given at the Museum of Science in
Boston as well as at local K-12 schools. The research has strong ties with
industry and both diamond manufacturing and applications (e.g. oil industry).
The international travel will enable key exchanges with UK firm which will
provide high quality synthetic diamond substrates. The PI will also meet with
researchers in Belgium and attend a diamond workshop.