* 1202591
* Three-Dimensional Plasmonically Enhanced Nanopillar Photodetectors: An Integrative Design Approach
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Diana Huffaker, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 04/30/2015
* USD 444,700.00

Objective: This project is an integrated approach for design and development of
plasmonically-enhanced photodetectors (PEPDs). A unique 3D plasmonic grating
self-aligned to a patterned III-V nanopillar array enables enhanced efficiency
along with speed appropriate for high-bandwidth transceiver integration on a Si
CMOS platform. Expected device performance includes quantum efficiencies &gt; 70
% and modulation rates &gt; 50 GHz. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:
The innovative component is the unique three-dimensional geometry enabled by the
vertical nanopillar-based format to circumvent two major limitations of planar
plasmonics and nanostructures. This plasmonic grating provides significantly
increased optical coupling efficiency resulting from tightly-confined photonic
hot-spots compared to the conventional planar configuration. In addition, these
hot spots can be physically placed to overlap the carrier absorbing region
rather than the lossy metal grating. A holistic&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This research project offers substantial opportunities for student
participation at all levels including high-school, undergraduate and
graduate/postdoctoral education and research experience. The project is linked
to K-12 projects such as Technology Road Show which takes nano- and clean-energy
experiments developed by graduate students into local high school science
classes. A related program brings high school teachers on UCLA campus monthly to
develop nano-related course work. Under represented minority students
participate in these UCLA laboratories through targeted campus support of
undergraduate and graduate programs.