* 1202698
* Shedding Light on the Fate of Satellite Galaxies and Integrating Current Research into Museums and K-12 Public School Classrooms
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Douglas Watson, Watson                  Douglas        F
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 07/31/2015
* USD 267,000.00

Dr. Douglas Watson is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the University of
Chicago. A longstanding problem in astrophysics is to understand how galaxies
form. Such understanding is necessary to uncover how our Universe evolved and to
gain insight into the origin of our own Milky Way Galaxy. One important aspect
of understanding galaxy formation is to study how satellite galaxies relate to
the dark matter subhalos in which they reside. Uncovering this connection
provides a wealth of information about galaxy formation and hierarchical
structure formation in the Universe. Satellite galaxies lead chaotic lives, yet
an understanding of their spatial distribution gives clues into the relationship
between the light and dark sides of the Universe.

In this project the fellow will focus on two principal aspects of galaxy
formation theory that seek to shed light on the fate of satellite galaxies:
First, there is a strong luminosity trend of the radial density profile of
satellite galaxies such that bright satellites are poor tracers of the dominant,
underlying dark matter. However, what is physically responsible for driving this
result remains unclear. The fellow will seek to incorporate high resolution dark
matter N-body simulations that will be able to resolve subhalos down to the very
small scales of interest. Since satellite galaxies are believed to reside within
subhalos, a detailed investigation of the spatial distribution of subhalos is
crucial towards testing the concordance Lambda Cold Dark Matter model at the
extreme small scales. Second, the fellow will investigate a new technique to use
the spatial clustering of satellite galaxies to understand how their stellar
mass loss occurs. Understanding how satellite galaxies can lose stellar mass can
yield direct predictions for the amount of diffuse intrahalo light (IHL) at
varying scales and may prove invaluable for providing insight into the physics
of galaxy formation.

The broader impacts of this project include a significant educational component.
One way to invigorate the general public and the next generation of great
scientists is for astronomers to convey complex ideas with inspiration and
clarity. The fellow will take a two-part approach to this endeavor: (1)
improving public outreach efforts at the Adler Planetarium, and (2) training
K-12 Chicago public school teachers in acquiring the skills to effectively teach
science (astronomy in particular) to underserved, minority students. The first
part involves the fellow developing new visualizations and engaging narratives
for use in interactive presentations with museum visitors at the Adler
Planetarium in Chicago. In the second part the fellow will help to construct and
implement a new professional development workshop for teachers with a focus on
astronomy. The experience with the Adler presentations will help inform the
fellow on effective methods for taking astronomy into the classroom. The
teaching workshop will not only allow teachers direct exposure to real
scientists and the scientific method, but it will also assess the ability of
astronomers to galvanize the underserved youth to pursue career paths in
science. This activity will help enable teachers to inspire students to pursue
careers in science.