* 1202065
* Collaborative Research: Resource Allocation in Clouds: A Stochastic Modeling and Control Perspective
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Rayadurgam Srikant, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 06/30/2017
* USD 224,610.00

Cloud computing services (such as Amazon EC2 system, Google AppEngine, and
Microsoft Azure) are becoming ubiquitous and are starting to serve as the
primary source of computing power for both enterprises and personal computing
applications. A cloud computing platform (or simply, a cloud) can provide a
variety of resources, including infrastructure, software, and services, to users
in an on-demand fashion. Compared to traditional own-and-use approaches, cloud
computing services eliminate the costs of purchasing and maintaining the
infrastructures for cloud users, and allow the users to dynamically scale up and
down computing resources in real time based on their
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A cloud consists of a number of machines
(computers), each with a certain amount of resources (CPU, RAM, hard disk space,
etc.). Each machine can be subdivided into virtual machines, where each virtual
machine (VM) behaves like a small machine with a certain amount of dedicated
resources. When a user submits a job to the cloud, he or she requests a certain
amount of resources from the cloud and the cloud responds by creating a VM with
the required resources in a machine. The resource allocation problem is to
figure out how to allocate jobs to machines. Further, when several jobs are
waiting for service, the cloud must also decide which job to select for service
next. The goal of this project is to design resource allocation algorithms for
efficient operation of the cloud, and to design pricing mechanisms to maximize
the cloud service provider revenue while providing good quality of service to
competing users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The prior art in this
area is to view the problem as a sequence of static problems as follows:
consider the jobs that are currently waiting for service and allocate them to
machines by solving a combinatorial optimization problem. Static approaches
which ignore the dynamic nature of the system lead to instability. Our viewpoint
here is fundamentally different: we consider the resource allocation problem as
a dynamic stochastic network control problem. We will use queue length
information about waiting jobs as the feedback signal to take resource
allocation decisions such as routing jobs to machines and scheduling jobs on
machines. To this end, we will answer a number of fundamental questions: what is
the stability region of a cloud? ; is there a tradeoff between computational
complexity and stability? ; how can we characterize the performance of resource
allocation algorithms beyond stability? ; and how should a cloud provider price
its resources for maximizing social welfare or profit? From a theoretical
perspective, the novelty in the proposed approach lies in the design of control
and performance analysis algorithms while taking computational complexity
considerations in account.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The PIs teach graduate-
level courses spanning networks, games, control theory, and optimization. We
were among the first to incorporate network applications in control courses and
control applications in networking classes. The proposed project provides new
opportunities for such cross-fertilization by opening up a new application area,
namely cloud computing, for control-theoretic methodologies. The PIs have a
strong record of advising undergraduate students and graduate students from
underrepresented groups. We will continue our recruitment efforts from such
student groups for this project also. We will also use specific opportunities
for this purpose as applicable, such as the NSF Alliance Graduate Education and
the Professoriate (AGEP) program, which is a coordinated effort by Iowa
universities to recruit minorities, and the Graduate Minority Assistantship
Program (GMAP), which provides funds for recruiting minority students on
research assistantships.