* 1202411
* Enabling Probe Based Nanointerrogation: A systems and controls approach
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Greg Haugstad, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2016
* USD 434,138.00

Objective: The goal of this proposal is to establish a paradigm for real-time
determination of material properties for soft-matter using micro-cantilever
probes with sharp tips using atomic force microscopes. The successful completion
of the project will result in plug and play modules compatible with existing
atomic force microscopes which will provide material science researchers with a
new real-time tool to image material properties and will enable access to new
temporal regimes of investigation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
main thrust of the enabling concept proposed is to utilize an existing and
prevalent mode of imaging topography of soft-matter, and modifying this method
to yield information on stiffness and dissipation at the nano-scale. Tools from
controls and systems area based on averaging theory and real-time adaptive
estimation methods provide a means to realize proposed objectives. The same
tools will be employed to discern and utilize higher modes of the cantilever
flexure and for novel means of exciting the probing mechanism. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The methods proposed are enabling technologies and
will open doors for investigating basic science issues by providing high
bandwidth determination of material properties. Under proposal goals a prototype
of the plug and play module will be made available to the CharFac facility at
University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, which is used by diverse set of industry
as well as academic researchers. Integration of the nano-interrogation material
into the undergraduate control course will aid in incorporation of exciting
novel applications of control methods into the curriculum. Instructional modules
to be made available to the CharFac user base will enable dissemination of the
new systems perspectives to the physics community. The polymer systems to be
studied will have direct impact on biological applications.