* 1202915
* Collaborative Research:  Applying Bayesian Predictive Modeling and Decision Theory to Milling Profit Optimization under Uncertainty
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Tony Schmitz, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 08/31/2013
* USD 101,873.00

The research objective of this collaborative research project is to establish a
new paradigm for the selection of optimal milling parameters under uncertainty.
The research plan includes two fundamental components: 1) develop a Bayesian
predictive model; and 2) implement a decision making framework for maximizing
profit. It will culminate in two significant outcomes. First, validation tests
will be performed that compare production costs using cutting tool manufacturer-
based recommendations for milling parameters to the new optimized result.
Second, a software platform will be developed that guides users through the new
approach to not only determine parameters for maximized profit, but also the
optimal selection of experiments for new data collection. If successful, the new
approach, which combines Bayesian predictive modeling and decision theory with
machining modeling capabilities, will provide a fundamental departure from
deterministic, model-based selection of milling parameters to a more realistic
approach that incorporates the inherent uncertainty in model predictions. This
will lead to new insights into optimal milling parameter selection by: 1)
formulating milling as a decision problem under uncertainty; 2) providing the
normative bases for calculation of value of experimentation in milling maximize
expected utility; 3) providing algorithms for the real-time updating of milling
performance uncertainties based on experimental results; 4) implementing the
derived algorithms in software; and 5) conducting milling tests to verify the
consistency of the normative Bayesian updating approach with experimental
results. By enabling maximized profit under uncertainty for discrete part
production by milling, this research will positively influence the nation?s
economy and defense capabilities.