* 1202981
* S12PP: Manipulating Cellular Microenvironments
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2013
* J. Ardie Butch Dillen, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* David A. Brant
* 01/31/2013
* USD 5,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1202981 PI: Dillen, J. A. ORG: Materials Research
Society&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Spring 2012 MRS Symposium PP: Manipulating
Cellular Microenvironments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The cellular
microenvironment plays a crucial role in normal development by guiding stem-cell
fate and tissue organization, but it may also contribute to pathological
processes such as tumor progression and metastasis. The need for
interdisciplinary approaches for deconstructing the cellular microenvironment is
becoming more widely recognized, with materials scientists and engineers well
positioned to advance our understanding of complex biological systems. The
symposium will provide an overview of current research aimed at determining how
complex biological components work together to shape physiological outcomes and
to develop strategies for manipulating these processes for clinical
applications. These examples will demonstrate how engineering principles are
well suited for advancing our understanding of biology and the power of
interdisciplinary research for tackling complex biological systems. The goal of
this symposium is to expand participation and promote new interactions by
bringing together researchers with a common biological interest, namely,
understanding cellular microenvironments. By including a common biological
theme, researchers will gain a broader perspective of the ways in which
different types of chemical and mechanical cues influence cells and the
techniques that enable that information to be collected. Due to the variety of
techniques that will be discussed within the symposium, there will be numerous
opportunities to capture the interest to the broader materials science
community, e.g., microfluidics, nanomaterials, polymers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The symposium provides a highly
interactive program that promotes the sharing of ideas and opportunities for
development of new collaborations. It brings to bear the perspectives of
researchers from both the biological and engineering communities in order to
improve communication between them and to develop and refine strategies for
going forward. The organizers have also given significant attention to pursuit
of NSF priorities. Women and other underrepresented groups are a predominant
component of the invited speaker list in order to encourage diversity within the
engineering community. Altogether at least 13 of the 16 invited speakers are
women and/or minorities. NSF funds will be used to support the attendance of two
junior faculty members, two postdoctoral students, four graduate students, and
two undergraduate students.