* 1202488
* Integrated CMOS terahertz spectroscopy of biomolecules
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Kenneth Shepard, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 06/30/2017
* USD 360,002.00

The objective of this research is to develop a fully-integrated complementary
metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS)-based platform for terahertz spectroscopy of
bio-molecules. The approach is the development of widely-tunable high-power
terahertz signal sources based on device stacking and multi-mode phenomena,
coherent terahertz sub-harmonic mixer-based detectors and planar passive
transmission-line-based terahertz resonator transducers and associated micro-
fluidics for bio-molecular analysis. The intellectual merit of this research
lies in the development of new design techniques for terahertz circuits that
operate beyond the cutoff frequency of the devices used, and overcome the
challenges posed by scaled silicon technologies for terahertz power generation,
including low breakdown voltage and high active and passive device loss.
Additionally, new concepts will be developed for the interfacing of silicon-
based electronics with biological material. The broader impact of the proposed
research is its ability to open up new applications for silicon electronics.
Silicon electronics lies at the heart of the digital and communication
revolutions. The terahertz frequency range offers new applications that could
significantly impact quality of life much in the way the digital and
communication revolutions have, including low-cost hand-held medical imaging,
bio-spectroscopy for bio-molecular recognition and disease diagnosis, and
extremely-high-data-rate communication to name a few. The proposed research also
furthers efforts to interface silicon electronics with wet biological material,
which will impact other applications of silicon electronics in the life
sciences. This proposal will allow the investigators to train graduate and
undergraduate students in a cross-disciplinary research environment combining
physics, nano-scale materials and fabrication, circuit design, and biology
applications. Significant effort will be made for K-12 outreach by
systematically training highly motivated high school students within the program
and also enhancing the interaction with the local K-12 educators through
interaction with the Double Discovery Program and the Columbia University
Science Research Program.