* 1202861
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2012
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2014
* David Wheatcroft, Wheatcroft              David
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 10/31/2014
* USD 123,000.00

The evolution of vocalizations with specific "meanings" in songbirds

The assignment of arbitrary sounds with culturally defined meanings is a key
building block in the development of language. However, a similar phenomenon can
be found in the non-human animal world. Some animals, ranging from non-human
primates to birds, use certain alarm signals in association with particular
predator types, which allows others to respond appropriately without themselves
observing the predator. How such communication systems arise is difficult to
understand, because both the form of the signals and how others interpret them
must develop in tandem. Are such context-specific signals truly arbitrarily
assigned to stimuli? This project addresses these issues by evaluating the
evolution of vocalizations used by a group of related species. Members of these
species use a particular type of alarm call that is very similar across species
when they observe cuckoos that seek to lay their eggs parasitically in their
nests, but use species-specific alarm calls when confronting other types of
threats. The project will develop theoretical mechanisms to explain why the
evolution of the cuckoo-specific vocalizations is so constrained across species
in comparison to other types of vocalizations and test the assumptions and
predictions using field experiments.

This project involves collaboration between mathematicians and field biologists,
exposing theoreticians to real world, testable problems and training field
biologists in techniques of mathematical modeling so that their experimental
research can be better planned and informed. The principal investigator will
employ and train undergraduate research assistants in field techniques and basic
research.