* 1202480
* LSAMP Mid-Level: The Upstate Alliance
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Eric Spina, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2017
* USD 2,504,432.00

The proposed Mid-Level Upstate Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(ULSAMP)- Clarkson University, Cornell University, Monroe Community College
(MCC), Onondaga Community College (OCC), Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI),
Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT), and Syracuse University (Lead
Institution) - will build on, refine, and further institutionalize recruitment
and retention interventions implemented in the first award cycle. The Alliance
will also pilot new programming to boost the recruitment and retention of
freshman and sophomore students, and employ research-proven, early-intervention
strategies to enhance retention of upper level students for increased
baccalaureate degree attainment and foster graduate
matriculation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recruitment efforts will use a two-pronged
approach: a) expanding the network of articulation agreements between two- and
four-year colleges within and beyond the Alliance; and b) targeting nationwide
"geographies of opportunity" by extending such 2+2 arrangements to cities such
as New York, Washington DC, Atlanta, Los Angeles, and Miami. The retention of
first- and second-year students will be supported by improving both the academic
preparation of students and the instructional performance of the STEM faculty
who teach them. Pre-freshman summer bridge programs and academic "boot camps"
will emphasize both college orientation and university-level skills in math
and/or biology and chemistry. Syracuse University will also pilot a pre-
sophomore Summer Scholars Program combining coursework in mathematics and
science fundamentals with hands-on, faculty-mentored research as well as
leadership training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond directly increasing the
representation of African American, Latino American, and Native American
students in STEM industries, research labs, and the professoriate, ULSAMP will:
1) contribute to the nation's knowledge base and best practices in recruitment,
retention, and effective STEM education by developing, piloting, assessing,
disseminating, replicating and institutionalizing successful interventions and
collaborative approaches in these areas; and 2) further institutional
transformation at seven key institutions of higher education in New York State,
leaving them better prepared to engage with an increasingly diverse student body
and to meet regional and national demands for a high-tech workforce and research
community.