* 1202054
* Tunneling Field Effect Transistors for Beyond CMOS
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Sean Rommel, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 04/30/2015
* USD 319,403.00

Objective: The transistor considered in this proposal is known as the Tunneling
Field Effect Transistor (TFET). To be competitive with the conventional
transistors, the TFET needs a drive current above 100 ?ÝA/?n?Ým and a
subthreshold slope below 60 mV/dec at 0.5 V. Such a transistor has yet to be
realized and is the ultimate goal of this proposal. The approach in this
proposal is spread through three objectives: diode characterization, transistor
design/demonstration, and circuit architecture. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
TFETs are among the leading candidates for next generation transistor technology
beyond CMOS. The proposed activities will provide a substantial experimental
database that will transform the understanding/demonstration of TFETs through
its analysis of (i) optimal material composition (2-terminal diode screening),
(ii) lateral TFETs (proximity diffused or alloyed junction source), (iii)
vertical TFETs (metal-first or mesa-first source), (iv) TFET SPICE model
extraction, and (v) novel circuit design. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
results of the project will be disseminated through a multi-tiered web site for
public and private access. The work will be carried out by domestic graduate
students who will be exposed to industrial and global interactions through
external partners such as SEMATECH, U.S. Naval Research Laboratory, and
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology. The PI also presents an integrated and
realistic K-12 outreach plan in conjunction with West Irondequoit High School in
suburban Rochester, NY. The PI will also develop unique exhibits for RIT¡¦s
yearly Imagine RIT festival, a forum for public exposure to science.