* 1202193
* Microwave Radiometer for Internal Body Temperature Monitoring
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Zoya Popovic, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 06/30/2018
* USD 309,862.00

Abstract (Proposal No. 1202193) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: This proposal addresses a new method of integrated design and
implementation of an external passive radiometer for monitoring internal body
temperature. The goal for the proposed research is to develop a temperature-
monitoring device with a potential of being wearable, disposable and
inexpensive. The motivating applications are in several areas: (1) medical
diagnostics, e.g. monitoring infant brain damage, arthritis, detecting localized
tumors and monitoring temperature rise during hyperthermia treatment; (2)
monitoring people under stress, e.g., athletes during training/competition,
emergency workers and military personnel in hazardous conditions; and (3)
manufacturing, e.g., monitoring internal temperature of foods during the
manufacturing process. The specific issues addressed in the project are the
basic understanding of principles and limitations of near-field microwave
radiometry, an engineering approach for monitoring internal body temperature in
an environment with radio interference. The anticipated result of the research
is development of a wearable and ultimately disposable radiometric thermometer
for a wide range of applications, with a spatial resolution on the order of 1cm
and temperature resolution of 0.1K. The radiometer data can easily be
transmitted using a low-power wireless transceiver for further off-body
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader impacts
of the proposed research are transformative in several areas. The technical goal
of providing a new method of non-invasive monitoring of internal temperature,
when applied to a human body, can lead to on-time preventive treatment. Not
having access to internal body temperature is not only a problem for various
diseases, but also has a considerable impact in national security (military
personnel under heavy training; emergency personnel in hazardous conditions). In
terms of education and outreach, the broader impacts include multi-disciplinary
education at the undergraduate and graduate level, spanning areas of high-
frequency analog circuit design, electromagnetic simulations, and metrology. An
impact on the institution will be development of core competency in the field
and interactions with existing research projects. The PI has been active in
outreach, and related to this proposed work plans to add a new module to the
existing K-12 outreach, entitled Hot inside?, where children can use a
radiometer to ?see? a hot spot inside an object. A collaboration with NIST-
Boulder will enhance the metrology component of the research. The international
component of the proposed effort includes a collaboration with ETH-Zurich
(Switzerland), in the form of student exchanges, software donations and no-cost
participation.