* 1202859
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2012
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2015
* Christine Romano, Romano                  Christine
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 10/31/2015
* USD 189,000.00

The physiological role and biochemical mechanism of bacterial manganese(II)
oxidation

As one of the most abundant transition metals in the earth's crust, manganese is
prevalent in biological systems. It is found in superoxide dismutase, the oxygen
evolving complex of photosystem II, and it plays an important role in
biogeochemical cycling of carbon, sulfur, and several trace elements. Some
microbes can even oxidize Mn(II), transforming it to Mn(III) and Mn(IV) oxides.
Although bacterial Mn(II) oxidation is thought to be ubiquitous in nature, its
physiological role remains poorly understood. Recently, researchers identified
two putative Mn(II) oxidase genes, mnxG and mcoA, in the organisms Pseudomonas
putida GB-1 and Bacillus sp. SG-1. The proteins are predicted to be multicopper
oxidases, a family of Cu-containing enzymes that couples oxidation of metal or
organic substrates to reduction of dioxygen. This project will use a combination
of molecular and spectroscopic techniques to investigate both possible
physiological roles for bacterial Mn(II) oxidation, and the enzymes that mediate
this process.

This research will teach the fellow a variety of biological, environmental, and
chemical techniques, allowing her to pursue an independent research career after
she completes her post-doctoral training. Additionally, she will volunteer with
several ongoing outreach efforts in the laboratory of her sponsor. In
particular, she will work with the NSF Science and Technology Center for Coastal
Margin Observation and Prediction (CMOP) to provide undergraduate internships
and K-12 educational programs. She will also mentor students in the laboratory
and teach summer school classes through the Saturday Academy
(www.saturdayacademy.org). She aims to provide young students with hands-on
training in environmental microbiology.