* 1203425
* Arctic Sea Ice Variability in the 20th and Early 21st Centuries: Synthesis of Observations and Models
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Axel Schweiger, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2018
* USD 694,893.00

Much of the uncertainty in the pre-satellite sea ice record stems from the
difficulty establishing a consistent record of sea ice variability that covers
the entire Arctic from historical observations such as ship logs, reconnaissance
flights, etc. These observations are scattered in space and time and the primary
challenge in constructing a representative picture of sea ice variability from
these records is to adequately sample the strong seasonal cycle and high spatial
variability of sea ice in the Arctic. Sea ice reconstructions must therefore
rely on interpolation in time and space, which is made difficult by the dynamic
nature of sea ice. For some critically important climate variables, such as sea
ice thickness and total arctic sea ice volume, no historical data exist. The PIs
will conduct a Century-scale Arctic Sea Ice Reanalysis (CASIR) that synthesizes
observations and models from 1872 to the present to produce a long-term record
of arctic sea ice extent, concentration, thickness, and volume. Advances in
atmospheric reanalysis, sea ice modeling, and recovery of historical data make
CASIR possible. To construct CASIR, they will recover and collect new and
existing historical sea ice observations as far back as the late 1800s and
integrate them into a model validation and assimilation framework based on the
Pan-arctic Ice-Ocean Modeling and Assimilation System (PIOMAS). This will
include the extraction of sea ice variables from historical Revenue
Service/Coast Guard ship logs that are now being transcribed and promise to fill
important gaps in the Pacific sector of the Arctic. Through data assimilation
and model calibration and validation, the observational record will be
integrated into PIOMAS to generate CASIR. An ensemble of atmospheric forcing
data for CASIR will be extracted from atmospheric reanalysis projects for the
20th century that are completed or currently underway. This ensemble, in
addition to comparisons with observations, will be used to determine
uncertainties in CASIR sea ice variables. The PIs will analyze CASIR ice extent,
concentration, thickness, and volume, to characterize 20th century temporal and
spatial variability, improve understanding of the mechanisms driving this
variability, and place the recent sea ice decline in a longer term context.