* 1203374
* CSBR:   Natural History Collections -- Digitizing the Historical Egg Sets of the Western Foundation of Vertebrate Zoology
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Stephen Rothstein, Western Foundation of Vertebrate Zoology
* Continuing Grant
* Roland Roberts
* 05/31/2015
* USD 488,375.00

The Western Foundation of Vertebrate Zoology (WFVZ) is a non-profit museum in
Ventura Co., California. It houses collections of more than 200,000 cataloged
sets of birds' eggs and 18,000 nests -- the largest of such collections in North
America. Data for 40% of the WFVZ's egg sets of perching birds of the world have
not yet been digitized, although the greatest numbers of electronic information
requests the Foundation receives deal with these birds (the Passerines). Through
this grant, the WFVZ will hire undergraduate biology assistants to fully
computerize, georeference, and scan the records for 75,000 egg sets, and
photograph them. The data and photos will be shared with researchers and the
public through several media and Internet sources, including ORNIS/VerteNet,
iDigBio, and the WFVZ's website (http://www.wfvz.org).

Bird eggshells are extremely useful and important for understanding
environmental impacts and other important issues such as the impacts of global
climate change and pollution; species relationships; egg coloration; and
historic and current distributions, breeding dates, clutch sizes, egg sizes, and
eggshell thicknesses. This project will train young scientists about museum
science, bioinformatics, and ornithology, and will engage the general public as
well because of the WFVZ's strong connections with its local community. The
project will enhance the public?s involvement in science and its understanding
of scientific research.