* 1203363
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: Modernization and Digitization of the Angelo State Natural History Collections
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Terry Maxwell, Angelo State University
* Continuing Grant
* Roland Roberts
* 04/30/2016
* USD 480,865.00

The Angelo State Natural History Collections (ASNHC) house 120,000 voucher
specimens of plants, mammals, birds, reptiles and amphibians of the Concho
Valley, other regions of Texas, the U.S. and the world. The primary goal of this
project is to improve researcher and educator access to the specimens and
tissues housed in the Collections. The data associated with these specimens and
digital images of plant specimens will be made available to researchers around
the world. Faculty curators and students will complete data entry, including
geo-referencing specimens, update software, and make all data available through
existing biodiversity portals. Specific web-based learning modules for K-12 and
university level students will be created. Holding facilities will be modernized
and integrated pest management systems will be updated to protect specimens.

The broader impacts of this project are diverse. The wider science community
will have improved access to ASNHC databases, increasing use of the Collections.
K-12 science education throughout the region will benefit from new outreach
resources (e.g. digital images) for teachers and students. Angelo State
University students, including their own Hispanic Serving Institution target
group, will benefit from improved specimen-based instructional resources for
classroom and laboratory instruction.