* 1203343
* RAPID: Social Networks, Clientelism and Elections in Contexts of Change: Egyptian, Tunisian and Moroccan Elections of 2011
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2013
* Ellen Lust, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 11/30/2013
* USD 149,713.00

The Egyptian, Moroccan and Tunisian elections provide a unique - and fleeting -
opportunity to explore a wide range of potential impacts of the "Arab Spring"
and the ensuing transitions to democracy. This project will field surveys in
these three countries as near to their elections as possible. The data that will
be collected in this project will allow the examination of the impact of this
process on networks and clientelism, religion and politics, and gender and
mobilization among other topics. This data will also provide policymakers with
important insights into electoral strengthening and democratic transitions,
especially with regards to Muslim countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With regards
to intellectual merit, the different contexts of the elections allow for the
examination of the nature of clientelism and how this varies across social
structures and political conditions. Specifically,the researchers will examine
whether electoral behavior in these contexts should be understood as one-to-one
political exchanges, in which citizens and candidates exchange goods for votes,
or as one of many exchanges in a web of relationships determined by competing
social networks. This will allow for a deeper understanding in countries with
developing electoral institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, as part of
a broader collaborative effort with scholars at Portland State University,
Harvard University, and the University of Pittsburgh, the research will explore
a number of other topics. For example, how do new entrants in the political
system differ from those who participated in elections under the preceding
authoritarian regimes? Does constituency service remain a salient consideration
when citizens are uncertain about the future role of parliament? How does
political mobilization change in periods of high uncertainty?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With regards to broader impacts, this study has a number
of implications. First, it will provide insights for policymakers on the role of
elections in these newly emerging democratic regimes. This is especially
important given their location. Second, it will provide baseline data for cross-
temporal projects, wherein researchers can use the surveys and campaign
observation interviews to assess changes in elections and, more broadly,
representation as regimes change. Third and finally, it will help establish and
strengthen collaborative relationships with scholars and institutions in the
Middle East.