* 1203605
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: Digital Imaging of Molluscan Type Specimens at the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Gary Rosenberg, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 522,986.00

This project will produce digital images of about 12,000 type specimens in the
mollusk collection at the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia (ANSP),
which is part of Drexel University. Type specimens are the original specimens
that scientists used when naming a new species, so they are the standards of
reference for identifying species and doing comparative research in systematic
biology. The mollusk collection at ANSP is the oldest in North America, dating
from the early 1800s, and holds type specimens named by more than 600
scientists. Project images will be served online and made available to websites
that consolidate information about biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mollusks
have the highest extinction rate of any major group of animals, accounting for
more than 40% of species extinctions in recorded history, with freshwater and
terrestrial mollusks being most strongly impacted. Only 3% of mollusk species
have had their conservation status assessed, so many extinctions have likely
been overlooked. The availability of project images online will help scientists
identify mollusk species and assess their conservation status, which is urgently
needed throughout the world. The project will train undergraduates from Drexel
University in molluscan systematics, taxonomy, and curatorial techniques and in
working with electronic databases and imaging equipment. Project website:
http://clade.ansp.org/malacology/collections/index.html