* 1203577
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: On the Roles of Agricultural and Conservation Extension in Producing Landscapes: Visioning Alternative Scenarios for the Ghanaian Cocoa Belt
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2012,10/31/2013
* Dianne Rocheleau, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Kelley Crews
* 10/31/2013
* USD 11,404.00

This doctoral dissertation project considers the ways in which interacting
visions of extension agents and farmers have shaped the landscape and how this
shaping impacts future use of the same landscapes. Extension, broadly defined,
refers to intervention programs that liaise between communities and institutions
that provide services or information. Agricultural and conservation extension
services are additionally tasked with managing landscapes in accordance with the
goals and missions of their particular agencies. Such services are designed to
work through farmers to act on the landscape. The objective of this project is
to study how a plurality of extension services come together to produce rural
landscapes, and so influence the range of possible agro-ecosystem futures. It
suggests an approach to deliberative land-use planning that aims to resolve the
apparent contradiction between the increased environmental emphasis in the
governance of extension services and extension as an intermediary for
participatory development. The project examines the case of extension
interventions targeted at cacao farmers living on the fringes of Ghana's high
forests. Each set of actors is motivated by different ideas about the present
landscape and their visions for alternative futures. The research design will
integrate an ethnographic study of extension practice with biophysical field
data and scenario analysis in order to study how cacao-forest landscapes are
produced from multiple (1) configurations of the current landscape; (2) desired
future landscapes; and (3) recommended best management practices of the land.
Biophysical field data will be used as an empirical basis for constructing
landscape visualizations to illustrate each of the alternative scenarios. The
long-term outcomes of this research would inform efforts within the ongoing
forest governance debate to produce diverse and multifunctional cacao
landscapes.

Ghana is among the first countries in sub-Saharan Africa to receive readiness
approval in the United Nations Collaborative Programme on Reducing Emissions
from Deforestation and Degradation in developing countries (REDD-plus) and is
now actively soliciting pilot projects to intervene in the production of cacao
landscapes. At the same time, Ghana is set on a vision to achieve middle-income
status by the year 2020 with an economy that depends on its forest resources.
This project analyzes the institutional terrain that has brought the compatible
ecologies of cacao, timber, and now, carbon into economic and territorial
conflict in the Ghanaian cacao belt. The research will demonstrate how multiple,
parallel, and conflicting extension efforts in Ghana can, in fact, drive
fragmentation and divide integrated agroforests into separate resource domains
for intervention. It also offers a constructive approach for studying how
extension services and growers produce landscapes through their interventions,
while advancing a methodology for rendering baseline landscape configurations
and desirable future landscapes mutually intelligible for multi-stakeholder
land-use planning. The project is timely and has implications for pro-poor
climate change mitigation strategies and multipurpose planning for forest fringe
communities in sub-Saharan Africa. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this project will provide support to enable a graduate
student to establish an independent research career.