* 1203947
* Late Medieval Climate in the Caribbean: Pacific vs. Atlantic control on interannual variability and mean state
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* K. Halimeda Kilbourne, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 06/30/2016
* USD 317,836.00

The Medieval Climate Anomaly (MCA), an unusually warm period ~1000 years ago
that was followed immediately by the Little Ice Age (LIA), represents a possible
example of climate response to changes in radiative forcing. Previous work
indicates that a change in the tropical Indo-Pacific sea surface temperature
gradient may have contributed to the MCA; however, this change does not fully
explain climate perturbations during that time, and the potential role of the
Atlantic Ocean has yet to be considered. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To fill this
critical knowledge gap, a researcher at Chesapeake Biological Laboratory will
generate a high-resolution paleoclimate record for the MCA and LIA transition
using isotopes (Sr/Ca, &amp;#948;18O) preserved in coral skeletons from the
Caribbean Sea. The Caribbean is particularly well-suited for this study because
Caribbean surface temperatures are strongly correlated with global surface
temperatures; furthermore, while modeling has suggested a strong Pacific
influence on Caribbean climate, this influence has not previously been tested
with paleoclimate data. The paleoclimate record produced by this project will
overlap temporally with pre-existing records from the tropical Pacific, enabling
analysis of the relationship between the Pacific and Atlantic ocean basins with
respect to short-term (centennial to inter-annual) climate variability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding anomalous, short-term events like the MCA
has important implications for assessing the limitations of long-term climate
predictions. This project will advance knowledge of climate processes and
variability in the heavily populated region of the Atlantic tropics. In
addition, the project will support student training at the graduate and
undergraduate levels, with undergraduate students provided by the Maryland
SeaGrant REU program. A female, underrepresented minority student familiar with
the study area (Anegada, British Virgin Islands) will participate as a student
collaborator, and students at the University of Puerto Rico (a minority-serving
institution) have been encouraged to join the field expedition. The field
program will provide international experience for all students involved. Ongoing
outreach programs at Chesapeake Biological Laboratory will incorporate this
research.