* 1203677
* GEM: Development and Application of Thin Filament Techniques for Magnetospheric Physics
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Richard Wolf, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Janet U. Kozyra
* 05/31/2016
* USD 280,000.00

This project will generalize an existing two-dimensional computer code to three
dimensions. The generalized code will then be used to attack several significant
scientific problems associated with the dynamics of Earth's magnetotail: (1)
understanding the dynamics of bursty bulk flows and interchange oscillations;
(2) analysis of the ballooning instability in the plasma sheet; (3) assessment
of the accuracy with which global codes solve their differential equations; and
(4) theoretical estimation of the effect of a cross-tail directed magnetic
guide-field on plasma motion that results from patchy magnetic reconnection in
the magnetotail. The project will provide better quantitative understanding of
Pi2 oscillations, which accompany both substorms and bursty bulk flows, and of
other oscillations that appear in MHD simulations. It will provide an
alternative computational picture of the ballooning instability, providing
insight into its nonlinear development. It will enable rigorous testing of the
accuracy with which large-scale 3D codes, which are used widely in
magnetospheric physics, solve their differential equations.

This project addresses the topic of the evolution of plasma flows in the
magnetotail during magnetic substorms. The project will support a graduate
student, who will be given the opportunity to personally develop, code, and
apply a new computer code to address a set of scientific questions. At the end
of the project, the resulting code will be made available for use by members of
the broader space physics community.