* 1203868
* The Archaeology of Herring: Reconstructing the Past to Redeem the Future
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2023
* Madonna Moss, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Erica Hill
* 08/31/2023
* USD 171,637.00

Pacific herring (Clupea pallasi) is a cultural keystone species for many Alaska
Natives, and is a critical resource in the marine food web for much of coastal
Alaska. The appearance of herring in the spring signals the start of the
seasonal round after a long winter. Herring is a key dietary resource during
this time, but to some, herring is an economic mainstay throughout the year.
Alaska Natives, as well as a range of North Pacific species, depend on abundant
and geographically widespread populations of herring. In 1989, the Exxon Valdez
oil spill devastated Prince William Sound herring populations in the northern
Gulf of Alaska (Thorne and Thomas2008). The southern Gulf of Alaska has been
impacted by commercial fishing, habitat degradation, and environmental changes
over the past century. Bering Sea communities also depend on herring; in the
words of Nelson Islander Louise Kanrilak, ?herring are very important to us.
When we are out of herring, we are out of food? (Barker 1993:73). The scientific
debate over the status of herring has been complicated by the lucrative
commercial sac roe fishery that supplies herring eggs for Asian markets. Local
and Traditional Knowledge bearers have witnessed the decline of herring
(Thornton et al. 2010a) and many argue that herring are being managed in a
depleted state. Alaska Native subsistence fishers and egg-collectors are
sounding the alarm, while biologists debate whether herring populations are
?endangered,? ?threatened? or ?struggling? (Carls et al. 2009). Herring have
already abandoned some spawning locations (ADFG 2011), and several First Nations
in British Columbia have been forced to stop harvesting herring and spawn
altogether (Speller et al. 2010).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
demonstrate how zooarchaeological and paleo-genetic research can be used to
understand the dynamics of ancient fishing and fisheries and produce new
knowledge that can advance resource conservation today. It will support the
development and refinement of new methods of recovering and studying ancient
DNA, and will greatly expand knowledge of the long-term history of Alaska Native
use of herring. By encompassing the entire range of Pacific herring across
Alaska, it will complement current efforts in British Columbia and integrate the
knowledge of social scientists, biologists, and Local and Traditional Knowledge
bearers. The health of herring is essential to the entire North Pacific marine
ecosystem. Archaeological assemblages from across coastal Alaska constitute an
unmatched archive of environmental data. This project aims to develop a more
complete understanding of the ancient Alaska Native use of herring to better
assess the historical abundance, biogeography, and genetic diversity of herring
in the past. This effort aims to improve herring fisheries management to benefit
a wide range of stakeholders in the Arctic, subarctic, and beyond. The project
will gather samples of herring bones from archaeological sites across coastal
Alaska for ancient DNA analysis. Preliminary work has shown that ancient
mitochondrial DNA can be extracted from herring bones and is well-preserved.
Yang and colleagues are working to extract nuclear DNA, which will facilitate
comparisons to genetic results emerging from the study of the DNA of extant
herring. In this project, ancient DNA from 150 herring bone samples will be
studied to establish phylogenetic and geographic relationships. The age of many
of these samples is established, but radiocarbon dates will be obtained for
those samples lacking dates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the temporal
context will allow the researchers to identify changes over time. Collaborations
between archaeologists, Native communities, biologists, and managers working in
BritishColumbia and Washington State will permit region-wide understanding of
the ancient use of herring across the North Pacific. The results of the genetic
study will be disseminated to six communities in coastal Alaska through a
traveling workshop which will leave behind resource materials that can be
exhibited and will stimulate further study and engagement in management.