* 1203398
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: Critical Renovation and Revitalization of the University of Arizona Insect Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Wendy Moore Brusca, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 468,056.00

Located in the heart of the American Southwest, the University of Arizona Insect
Collection (UAIC) is the oldest, largest and most geographically diverse
arthropod museum in the state of Arizona. For the past century the UAIC has been
focused on the Sonoran Desert Region (including the Madrean Sky Islands), one of
the most biodiverse regions of North America. It contains many unique records of
endemic species, including documentation of changes in species distribution
patterns and northward expansion of insect pests into the region. Today the
collection contains 2 million research specimens, 83% identified to the species-
level. This project will provide funds to install a mobile storage system, with
modern steel cabinets, drawers and unit trays. By making the proposed
improvements, (1) the future of 2 million high value specimens will be assured,
(2) much needed new space for growth and research will be available, (3)
collection data and images of all species held in the collection will be
searchable online for professionals, agencies and the public, and (4) a very
popular outreach program for schoolchildren and the public will be able to
thrive. Safeguarding the future of this collection and making associated
specimen-level data available online will impact many communities by providing a
valuable resource for academic researchers, federal and state agencies in both
conservation and agriculture, and the public.