* 1203557
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Linking Population Genetics of Bacillus anthracis with Spatio-Temporal Patterns of Anthrax Outbreaks
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Jason Blackburn, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 10/31/2013
* USD 7,898.00

Understanding the ecology of outbreaks of diseases like anthrax as well as
associations between landscape ecology and specific bacterial genotypes is
essential for improving prevention and control of the disease in wildlife,
livestock, and humans. The mechanisms through which the anthrax pathogen is
transmitted at fine spatial and temporal scales are poorly characterized. This
doctoral dissertation research project will combine molecular analysis of
Bacillus anthracis, the causative bacterium of anthrax, with spatio-temporal
epizootic data to explore anthrax dynamics in North America across different
spatial and temporal scales, multiple genetic sub-lineages, and multiple
mammalian host systems. The doctoral student will seek answers to the following
questions: Do potential evolutionary changes in B. anthracis from infected
animal hosts and necrophagous flies suggest mechanisms of pathogen transmission
at a local scale? Are there associations among ecological conditions,
epidemiology, and genetic diversity within outbreaks in different ecological
settings and host systems? What are the broad scale spatio-temporal patterns of
genetic diversity of B. anthracis across two important anthrax foci in North
America? The student will use an existing collection of B. anthracis isolates
and anthrax epizootic data from ecologically distinct geographic areas. New
isolates and epizootic data will be collected from outbreaks occurring during
the study period. High-resolution single-nucleotide repeat (SNR) analysis will
characterize genetic diversity among and within multiple locus variable number
of tandem repeat- (MLVA) defined genotypes across study sites. Trend surface
analysis with vector velocity mapping will be used to analyze disease movement
through host populations across the landscape and will be overlain with maps of
genotypes to evaluate associations between genetic diversity and disease
transmission.

This project will help fill important gaps in knowledge about anthrax
transmission and will specifically evaluate whether genetic analysis can inform
spatio-temporal models of anthrax transmission. Anthrax transmission is likely
influenced by fine scale environmental characteristics, genetic lineage, host
species and behaviors, and arthropods as well as other as-yet-unknown variables.
This project will encompass multiple genetic lineages of the pathogen and
multiple host systems, including a study area in Texas with annual, enzootic
anthrax with wildlife and mixed wildlife/livestock host populations and a study
area in Montana experiencing a reemergence of anthrax in wildlife. Project
results will provide insight into the genetic diversity and evolution of an
important spillover pathogen. The results also will inform public health
strategies for prevention of wildlife, livestock, and human disease and will
provide insight as to whether strategies should be tailored to the local
ecology. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also
will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.