* 1203103
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Making Hybrid Property: People, Trees, and Grafting in the Walnut-Fruit Forests of Kyrgyzstan
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2013
* Jacob Fleming, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kelley Crews
* 05/31/2013
* USD 9,060.00

This doctoral dissertation project considers the human relations with and
especially property right and politics of grafted fruit trees in a center of
agricultural origin for such trees in Central Asia. Property is central to the
interactions of humans and nonhumans, but scholarship on property tends to be
strongly anthropocentric: property is a relationship among people about a thing.
Most research on property rights represent nonhumans (e.g. inanimate objects as
well as non-human living beings such as trees) as passive and subordinate, to be
moved among human owners. But people are not so clearly in control of property
regimes, nor are people and things so easily separated as this schema suggests.
The objective of this project is to provide an analysis of property
relationships in and around Kyrgyzstan's walnut-fruit forest, an ecosystem of
international conservation and horticultural importance in a relatively
understudied part of the world. The trees of this forest, walnut, apple, plum,
cherry, pear, grow in untended profusion in some places, but, through the
horticultural practice of grafting, can be transformed into the dependable
inhabitants found in gardens and orchards around the temperate world. Since the
1930s human labor has scattered thousands of grafted trees throughout the
forest, where they bear bigger, tastier, and more valuable fruit than their
ungrafted neighbors. Using a suite of methods including participant observation,
interviews, oral histories, document review, and the mapping of the distribution
of grafted trees in and around the forest, this project addresses the role of
these trees in property regimes through three key questions: 1) How are things
owned and accessed by various actors in the forested and cultivated spaces of
southern Kyrgyzstan? 2) How does grafting work in and around Kyrgyzstan's
walnut-fruit forests? 3) How does the horticultural potential of the forest
affect the politics of access to its resources? The investigators expect to
demonstrate the ways in which grafted and ungrafted trees act differently, and
with different consequences for how the forest is owned and accessed. By
considering the place of the grafted tree on the shifting terrain of post-Soviet
property, this project has potential implications for the fields of political
ecology, science and technology studies, social theory, human-environment
interactions, and research on the post-Soviet world.

This project seeks to reframe property institutions as accomplishments of people
and things, only achievable through their collective efforts, and no longer as
ways for humans to distribute the fruits as passive items. By focusing on
grafting, a horticultural practice that shapes the forested landscape and
people's use of it, this work draws attention to an intimate interaction between
humans and plants with material effects on local livelihoods and the genetic
identity of the forest. The project will demonstrate that smallholder concerns
that their access rights to the trees are threatened by conservation interests
and other exogenous interventions that wish to conserve them without human
intervention, threatens both their livelihood as well as the maintenance of the
trees which are nature-society hybrids. Plans for academic and non-academic
dissemination via conferences, publications and reports in the US as well as in
Kyrgyzstan are included. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish
a strong independent research career.