* 1203588
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Computational Modeling of the Effects of Climate Change and Land Acquisition on Household Dynamics in Southern Ethiopia
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Claudio Cioffi-Revilla, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/2015
* USD 12,000.00

The current surge in large-scale land acquisition in developing countries is a
complex socio-natural systems problem that also is emerging as a global policy
issue. Significant tracts of land are being leased to agribusiness enterprises
based in both poor and industrialized countries. The resulting expansion of
large-scale land acquisition contributes to the rural economy by creating jobs,
developing infrastructure, and transferring technologies. It also negatively
affects rural households, however, because most large-scale land acquisition
(combined with ongoing effects of climate change) affects the pastoralist
livelihoods of rural people by limiting their access to resources, eventually
leading them to dispossession and displacement. Although agent-based models
previously have been used for modeling complexity in human-environmental
systems, the influence of large actors and their interactions with local
households have not been addressed and remain poorly understood. This doctoral
dissertation research project will apply an agent-based modeling simulation
approach that explicitly represents the main actors (enterprises, households,
and institutions) to understand their interactions and dynamics with the
environment in the South Omo region in southwestern Ethiopia. The doctoral
student will integrate methods from spatial agent-based modeling and GIS along
with social network analysis and quantitative analysis. The agent simulation
model will use quantitative and qualitative socioeconomic data, with explicit
spatial referencing based on geographic data, thereby enabling agents to
interact in environments resembling the real world. He also will use a
participatory modeling strategy that involves consultation before, during, and
after each stage of modeling with local stakeholders, such as agribusiness
enterprises, government officials, and local community households.

The project will enhance understanding regarding dynamic interactions between
rural households and enterprises; the consequences of different actions of
actors on the land and reciprocal feedbacks; and the impact of climate change on
ecosystems and local communities. By using a complex system approach, the
project will contribute fundamental new understanding regarding the nonlinear
dynamic interaction of human and environment components at multiple spatial and
temporal scales. The project will enhance current scientific knowledge about
human-environment systems by explicitly modeling the dynamics of heterogeneous
actors, institutions, and their environments. The participatory modeling
approach will expose a broad spectrum of constituencies to scientific research
on complex socio-environmental systems. The project also will provide new,
scientifically informed perspectives for the science-policy debate on this
significant development issue. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.