* 1203529
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Thermal, Hydraulic, and Geomorphological Dynamics at Stream Confluences
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2012,11/30/2014
* Melinda Daniels, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 11/30/2014
* USD 11,695.00

Stream confluences, the joining of two streams, represent both unique habitat
patches and critical movement corridors within a riverscape. Although the
hydraulic and thermal nature of a particular confluence influences the ability
or likelihood of biota to travel through it, confluences generally have been
ignored in restoration efforts because they are hydraulically and
geomorphologically complex and dynamic systems. The doctoral dissertation
research project will seek to advance basic understanding of the thermal,
geomorphological, and hydraulic conditions present at stream confluences with
the intention of informing conservation, management and restoration of these
uniquely important river features. The doctoral student will explore answers to
the question: How do tributary confluence dynamics influence thermal habitat
patterns in the main channel? The student will employ cutting-edge distributed
temperature sensing fiber optic arrays coupled with acoustic Doppler current
profilers in a paired confluence sampling design.

This project will contribute to basic understanding of the processes through
which channel morphology influences hydraulic and thermal habitat variability at
confluences under different hydrologic conditions. It will integrate hydraulic,
geomorphic, and thermal observations at stream confluences to form a holistic
understanding of the complex interactions the influence thermal habitat dynamics
in confluences. The knowledge generated will transform basic understanding of
stream confluences by: investigating small confluences (small tributaries
joining a large river), confluences on a Great Plains sand-bedded river, and
thermal mixing patterns and associated thermal refuge habitat dynamics within
both small and large confluences. The project will provide policy makers and
public stakeholders with the greater knowledge that will facilitate
scientifically based, cooperative decisions regarding confluence restoration. As
a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.