* 1203667
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Rodrigo Cardenas, Cardenas                Rodrigo        A
* Fellowship Award
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 07/31/2015
* USD 120,000.00

Parental care is a major evolutionary dimension of the biobehavioral repertoire
of many species. Despite the importance of intensive infant care in the course
of human evolution and the likelihood that infant care has significantly shaped
human cognition, the nature of the cognitive mechanisms underlying interest in
infants is still largely unexplored. This research addresses how human cognition
might be attuned to detect, process, and recall infant-related information, and
whether and how these cognitive attunements are associated with adults' interest
in infants. Seven studies using a combination of psychometric, eye-tracking,
fMRI, and endocrinological techniques, are being conducted to address these
questions.

Intellectual merit. This project is the first series of empirical studies
designed to provide a comprehensive look at how cognitive mechanisms might be
attuned to the detection, processing, and recall of infant-related information,
and to show how they may vary as a function of the individual differences that
affect interest in infants. These questions are motivated by evolutionary,
anthropological, and psychological data and theory. This multidisciplinary
approach follows recent theoretical and methodological developments in
psychological science aimed at integrating vision science and social psychology.
This project bridges these developments with research examining how sexual
selection might have shaped human cognition and recent theoretical efforts that
seek to incorporate individual differences into evolutionary thinking about
human behavior.

This work directly informs a large body of work developed over the last three
decades about how infant-like facial features affect our perception of adult
faces. In addition, the results have the potential to advance knowledge about
the cognitive processing of emotional stimuli, neuroendocrinology of human
parenting, and the evolution of sex differences in parenting. The implications
of this research is relevant to multiple disciplines, including psychology,
anthropology, endocrinology and neuroscience, and therefore it will be published
in journals of broad readership.

Broader impacts. Understanding the cognitive basis of individual differences in
interest in infants is worthwhile from a basic science perspective, and,
individually and collectively, that is the aim of these studies. But
understanding these mechanisms also has important implications for application
and remediation. Physical appearance affects social interactions, including
interaction with infants and children. Studies show that the infant's physical
appearance affects parental investment, the risk of infanticide, and affective
maternal behavior. From these examples, the possibility thus arises that a
better understanding of the cognitive and biobehavioral mechanisms underlying
interest in infants not only can improve our understanding of how these
mechanisms translate into actual care-giving behavior, but how, through the
development of new screening and assessment tools, persons at risk for poor
care-giving can be identified earlier so that effective interventions can be
instituted before care-giving fails.

Broadening Participation. This project broadens participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM fields by outreaching underrepresented groups
and fostering diversity in science at various stages of the educational
pipeline. At early educational stages, this project is producing a website for
schools about face perception and intergroup relations. At higher educational
stages, researcher assistants are trained in laboratory methods, data analysis,
and education in the protection of human research participants. This fellowship
contributes to mentor these students toward their long-term involvement in
science. In addition, research participants from underrepresented groups have
the opportunity to gain educational experience about the research process. This
project also implements a cross multidisciplinary forum in Social Behavior,
Neuroscience, and Diversity, which fosters an intellectual climate that
encourages and values the importance of diversity in science, stimulates
networking among academics and students from underrepresented groups, and
promotes role models for underrepresented undergraduates pursuing careers in
STEM fields.

Finally, this project enables the Fellow to gain critical theoretical and
technical skills to prepare him for pursuing a tenure track position at a
research university. This research serves as an empirical foundation for
launching a unique research program aimed at understanding the evolution of
neuro-cognitive mechanisms involved in infant care. In addition, this fellowship
facilitates his involvement in institutional efforts at his host institution for
increasing the recruitment and retention of minority faculty members and
students.