* 1203632
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: China's Emerging Slums During Urban Expansion: The Case of Beijing, Henancun, and Recycling
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2012,11/30/2013
* Guo Chen, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 11/30/2013
* USD 11,830.00

For two decades from 1992 to the end of 2011, China has maintained economic
growth at rates of ten percent or more per year, but very large numbers of
China's rural-to-urban migrants face discrimination and exclusion in urban
environments in terms of housing, job opportunities, education, and other basic
entitlements. The United Nations estimated that more than one-quarter of China's
urban population lives in slums, even as government rhetoric and many research
reports consistently have denied the existence of large-scale slums in China.
Other studies have provided evidence showing that rural migrants remain the most
disadvantaged group in China, experiencing socially, economically, politically,
and spatially marginalized status. Unlike conditions in many developing
countries, China's state land ownership, authoritarian control of squatting, and
hukou-related housing injustice have undermined the relatively stable spatial
and temporal qualities that characterize most slums and created an obscure,
often-hidden geography of the lived experiences of the urban underclass. This
doctoral dissertation research project will be based on slum and ethnic enclave
studies and will develop a proto-slum framework to understand the
reconfiguration of slums in China and the mechanisms whereby migrants sustain
their livelihoods and businesses in rapidly urbanizing environments. The
doctoral student will consider Henan migrants in Beijing as the project's
central case study. Following their first wave of migration to Beijing in the
mid-1980s, the rural household registration status, limited means, and
discrimination have gradually channeled Henan migrants into the informal
recycling business and have led to the formation of various Henan enclaves in
Beijing. From the late 1980s to the early 2010s, these enclaves have been
subjected to repeated demolition and relocation processes. The student will use
mapping and spatial regression modeling based on land use, observations, and
questionnaire and interview data to investigate the spatial-temporal geography
and the internal dynamics within slum-condition Henan enclaves in Beijing. He
will focus special attention on ascertaining the geography of the proto-slums in
Beijing and what structural factors account for the spatial and temporal
dynamics of migrant communities and their ability to sustain livelihoods in
Beijing as well as the strategies disadvantaged groups use to secure their
livelihoods and right to the city within socially, politically, and spatially
excluded and environmentally threatened communities.

This project will draw on an interdisciplinary approach to develop new
information and insights into the geography of Chinese slums, which have rarely
been studied. It will incorporate literature focusing on slums, enclaves, and
migration from developing and developed countries and will use a spatial-
temporal framework explain how proto-slums develop and function in the Chinese
context. The project will provide practical information on the development of
and spatial-environmental challenges faced by slum-condition communities in
rapidly expanding cities, and it will help to identify policies addressing urban
inequality and injustice in China as well as ways to facilitate integration of
migrants into the society. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.