* 1203204
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Climate Variability and the Susceptibility of Engelmann Spruce to Spruce Beetle (Dendroctonus Rufipennis) Outbreaks in Northwestern Colorado
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2012,11/30/2013
* Thomas Veblen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Kelley Crews
* 11/30/2013
* USD 11,727.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will investigate the effects of
warmer temperatures on the susceptibility of spruce trees to infestations by
spruce beetles in subalpine environments of western North America. Changes in
climate during the late 20th and early 21st centuries are widely viewed as the
primary driver of a dramatic increase in bark beetle activity throughout western
North America. Although the mountain pine beetle (MPB; Dendroctonus ponderosae)
has caused most bark beetle related tree mortality across North America over the
past two decades, concern has been growing that outbreaks of the spruce beetle
(SB; Dendroctonus rufipennis) could be similarly extensive. The area affected by
SB in Colorado and Wyoming nearly doubled from 460 km2 in 2009 to 840 km2 in
2010. The vast extent and substantial mortality of this and other bark beetle
outbreaks over the last two decades are consistent with predictions drawn from
studies of beetle population dynamics, which predict that a warmer climate
stimulates beetle activity through decreased winter mortality and shifts from
two-year to one-year life cycles. However, comparatively little is known about
the potential constraints on SB activity posed by spatial variation in spruce
tree susceptibility, as mediated by physical environmental factors interacting
with forest dynamics in response to previous disturbances by fire, wind, and
past outbreaks. Early research suggests that variation in tree susceptibility
may have limited the extent and severity of previous SB outbreaks, but the
feedback of tree susceptibility on outbreak dynamics appears to be greatly
reduced under the warmer climate of the current outbreak (1998 - present). The
central goal of this project is to determine the susceptibility of Engelmann
spruce (Picea engelmannii) trees to SB outbreaks across the complex subalpine
environment of northwestern Colorado in the context of climate variability.
Using an integration of mapping via GIS as well as tree-ring analysis the
research seeks to reconstruct historical and contemporary SB outbreaks. The
research seeks answers to the following two research questions: What are the
climate conditions related to historic spruce beetle outbreaks in northwestern
Colorado? 2) What abiotic and biotic factors determine susceptibility to the
current period of SB attack at the tree and stand-level, and how do these
relationships compare with historic relationships (pre-1998) between
susceptibility to SB and the same variables?

The results of this research will provide insight into how climate variability
alters the susceptibility of spruce trees to SB outbreak across the subalpine
environment in North America. An increased understanding of the relationships
between increased temperatures, beetle infestations and other forest dynamics
will help inform management decisions and evaluate hazards to nearby communities
related to high tree mortality. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.