* 1203242
* CSBR:  Living Stock Collections:  Critical Environmental Upgrade for Living Collections of Arecaceae, Zamiaceae, and Cycadaceae.
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Tracy Magellan, Montgomery Botanical Center
* Standard Grant
* Roland Roberts
* 05/31/2013
* USD 49,212.00

This project provides a critical environmental upgrade for a living collection
of plants used to support scientific research. The upgrade consists of a shade
system for temperature control, a modern irrigation system, and a -80 degree C
freezer to store living material. Steady growth in users and living collections
make this project urgent and it will provide improvements to the efficiency,
quality, health, and diversity of the living collection. Living collections of
palms and cycads at MBC are a vital research resource used by a growing number
of researchers and have contributed to at least 26 NSF-funded projects. The
upgrades proposed here will permit successful establishment of wild-origin
stocks, improve collection survival, and allow for greatly improved success in
stock propagation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Montgomery is located in South Florida
in an area rich with research and educational institutions, such as botanic
gardens, universities and government agencies. Montgomery closely collaborates
with researchers from these institutions, especially with the universities and
colleges in Miami-Dade County, which serve many underrepresented minorities.
Upgrading Montgomery's living collections propagation equipment will enhance and
promote educational opportunities for these university students, as well as for
volunteers, the &lt;br/&gt;public, and students in elementary and secondary
schools.