* 1203430
* Collaborative Research:  P2C2--Implications of the Early Anthropogenic Hypothesis
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Stephen Vavrus, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2017
* USD 445,063.00

This is a project to continuing testing aspects of the Early Anthropogenic
Hypothesis, the conjecture that early agricultural practices by humans altered
the terrestrial carbon cycle, causing a net increase in atmospheric CO2 and
methane that offset a natural decline during the Holocene (the last 10,000
years). The hypothesis is based on observations of orbital climate variability.
During previous interglacials atmospheric CO2 and methane began to decline
early, leading to cooling and ultimately glacial inception. The Holocene is an
outlier in this regard because the greenhouse gases increase in the atmosphere
from the mid-Holocene to preindustrial values in the mid 1700s. There is great
debate about why.

Based on new information that per capita land use has changed, the project will
test whether this can account for the rise in greenhouse gases observed during
the Holocene. It will invoke a series of novel general circulation experiments
for the last 6000 years, comparing the expected natural changes with those that
might have been caused by anthropogenic impacts. The researchers will use the
Coupled Environmental System Model (CESM1) and compare the results with
observational data for the Holocene.

Because it is controversial, the Early Anthropogenic Hypothesis has generated
much research activity in the field of paleoclimatology, resulting in dedicated
symposia, journal volumes, popular books and public lectures.