* 1203530
* CSBR:   Natural History Collections: Equipment for The Field Museum's Fossil Mammal Collection Range for the Accommodation of Nonmammalian Synapsids and the Turnbull Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Kenneth Angielczyk, Field Museum of Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Roland Roberts
* 05/31/2016
* USD 499,998.00

The Field Museum of Natural History's fossil mammal collection is an invaluable
resource for paleontological, paleoecological, and evolutionary research. Two
components of this collection require urgent attention. Several thousand
specimens collected by W. D. Turnbull during his nearly 70 year career have
never been accessioned; many of the specimens, which can elucidate the early
histories of modern mammal groups against the backdrop of a rapidly warming
climate, have never been unpacked. The non-mammalian synapsid collection was
built by iconic paleontologists and continues to provide key information about
the earliest ancestors of mammals. Yet this collection is stored in overcrowded
facilities with no room for anticipated expansion.

Specimens from these collections will be packaged in archival storage materials
and housed in new cabinets and shelving that take advantage of existing
infrastructure in the fossil mammal collection space (funded by a previous
grant). Uncataloged specimens will be accessioned and cataloged. Collections
data for all Field Museum fossil vertebrates will be made available online.
These steps will increase the utility and accessibility of the specimens to the
research community, while guaranteeing their long-term preservation for future
generations. A postdoctoral researcher and two undergraduates will be trained in
collections management and curation during the grant; a third undergraduate will
produce podcasts describing the work and its rationale.