* 1203573
* Collaborative Research:   CSBR:  Natural History Collections: Magnolia grandiFLORA, digitally linking herbaria to support botanical research and education in Mississippi
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Nina Baghai-Riding, Delta State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2018
* USD 94,031.00

The Magnolia grandiFLORA project, named in honor of the official state tree and
flower of Mississippi, will develop digital databases of images, labels, and
georeferenced locality data for more than 250,000 vascular plant specimens from
herbaria at Mississippi State University, University of Mississippi, Delta State
University, University of Southern Mississippi, Gulf Coast Research Laboratory,
Mississippi Museum of Natural Science, and Institute for Botanical Exploration.
A web interface that allows for integrated database searches will be established
through the High Performance Computing Collaboratory at Mississippi State
University. Specimen imaging and label digitization will provide worldwide
access to the collections, biological and geographical metadata for broad-scale
studies based on plants, and a permanent back-up of specimen data in the event
of natural or other disasters.

The resulting high quality data set will provide tools for plant identification
and information on plant distributions in Mississippi to government agencies,
researchers, and the general public. These data have applications in tracking
rare and invasive species, developing environmental policy, increasing citizen
knowledge of the natural history of Mississippi, and enhancing K-12 science
education with interactive tools. The data will contribute to the development of
a comprehensive list of plants in Mississippi and national efforts to catalog
and map plant diversity. Numerous undergraduate and graduate students will be
involved in the project.