* 1203434
* Deciphering the ecology of key diatom taxa to understand climate-induced changes in West Greenland lakes
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Jasmine Saros, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 12/31/2016
* USD 353,980.00

Across the Arctic, paleolimnological records provide some of the few key
archives documenting rates of ecological change in this region over the
Holocene. In particular, striking changes in communities of diatoms (a type of
algae that responds rapidly to environmental change and leaves a fossil in lake
sediments) have occurred over the last 150 years, with species generally
associated with warmer conditions increasing at unprecedented rates in the
sediment record. However, changes in diatom assemblages in lake sediments from
west Greenland are different from those in the rest of the Arctic in that they
are rich in these 'warmer' water diatoms throughout the Holocene. This
difference has raised questions about what we can use diatoms to infer in the
Arctic, and suggests the need to clarify the ecological traits of key diatom
taxa in order to advance our understanding of drivers of change. Recent research
in alpine regions reveals that key diatom species that are used as indicators of
20th century warming in both arctic and alpine lakes respond specifically to
both climate-induced changes in energy (mixing depths) and mass inputs
(nutrients) to lake ecosystems. This suggests that spatially- and temporally-
variable interactions between climate-induced changes in the physical and
chemical structure of lakes may drive diatom community changes, but this is
currently untested in arctic lakes.

This research will couple comparative lake sampling with both small- and large-
scale experiments to provide key ecological information that will enable
interpretation of climate- induced ecological changes from several existing
diatom records from southwest Greenland. The objective of this project is to
determine the effects of climate-driven changes in nutrients and water column
stability on the relative abundances of key diatom taxa, and to apply that
information to existing diatom records to determine climate-induced changes in
these lake ecosystems. A suite of lakes will be sampled to determine the factors
controlling the distributions of key diatom species. A small-scale experiment
will be conducted to assess the importance of nutrients and incubation depth on
the abundances of these key diatom species. A large-scale experiment (whole lake
manipulation) will be conducted to assess the importance of thermal
stratification on these diatoms, which will be tested by deepening the mixed
layer of a lake that typically stratifies thermallyduring the summer. This
large-scale experiment will be the first whole-lake ecosystem test of the
importance of changing energy influx on the community structure of these arctic
lakes.

This project will provide support for a postdoctoral research associate at the
Climate Change Institute at the University of Maine. The postdoctoral associate
will gain valuable experience conducting arctic ecosystems research, mentoring
undergraduate students, and working in a multidisciplinary institute focused on
multiple aspects of climate change. This research will also involve two
undergraduates over the course of the project. A distributed graduate seminar
focused on climate change and high latitude and altitude lake ecosystems will be
developed and taught in conjunction with ecologists from four countries. Data
from this project will be made available through the NOAA paleoclimate database
and website, and the Diatom Paleolimnology Data Cooperative website.