* 1203420
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Sumarga Suanda, Suanda                  Sumarga        H
* Fellowship Award
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2014
* USD 120,000.00

How children learn words is of interest to scholars in the cognitive,
developmental, and learning sciences, as well as to clinicians and educators. In
recent years, there has been a growing interest in viewing word learning, and
language acquisition more generally, as a process of abstracting structure from
probabilistic information in the learning environment. In the context of word
learning, support for this view comes from three types of findings: (1)
computational work suggesting that rich latent structures are discoverable from
the child's seemingly "noisy" input; (2) observational findings highlighting
correlations between distributional features of the environment (e.g., the
frequency of a word) and acquisition (e.g., the age at which that word is
learned); and (3) controlled laboratory studies revealing that human learners
have a remarkable capacity to pick up on the co-occurrence regularities between
words and their referents.

Intellectual Merit. The applicant is conducting research that expands current
understanding of this learning process by examining whether the prowess of human
statistical language learning, well documented in artificial laboratory tasks,
scales up to real-world learning contexts. Employing a multi-methodological
approach (i.e., high-density multimodal observations from the perspective of the
child learner, behavioral experiments with both children and adult learners,
computational modeling), the applicant is (1) estimating the real-world word-to-
referent co-occurrence structure to which children are exposed; (2) examining
whether words can be learned from this co-occurrence information alone; and (3)
investigating the mechanisms that may underlie such learning. In addition to
advancing our state of knowledge in the cognitive and developmental sciences,
this work has the potential to inform neighboring areas of inquiry such as
individual differences in language development, vocabulary development through
reading and second language acquisition. Broader Impacts. The planned project
has three broader impacts. First, the project includes enhanced training
opportunities for undergraduate student researchers, including students from
under-represented backgrounds. This vertical integration exposes students to
multiple methodologies across diverse disciplines (e.g., psychology,
linguistics, computer science), and thus serves as an excellent training
opportunity for these students' own future careers in science. Second, the
project yields novel pieces of data (e.g., recordings of real-world interactions
from the child's perspective, detailed transcripts of children's language
learning environment, experimental stimuli, computer simulation code) that is
being shared with the larger scientific community. Finally, as a study of
children's learning abilities and their language environments, the study
encourages participation in scientific endeavors by members of the local
community.

Outreach Plan for Broadening Participation. The proposal also includes an
outreach plan to broaden the participation of under-represented minorities in
science. The applicant is carrying out the research at Indiana University, which
has a solid infrastructure in place for outreach efforts. During this
fellowship, the applicant is partnering with these established programs and is
engaging in the following: (1) visiting a nearby university with a large
population of under-represented students to conduct information sessions about
summer research opportunities, graduate school applications, and career
opportunities in psychology; (2) offering one-on-one mentoring to students from
under-represented backgrounds who are applying to graduate school in STEM
fields; (3) enrolling in training opportunities for becoming a better mentor to
under-represented students. Additionally, as a scholar with Indonesian heritage,
the applicant is a minority in the field of psychological science.