* 1203132
* Factors Related to Teacher Retention in Arctic Alaska, an Integral Part of the Circumpolar North
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Ute Kaden, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 07/31/2017
* USD 499,848.00

This is a three-year research project to do indepth quantitative and qualitative
research on teacher retention in rural schools in Arctic Alaska. Rural Alaskan
schools are populated by over 90% Alaska Native students and are in majority
Alaskan Native communities. One of the key issues in these school systems, not
just in Alaska but throughout the circumpolar North, is how to retain teachers.
Up until now, teacher retention studies focused on the statistical analyses of
how many teachers stayed in rural community schools and for how long. And
although there has been research on the effects of teacher retention and student
achievement, findings showing that student performance is directly connected to
teacher retention, no substantive scientific research has been done that
explains why retention rates are so low in Alaskan Native communities. Using an
explanatory design, the study will triangulate findings by looking at multiple
qualitative and quantitative indicators related to teacher retention, comparing
them and using qualitative evidence to shed light on the quantitative patterns.
Teachers in the region will be surveyed using electronic and interview survey
methods. Attempts to contact teachers who left the district within the past 2
years will be made for purposes of semi-structured telephone interviews. Alaskan
Native researchers will conduct focus group field interviews of a purposefully
selected, weighted, and stratified sample of teachers, school board members,
Elders, and Tribal Council members. The goals of the research project are: 1. To
identify the degree of school and community integration, which influence teacher
retention; 2. To identify school workplace characteristics, including
recruitment practices, which influence teacher retention; 3. To identify teacher
preparation practices which influence retention; 4. To identify key unknown
variables for understanding teacher retention in Arctic Alaska.