* 1203631
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Kevin Holmes, Holmes                  Kevin          J
* Fellowship Award
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 12/31/2014
* USD 120,000.00

Does language shape our perception of the world? This classic question has long
provoked fierce debate in cognitive science. In recent years, new insights have
been brought to bear on the debate, drawing on the functional organization of
the brain. The nature of this organization predicts that language should
influence perception more in the right visual field (RVF) than the left visual
field (LVF), because stimuli in the RVF are initially processed by the left
hemisphere, the side of the brain dominant for language. A number of studies
have supported this prediction, showing that people are better able to
discriminate items in the RVF when they come from different categories (e.g., a
dog and a cat) than from the same category (e.g., two different cats), an effect
of categorical perception (CP). In contrast, it appears that perception in the
LVF is much less affected, if at all, by the categories of the items. This
hemispheric asymmetry, known as left-lateralized CP, has been regarded by many
researchers as strong evidence for the influence of language on perception. The
Fellow's previous research has challenged this interpretation, however, by
demonstrating that categories without names can also produce left-lateralized
CP. At the same time, several other recent studies have contested the very
existence of left-lateralized CP in failing to replicate it. The Fellow's
postdoctoral research seeks to reconcile this conflicting body of evidence by
probing the nature of the categories that give rise to the phenomenon. Four
studies examine the extent to which various kinds of categories--linguistic vs.
non-linguistic, overtly learned vs. implicitly represented, coarse- vs. fine-
grained, lay vs. expert--elicit left-lateralized CP. Broadly, this research
clarifies the circumstances under which various means of highlighting conceptual
distinctions, including but not limited to language, shape our representations
of the visual world.

Intellectual Merit. The idea that language influences perception, but only in
half of the visual world, is an important but currently contested proposal. The
findings from the Fellow's research will shed light on the nature and
specificity of this influence. It may be that the simple act of forming a
category, whether linguistic or otherwise, is sufficient to change how members
of the category are perceived. Such a finding would suggest that knowledge need
not be represented linguistically in order to exert a powerful influence on
perception. Alternatively, linguistic categories may exert a stronger or more
reliable influence than other kinds of conceptual distinctions, consistent with
the possibility that language is privileged in the conceptual system. The
findings from this research will thus provide a useful contribution to the
ongoing debate on whether and to what extent language shapes thinking, with the
potential to inform theories of knowledge representation and acquisition more
generally.

Broader Impacts. As a first-generation college student and a person of mixed
race, the Fellow holds a deep personal commitment to broadening the
participation of underrepresented minority groups in STEM fields. To this end,
the Fellow has been a leader in outreach efforts to inspire talented
undergraduates at minority-serving institutions to recognize the value of
scientific research and the rewards of a career in science. Through his
postdoctoral training, the Fellow is extending these efforts by mentoring
undergraduate researchers from diverse backgrounds, initiating targeted outreach
events within the UC Berkeley community and beyond, presenting the research
findings to a wide range of academic and non-academic audiences, and promoting
scientific discourse on the Internet. In addition, part of the research examines
perception in people with expertise in highly specialized domains, engaging
groups rarely considered in the research process and providing an intriguing
window on perceptual diversity. Such insights may ultimately help address
barriers in intergroup communication, demonstrating that when people from
different groups talk past each other, it may be in part because they--quite
literally--see the world differently.