* 1203876
* Collaborative research: Spatial and temporal variability of surface albedo and light absorbing chemical species in Greenland.
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jack Dibb, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2016
* USD 368,208.00

The collaborative team will take advantage of the currently funded Greenland
Inland Traverse (GrIT) traveling between Thule and Summit Greenland to access a
spatially diverse area of the GIS in order to better understand albedo
variability and the snow properties that influence albedo. The GrIT route offers
a unique opportunity to study a wide range of snow accumulation zones (i.e. the
ablation zone, soaked snow zone, the percolation zone and the dry snow zone)
across Greenland, which are expected to have a broad range of albedo values as
well as significant variability in snow physical properties and concentrations
of light absorbing compounds (i.e. dust, elemental carbon, and brown carbon).
The project's field component will take place over two seasons during the spring
of 2013 and 2014. The approach will include stopping along the traverse to
collect coincident daily measurements of snow spectral albedo, snow physical
properties (i.e. specific surface area, density), surface snow light absorption
properties (i.e. wavelength dependent absorption of water soluble compounds and
particulates), and the concentrations of trace elements, organic, and elemental
carbon. Additionally, the temporal evolution of spectral albedo will be
monitored continuously during the sunlit months using autonomous stations
deployed along the traverse route to track seasonal variations of snow albedo
and to help attribute these variations to the physical and chemical composition
of the snow. The results of this project will yield a unique data set
characterizing the temporal and spatial variability of surface albedo as well as
the physical and chemical properties of Greenland snow, which are broadly useful
to both modeling, ice mass balance, and remote sensing communities. Conference
presentations, rapid publication of results, and most importantly close
collaboration with modelers, (i.e. through work with the CESM PCWG) will ensure
that this knowledge used to improve process parameterizations in predictive
global climate models. The team will also build on international collaborations
begun in the Dartmouth IGERT program, including a week-long ambassadorship to
Nuuk by co-PI Polashenski including lectures at the college and Katuuaq cultural
center. Graduate, undergraduate, and high school student training will also be
included in the project.