* 1203928
* Collaborative Research:  P2C2--Controls on Water Isotope Variability in the Tropical Pacific: A Strategy to Improve Paleoclimate Interpretations
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2012,11/30/2014
* David Noone, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 11/30/2014
* USD 109,838.00

Paleoclimate reconstructions of past tropical precipitation rely on interpreting
hydrogen and oxygen isotopic variations in terms of past changes in
precipitation. This project has the goal of better understanding of the response
of tropical Pacific precipitation to climatic variability and how the stable
isotope composition of the rainfall is affected by seasonal and interannual
changes in the climate. The researchers include a scientist and a postdoctoral
fellow from Georgia Institute of Technology and a scientist from the University
of Colorado. They will collect and measure the stable oxygen and hydrogen
isotopes in water vapor, rainfall and seawater from four island locations in the
tropical Pacific. Samples will be collected on site during field programs
executed by the PIs. The sampling program will also include year-round sampling
by local individuals who will be trained in proper sampling techniques. The
sampling strategy includes ultra high-resolution sampling of the diurnal cycle,
as well as daily and longer sampling in order to evaluate the relationship of
water isotope variability to climate change from sub-seasonal to interannual
time scales and on a basin wide scale. The stable isotope data will be
integrated with an isotope-enabled climate model at the National Center for
Atmospheric Research to link the climate mechanisms for the isotope variability
at high frequency with the resulting longer term averaged values that typify the
type of data reconstructed by paleoclimate proxies of rainfall. Using this
approach, the PIs hope to provide a more accurate evaluation of paleoclimate
proxies as well as a better understanding of the uncertainties embedded in these
types of reconstructions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent rise in the number of
paleoclimate publications dedicated to measuring and interpreting water stable
isotopes, and the possibly oversimplified nature of some of the interpretations,
makes this project likely to have a significant impact on paleoclimate research.
The project includes two established researchers, Kim Cobb (GA. Tech.) and David
Noone (CU), but the main driver of this project is Jessica Conroy, an EAR
Postdoctoral Research Fellow at Ga. Tech., supported by the AGS Paleoclimate
Program. This project builds on the PRF award by providing greater access to the
Pacific for sampling, collaboration with Noone at CU for access to the NCAR
GCMs, and a third year of support for the postdoc to complete the work.