* 1203740
* Collaborative Research: Toward optimization of observational arrays in the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Gleb Panteleev, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* William Ambrose
* 08/31/2016
* USD 117,489.00

This project contributes to the further development of the Arctic Observing
Network (AON) by providing a suit of variational methods for optimization of
observational arrays with special emphasis on the computational efficiency and
portability of the optimization procedures. The team will analyze a scientific
rationale for several ongoing and proposed observational programs to provide
recommendations for designing an effective AO observing system. By accomplishing
the proposed research they intend to approach the major goal of the proposal: to
provide observational Arctic community with an objective procedure for
optimization of the observational strategy that can be routinely used and will
deliver robust and efficient estimates of the optimal configuration of an
observational array based on the information available from community AO Ocean
General Circulation Models. The study will provide a helpful tool for quality
control of the decisions based on ?common sense? and the information which
cannot be formalized in the framework of a rigorous mathematical approach. The
results may suggest recommendations for deployment of the monitoring equipment
in support of the Study of Environmental ARctic CHange (SEARCH) and AON
programs. The results of the proposed study will be available through a web site
that will include links to other relevant observational projects. The web site
will be designed to be useful for a variety of audiences including the
scientific community, students, and the general public. Additionally, the
investigators will set up a web server to simplify access of the interested
researchers to the developed algorithms. Results from project data
interpretation will be published in scientific and popular journals.