* 1203022
* Fundamental Physics of Trapped Atomic Tritium
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Mark Raizen, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2015
* USD 390,000.00

This research program focuses on trapping and cooling atomic hydrogen in a
simple room-temperature apparatus. Molecular hydrogen is mixed with an inert
carrier gas and expanded in the flow of a pulsed supersonic beam. The molecules
will be dissociated near the output of the valve. Atomic hydrogen will be
stopped with a timed series of pulsed electromagnetic coils, relying on the
magnetic moment of hydrogen. This atomic coilgun will be optimized for the case
of hydrogen, and an adiabatic coilgun will be constructed in order to enable
mode matching to the source. The stopped atoms will be confined in a magnetic
trap in a room temperature apparatus, and will be detected using the two-photon
1S-2S transition near 243 nm. Hydrogen will be cooled to near the recoil
temperature by single-photon cooling, in a dressed RF magnetic trap.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atomic hydrogen is the simplest element in the periodic
table, yet it has proven extremely challenging to control its translational
motion. The standard method of laser cooling has not been possible, due to the
lack of an accessible cycling transition. This research program will demonstrate
trapping and cooling of hydrogen in a simple room temperature apparatus, using
new methods that were successfully applied to other atoms. The broader
significance of this work is that it will enable in the future the trapping and
cooling of atomic tritium. This is a radioactive isotope of hydrogen, and its
study can provide important data for nuclear physics. The same techniques can
also be applied to anti-hydrogen, and such studies can test basic symmetries
between matter and anti-matter.