* 1203200
* Bridging the Water Divide: Training a New Generation of Water Technicians
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Achala Chatterjee, San Bernardino Valley College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 12/31/2016
* USD 199,273.00

Despite an optimistic outlook for professional employment in the field of water
and waste water supply and treatment, industry experts report there are not
enough trained workers to fill positions in the Inland Empire, a region of
Southern California comprising San Bernardino and Riverside Counties.
Encompassing five objectives, this project is advancing water and waste water
supply technical training, initiating regional coalition building, and preparing
students to meet existing employer requirements for trained technicians.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are to:&lt;br/&gt;1:
Enhance and expand the Water Supply Technology (WST) curriculum to include
innovative courses that align with industry standards and provide up-to-date
technical education. &lt;br/&gt;2: Form the Inland Empire Water Consortium by
bringing together water suppliers, water agencies, and wastewater treatment
facilities to offer internships and job opportunities, and assist with providing
funding to prepare low-income students. &lt;br/&gt;3: Expand the internship
program of the college by offering at least 20 new internships. &lt;br/&gt;4:
Conduct outreach to increase the demographics of women and minority students
employed in the water and wastewater industry. &lt;br/&gt;5: Evaluate and
disseminate project outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
limited supply of water as a result of population growth, pollution, and global
warming has become not only a national, but a global issue. This project aims to
serve as a national model that can be replicated in other regions of the United
States, particularly in regions where water is becoming scarce. The WST Program
at the college has been offered for more than 30 years, and the department
estimates that more than 80% of the workforce in the water industry for the
surrounding area has been trained through the program. To meet demand, the
curriculum has been expanded from eight courses to 20 courses over the last six
years. By developing curriculum which incorporates the latest technology and
industry standards, the college is leading the way for young students and
workers seeking retraining to enter a growing job market and developing a
program that sets a standard for WST programs that can be adopted across the
nation. Through this project, students receive a two-year degree and obtain
state certifications and work experience required for employment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project is a collaborative effort
among industry, educational institutions, and government agencies. Thus far, the
project has secured support from 20 agencies whose representatives currently
serve on the Advisory Board. These agencies include the Metropolitan Water
District, the largest water supplier in southern California. The Inland Empire
Water Consortium is being built through a model that is designed to track
student program completion and employment. The expanded curriculum meets a need
for training that has been requested by industry representatives to advance the
skill sets of technicians to meet emerging industry trends, such as increasing
requests for water audits and expertise in reducing outdoor water usage. This
project is also contributing to a knowledge base of what factors and program
components best support the participation and retention of women and minorities
in the sciences. Dissemination is through a consortium Web site, a curriculum
guide, a published project evaluation, and workforce development reports.