* 1203445
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: Urgent Improvements to Housing and Accessibility of the World's Largest, Most Diverse &amp; Significant Dendrochronological Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Thomas Swetnam, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 483,918.00

The University of Arizona's Laboratory of Tree-Ring Research (LTRR) maintains
the largest and most diverse collection of tree-ring research (dendrochronology)
specimens in the world. For 75 years, the LTRR has essentially served as a "wood
herbarium", containing approximately 2,000,000 research specimens and associated
materials. Nearly half of the collection currently resides in extremely high-
risk storage, lacking even basic heating or air conditioning controls. This
project will secure the long-term safety, organization and accessibility of the
collection through re-housing to current archival standards and via the purchase
of high-density compact shelving. The shelving will be installed in a renovated
archive building, providing greatly improved access to a wealth of materials for
research, education and outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tree rings are natural
chronometers and recorders of change in the environment with which biological
life is inescapably linked. The LTRR collection is an irreplaceable source of
physical, biological and historical insights on climate change, water resources,
fire ecology, and human-environment interactions that are often otherwise
unobtainable. Physically condensing and organizing the LTRR collection will
allot space for public activities, including exhibits and hosting school field
trips. Public interaction with, education of and exposure to scientific
collections is facilitated in the form of tours and the creation of no-cost
travelling exhibits.