* 1203009
* Establishment of a Network of Cooperative Science Centers and High Schools for Training High School Students in Geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Paulinus Chigbu, University of Maryland Eastern Shore
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2015
* USD 500,000.00

The Network of Cooperative Science Centers (CSCs) and High Schools for Training
High School Students in Geosciences is a Track 2 program designed to create an
effective pipeline for recruiting high school students and preparing them for
transition through undergraduate and graduate programs to the workforce in
geosciences. The program has two major components, Outreach to High Schools, and
a 6-week's summer program. Through the outreach program, geoscience recruitment
materials are disseminated to teachers and counselors. In addition, selected
high schools are visited to make presentations to more than 500 juniors and
seniors nationwide. Students are provided information about undergraduate and
graduate degree programs in geosciences available at the more than 20
institutions that make up the four CSCs. They also receive information about the
existing opportunities for financial support, mentoring and research in
geosciences at the bachelors, masters and doctoral levels. The outreach program
helps to increase students' access to learning about Earth System Science, and
recruitment into geoscience degree programs or related sciences in the
universities. Thirteen (13) high school seniors preparing to enter college are
recruited into the 6-weeks summer geoscience bridge program each year. The
program uses an Earth System Science approach, enhances the quantitative skills
of the students, and exposes them to workforce needs and careers in geosciences.
It also creates opportunities for students to work in a culturally diverse
environment.