* 1203005
* WeatherBlur
* GEO,GEO
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Ruth Kermish-Allen, Island Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,358.00

WeatherBlur is a two-year Track 1 project that advances public earth system
science literacy, enables a dialogue between stakeholders, and promotes the
development of a future geosciences workforce. Building upon a proven model for
teacher professional development and K-8 student engagement, WeatherBlur
designs, develops, and evaluates the effectiveness of a framework for earth
science learning across the continuum from child to adult. The project centers
on the creation of a non-hierarchical, place-based, learning community model to
influence all learners' earth systems science literacy and overall science
identity. Weather Blur incorporates online and community engagement learning
methods in eight rural, natural-resource dependent coastal communities. K-8
students, teachers, parents, fishermen, and other community members from six
communities in Maine, and two communities from other coastal regions of the
United States, interact with active researchers in a learning community of 100
participants, including at least 50 students and teachers. The focus is
specifically on two STEM topic areas of strong community interest: coastal
geomorphology and historical weather and climate patterns in participants'
regions. Participants engage with each other in person and online by uploading
and sharing weather data, photos, and video, and analyzing and discussing their
results via blog, wiki, graph, and map formats. WeatherBlur leverages students'
facility with technology and community interest in a STEM topic - in this case,
weather and its impact on their lives - to bring together a diverse group of
learners in a highly interactive online learning community. Through this
learning community, scientists, teachers, grades K-8 students, parents, and
fishermen actively engage with each other and learn from one another.