* 1203410
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* David Torres, Torres, David D
* Fellowship Award
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 07/31/2014
* USD 120,000.00

Intellectual Merit: It has been theorized that the possible cause for the
persistent underachievement of American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN)
schoolchildren relative to white and even other minority groups derives from the
different and conflicting cultural milieus of the AI/AN home and the schools
AI/AN children attend. As a result, there has been a turn in recent years toward
cultural based education relative to this vulnerable population. Viewed in some
circles as a remedy to the decades-long practice of forced assimilation and
integration, the implications of cultural based education for AI/AN student
achievement have nevertheless remained unclear due to a historical lack of good
data that can be said to be representative of all AI/AN children. With the
issuance of Executive Order No. 13336 in 2004, however--which called for
identifying those cultural and linguistic practices shown to improve the
academic performance of AI/AN children, and which led to the instituting of the
National Indian Education Study (NIES) in 2005--an opportunity finally exists to
fill the gap in the literature. Utilizing NIES data, the fellow's research
exposes whether and in what context the indigenous culture orientation of AI/AN
families plays a role, positive or negative, in their children's academic
development. As a first step, the fellow highlights, by institutional control
(i.e., whether the school is administered by the U. S. Department of Education
[DOE] or by the Bureau of Indian Education[BIE]), the extent to which AI/AN
culture figures in teachers' transmission of reading and mathematics knowledge
during kindergarten through 12th grade. Given BIE schools' control by AI/AN
community leaders, as well as their residence on, or close proximity to, tribal
lands, the fellow hypothesizes a greater degree of cultural reinforcement in
these schools relative to DOE schools, which are often run by non-AI/AN people
and located away from tribal lands. As a second step, the fellow's research
answers, at the student level, the following questions: (1) To what degree does
the incorporation of tribal practices, beliefs, languages, or ways of viewing
the world into classroom work enhance or detract from reading and mathematics
achievement associated with indigenous cultural knowledge received at home?; and
(2) Do the effects of AI/AN culture based practices at school vary by
institutional control (i.e., are they the same across schools operated by DOE
and those operated by BIE?)?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
elucidation of the ways in which the differing cultures of the home and school
might influence academic outcomes will provide professionals concerned about the
academic trajectories of AI/AN communities with information to enhance classroom
practices and bring about greater racial parity in outcomes. The multiple
articles to be written and circulated at professional meetings and published in
peer-reviewed journals will be among the first scholarship generalizable to the
entire universe of AI/AN children throughout the United States. This scholarship
will be of enormous benefit not only to intellectuals and professionals
interested specifically in AI/AN educational outcomes, but also, and most
especially, to those whose primary work is within predominantly AI/AN areas or
elementary and secondary schools. Further, a finding of positive effects of
cultural congruence between the home and school should allow for the
identification of best practices for future policy implementation to close the
AI/AN achievement gap. Improving approaches to educating indigenous peoples at
the elementary and secondary levels will improve the chance of their greater
participation in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (S.T.E.M.)
and social, behavioral, and economic science (S.B.E.s) fields at the
postsecondary and postgraduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another way in which
the fellow's project impacts the broader community is its prospective
involvement of AI/AN and other minority students in aspects of the research, to
be effectuated through the Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(L.S.A.M.P.) and the Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate
(A.G.E.P.) at the host institution.