* 1203228
* RUI: Quantum Mechanical Studies of Hydrogen and Helium Interactions: Applications in Astrophysical, Ultracold, and Industrial Environments
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Robert Forrey, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 08/31/2016
* USD 230,695.00

Quantum mechanical studies of hydrogen and helium interations will be performed
with applications in astrophysical, ultracold, and industrial environments.
These environments include atom and molecule traps, surfaces of transition metal
clusters, and astrophysical environments where reliable data is needed for a
variety of microphysical processes. The intellectual merit of the research
includes first principles investigation of the interactions of hydrogen with
other atoms and molecules, the formation and dynamics of helium-containing van
der Waals molecules, and chemical reactions involving hydrogen on the surfaces
of metallic clusters. Each of these investigations will use fully quantum
mechanical methods to describe detailed interactions involving hydrogen and
helium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the research include
applications to:&lt;br/&gt;(i) Astrophysical environments such as
photodissociation regions where hydrogen molecular clouds are far from thermal
equilibrium, and primordial gas where a significantly improved theoretical
account of molecular hydrogen is needed to simulate population III star
formation,&lt;br/&gt;(ii) Ultracold environments such as buffer-gas traps where
trapped van der Waals complexes may open up new avenues of research in few-body
physics, chemical reaction dynamics, and cluster physics, and &lt;br/&gt;(iii)
Industrial environments where processes such as heterogeneous catalysis might
benefit from an atomic and molecular perspective. The broader impacts also
include the development of human resources and educational outreach activities.
Students will be given their first exposure to scientific research. General
education and outreach talks will be given that relate the research activities
with topics of interest to the public. The project is designed to integrate
research, teaching, and educational outreach and provide an excellent
opportunity for undergraduates to begin training for science and engineering
careers.