* 1203282
* Rafts as Curvature-Induced Microemulsions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Michael Schick, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 330,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education to investigate physical
mechanisms leading to the organization of lipid membranes. The idea that the
plasma membrane is not uniform but displays physical organization which leads to
functional organization is one that has attracted enormous attention. This is
due to the fact that such organization would affect a host of biologically
important processes, such as signaling, endocytosis, membrane fusion, and viral
entry, among many others. In spite of the compelling nature of the hypothesis,
and of the ever-increasing evidence, there remains skepticism concerning the
idea. The PI will investigate a mechanism that arises from the well-known
variety in lipid composition of the inner and outer leaves of the plasma
membrane. It has been hypothesized that differences in composition between the
leaves can couple to the curvature of the membrane, with unsaturated lipids
preferring regions in which the membrane bulges outward, and saturated lipids
and cholesterol preferring regions on the opposite leaf where the membrane
bulges inward. It was known that such coupling can, in principle, bring about
modulated phases, such as those displaying alternating stripes. But these phases
are not seen in biological systems. These same forces can also induce a
curvature-induced microemulsion, with droplets whose area is characterized by
the ratio of the bending modulus to the surface tension. These droplets would
form and break up dynamically. The PI will use theoretical and computational
methods to develop this idea and to enable experimentalists to test the
existence of such two-dimensional microemulsions.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education to investigate a physical
mechanism for how the molecules in cell walls organize themselves. Proteins are
the machines which carry out innumerable crucial functions in our body. Some are
found on the outside of cells, others on the inside. In general it takes many
different proteins working together to carry out some particular function. How
do proteins on one side of the cell wall communicate with one another, and how
do they communicate with proteins on the other side of the cell wall? It used to
be thought that the proteins were distributed randomly over the cell surface so
it was only by chance meetings that they found one another. And for a protein on
one side of the cell wall to be positioned near one on the opposite side, that
too was a matter of chance. More recently it has been suggested that this
picture is incorrect. Instead it has been proposed that the molecules which make
up the cell wall form distinct regions; the molecules with carbon tails that
have no double bonds, like 'saturated fats,' form small regions with the
molecule cholesterol. These regions float like rafts in a sea of molecules with
carbon tails that do have double bonds, like 'unsaturated fats.' Proteins on
either side of the cell wall are anchored to it, and these anchors can
distinguish the rafts from the sea, and prefer to be in one or the other. In
this picture, then, the distribution of proteins is not random; those that
prefer the rafts are close together as are those that prefer the sea. This is
very appealing but it leaves open one important question; why do these molecules
aggregate into rafts and sea in the first place? The PI and collaborators are
exploring the idea that undulations of the cell wall tend to organize the
molecules comprising it much as waves in the ocean affect the seaweed floating
on it, driving them apart at wave crests and pushing them together at wave
troughs.