* 1203861
* Atmospheric Inputs and the Photochemical Transformation of Brominated Flame Retardants in Arctic Surface Waters
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Yu-Ping Chin, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 12/31/2015
* USD 109,841.00

Brominated flame-retardants (BFR) are ubiquitously distributed in the
environment and capable of being transported to the arctic by long-range
processes (i.e., global distillation). The proposed research would measure BFR
concentrations in air and water, and study processes that control their fate in
the presence of dissolved organic matter (DOM) and light from surface water
bodies at the Toolik Lake long-term ecological research (LTER) station. Specific
objectives include: 1. measure BFR levels in air and water bodies at the Toolik
Lake LTER; 2. collect, isolate, and elucidate the structural and photolytic
properties of DOM from water bodies at the Toolik LTER; 3. study BFR
partitioning to DOM and assess the role of DOM composition on this process; 4.
measure the degree to which direct and indirect photolysis occurs for BFR in the
respective presence and absence of DOM using solar simulators and natural
sunlight at Toolik Lake; 5. identify the reaction products produced by the
phototransformation of BFR; and 6. elucidate reactive pathways that control the
phototransformation of BFR in the presence of DOM. This project would study a
BFR environmental pathway that is a critical link in the bioaccumulation of
these substances in the arctic food chain. It would primarily provide lab and
logistical support for a doctoral student, and would also support an
undergraduate assistant during the summer field season. The investigators plan
an active outreach program including interfacing with the LTER Schoolyard
program and ARCUS, and the graduate student would maintain a research blog.