* 1203857
* Collaborative Research: Direction and Mechanisms of Seasonal Change in Arctic Microbial Communities
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Slava Epstein, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2017
* USD 659,976.00

This research focuses on the characteristics and mechanisms of microbial
succession in the high Arctic. Empirical observations suggest that seasonal
change could be viewed as consisting of two phases, with simpler communities
gradually replaced by more complex assemblages. The researchers hypothesize that
life histories of the early colonizers include metabolic versatility and ability
to expand quickly, which leads to communities characterized more by interspecies
chemical warfare than intricate species integration. They also hypothesize that
at later stages, species develop multiple synergies, their communities become
more complex, and integrated by a signaling and regulatory network. A corollary
of these traits is that the first phase is populated with species that are
relatively easy to cultivate in pure culture, whereas species dominating at
later stages may appear ?uncultivable? in pure culture due to their dependencies
on other species. They will test these hypotheses in a study of a microbial
community in the Thule Area in Northern Greenland. This environment offers a
range of communities from simple to more complex with tractable (short) seasonal
succession and constitutes a pristine and endangered community.

Methodological challenges are one of the principal reasons that many aspects of
microbial seasonal succession remain unresolved. Instead of applying either
culture-dependent or culture-independent methodologies, this group will combine
the two so that they compensate synergistically for their respective weaknesses.
They will interrogate the microbial richness and identify a model assemblage,
followed by seasonal studies of the metagenome and metatranscriptome, with a
particular focus on two hallmarks of microbial activities: production of
antimicrobials and signaling compounds. They will cultivate >50% of the
microbial species present using an arsenal of new cultivation platforms that
depart radically from conventional cultivation and enable them to isolate
previously uncultivated species. The ability to do so is one of the keys to the
success of this project, because it will enable them to connect microbial
function to microbial species, and vice versa. For that, they will sequence
genomes of at least 150 novel previously uncultivated strains, and identify
species whose antimicrobial, signaling activities were detected by their meta-
omics approach. They will integrate the data, test the hypotheses, and infer how
to artificially manipulate the trajectory of successional change. The inferences
will be tested in direct in situ experimentation.

Intellectual merit of this study is two-fold. The first is about bringing
together in one study the culture- dependent and culture-independent approaches,
enabling us to relate microbial diversity and function in the most general
sense. The enabling technology is important for general microbial ecology
because it identifies functions expressed by the community with specific
microbial players, and deciphers the roles of individual species, spatially and
temporally. It has the potential to transform the study of arctic and other
environmental microorganisms by informing us what key species are present, what
functions they perform, and how the structure-function relationship changes over
time. Second is the application of this platform to the ecology of arctic
microorganisms, whereby they will test specific hypotheses related to the
direction and aspects of microbial seasonal succession, aiming at their
mechanistic explanation. Regardless of whether the hypotheses stand, they will
assess the importance of community-level microbial interactions that are based
on production of bioactive compounds, how these interactions change over the
course of seasonal succession, and whether trajectory of the microbial seasonal
succession can be manipulated in a predictable fashion.

This approach may become useful in human and animal microbiome research helping
establish roles of species implicated in a range of diseases; in bioremediation
efforts by explaining roles of individual species in biotransformation of
pollutants; and drug discovery since bioactive compounds are often produced in a
community setting but not in isolation. These cultivation approaches are already
used in biotechnology efforts, and are licensed to a biotech startup company.
The project will provide opportunities for undergraduate and graduate training
in a multidisciplinary setting.