* 1203509
* CSBR:   Natural History Collections:   Vital Upgrades and Databasing for The University of Hawaii Insect Museum
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Daniel Rubinoff, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 420,412.00

This work will safeguard and improve accessibility of the University of Hawaii
Insect Museum (UHIM), which contains about 250,000 insect specimens from the
Pacific Region. Infrastructure of the museum will be updated: dilapidated
cabinets, which can't keep specimens safe from pests and mold, will be replaced.
The improvements will also make space for additional specimens, since UHIM is
currently close to capacity. UHIM will join a team of museums (InvertNet) to
copy the data from the specimen labels using an efficient process in which
labels are photographed and interpreted by computer. The data from every
specimen will be available online, so that anyone can access the collection
remotely for research or education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insects are major pests
of humanity, affecting agriculture, forestry and homes, as well as being vectors
of deadly diseases. Yet some insects control pest insects and others are crucial
pollinators of both agricultural crops and wild plants, which form the basis of
natural communities. Hawaii has more invasive insects than any other state, and
has lost many of its native insect species. UHIM is over 100 years old and
houses rare specimens and unique data that allow scientists to track the
invasions and disappearances of insects over time. UHIM provides essential
information on the health of Hawaiian ecosystems, and guidelines for its
restoration.