* 1203263
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Community Context and Women's Health in India
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2013
* Samuel Stroope, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 03/31/2013
* USD 4,690.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: Community Context and Women's Health in India.

ABSTRACT This research analyzes the intersection of community context, gender,
and health in India. India has risen as a center of technological innovation and
production and is poised as a large consumer market for globally produced goods
and services. Yet, its role in the global economy partly depends on the
development and health of all its citizens. The well-being of large sectors of
India?s population has not risen in tandem with other sectors. India lags far
behind most nations in terms of gender equality in health. There are also
inequities in the health of women based on the geographic contexts in which they
live. Relatively little is understood about how attributes of geographic
contexts are linked to variations in women's health. Gender is not merely a
personal characteristic but rather an arrangement of inequality with various
dimensions.

This project examines how gendered cultural and economic practices in
communities are associated with women?s health, holding constant other key
individual, family, and community-level characteristics. It uses national data
on women drawn from community contexts located within all Indian states and
union territories, excluding Lakshadweep and Andaman and Nicobar Islands. It
will examine health outcomes using multilevel and spatial modeling techniques in
order to isolate the role of community context factors in women's health.

This research has varied broader impacts. For countries such as India, gaining a
better understanding of processes through which community contexts influence
women?s health is especially important because of the prevalence of and
variation in gender norms across local communities. This research will also have
policy implications for government and non-government initiatives to promote
health equity. Insights stemming from this research will have the potential
better equip leaders to face the practices and processes in communities that
impact the lives of girls and women. More generally, this study promises to
bring cultural and economic practices into sharper relief with regard to
researchers' understanding of health and well-being.