* 1203279
* GSA Penrose Conference on "Deformation, Fluid Flow and Mass Transfer along Convergent Margins"
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Donald Fisher, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 01/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

This project provides funding for international travel support to approximately
early-career professionals and students to attend the Penrose Conference
"Deformation, Fluid Flow and Mass Transfer along Convergent Margins" that will
be held in Il Ciocco, Italy, from March, 26-30, 2012. The conference will
explore recent developments related to deformation, fluid flow, and mass
transfer in the forearc of convergent plate boundaries and their potential
relationships to earthquake phenomena and seismogenesis. The objective of the
conference is to consolidate recent advances in the understanding of convergent
margins and to bring together researchers of different backgrounds to develop
models for forearc evolution that explains observations of geometry, structure,
deformation, and fluid flow at a variety of temporal and spatial scales.
Forearcs are also the regions where energy release occurs in great tsunamigenic
earthquakes, yet the links between earthquake-cycle deformation and longer-term
geological structure, material properties, and the fluid regime remain obscure.
The main topics at the meeting will include: (1) material balances - the
processes and rates of accretion and erosion and their influence on
seismogenesis; (2) interactions between the subducting and overriding plates
including continental slope and forearc basins; (3) wedge dynamics and links
between seismic and geologic time scales; (4) fluid flow in the forearc:
evidence from direct observations and inferences from rock microstructures and
geochemistry; and (5) the timescales of the earthquake cycle.

This conference addresses many current research topics in tectonics and related
fields. The conference affords international participants the opportunity to
share recent research results and initiate new international research
partnerships. The meeting provides an opportunity for integration of onshore and
marine observations, experiments on mechanics and fluid flow, and results of
geodynamic modeling to evaluate the relationship between these processes for
plate boundary seismogenesis and hazards of the Pacific Rim - a topic of great
concern for society as exemplified by the destructive event in northern Japan in
March, 2011. Conveners will make efforts to broaden participation through
support students and early career researchers from underrepresented groups in
the earth sciences.