* 1203464
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Clovis Mobility at the Gault site, Texas:  A Chert Provenance Study using LA-ICP-MS
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2014
* Robert Hard, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2014
* USD 19,435.00

Under the direction of Dr. Robert Hard, Mr. Charles Speer will collect data for
his doctoral dissertation. The research examines the subsistence strategies and
landscape use by early inhabitants of the New World. Although the long standing
view of the 13,000 year old Clovis culture is that its members were highly
mobile hunters who moved from kill to kill, specializing in hunting extinct
mammoth and other large mammals, mounting evidence suggests a wide array of
behavior was practiced by these groups which were dispersed across the New World
in a diverse host of environments. The classic model of describing Clovis
behavior is based on three key elements: the discovery of Clovis stone
projectile points with extinct large game, the exotic (non-local) stone with
which Clovis projectile points were made, and the rapid spread of the Clovis
cultural complex across the New World. This project will focus on determining
the source of the flint or chert used to make Clovis period projectile points at
the Gault site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over most of the course of human existence
people lived in small groups as hunters and gatherers and many scientists argue
that behaviors characteristic of the species developed and are best understood
within this context. Mr. Speer's research gains significance because it will
provide insight into the range of likely behaviors which
existed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clovis period stone tools found at the Gault
archaeological site in central Texas run counter to the traditional model. At
Gault, nearly 95% of the stone tools and 80% of all Clovis projectile points are
made from material within the immediate vicinity. As the visual aspects of the
stone are similar to others across a wide region of central Texas, a geochemical
technique is employed to determine accurate provenance. The geochemical
technique, Laser Ablation - Inductively Coupled Plasma -
Mass&lt;br/&gt;Spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS), will analyze the geochemistry of chert
toolstone used in the manufacture of projectile points found at the site. The
Gault Clovis projectile points appear to be made of the local material and not
from visually similar non-local sources. This is in direct contrast with many
Clovis sites that are dominated by projectile points derived from sources that
are hundreds of kilometers away. This research analyzes artifacts from an
important Clovis site to further understand mobility behavior and it takes
subjective postulates concerning Clovis mobility and evaluates them with
objective data.&lt;br/&gt;The project will also help to develop a highly
effective and reliable methodology for determining both intra- and inter-source
variation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This dissertation suggests that the Clovis
cultural complex was widespread across the New World but the behavior elicited
by Clovis peoples was varied and not uniform. The Gault site artifacts
demonstrate that cultural diffusion may have allowed technological aspects of
Clovis culture to spread rapidly across the New World, rather than long distance
movement in search of game. This suggests pre-Clovis populations might have
already been in place across the New World to allow for this rapid cultural
diffusion.