* 1203210
* Explore NJ: Attracting African and Hispanic American High School Students in Northeastern Jersey to Geosciences (Track 1)
* GEO,GEO
* 09/12/2011,08/31/2015
* Kirk Barrett, Manhattan College
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2015
* USD 198,896.00

Manhattan College is collaborating with Montclair State University and four
public high schools in northeastern New Jersey (Montclair H.S., Bloomfield H.S.,
NewarkTech, and Columbia H.S.) on a multi-tiered project to increase the number
of African-American and Hispanic-American high school students (grades 9-12)
that participate in high school geo-environmental and ocean science education
programs and pursue college degrees and careers in these fields. Additional
goals include increasing general student interest in, and awareness of, the
societal relevance of the geosciences and improving the geoscience content
knowledge of teachers working at these schools, through rigorous professional
development and academic-year support. The partnering high schools are high-
performing schools with significant minority populations that are already
teaching geoscience courses. The project combines a variety of articulated
activities that are intended to reinforce and build on each other to achieve the
goals of increasing interest, understanding, appreciation and pursuit of geo-
environmental/ocean sciences. Teachers participate in a professional development
workshop to learn basic Earth Science Literacy concepts that will be embodied in
later field trips and learn how to incorporate these concepts into their
curricula. Students are using field trips to visit several geo-
environmental/ocean science-related sites and performing fun, hands-on, inquiry-
based investigations of geoscience-related phenomena important to society.
Presentations by local geoscience professionals, primarily African-Americans and
Hispanic-Americans, are highlighting the career potential embodied in study of
geoscience and serving as role models. Students participate in a "citizen
scientist" water monitoring program using a water body near their school,
perform a scientific investigation using the data, and convene for a year-end
conference. In the first summer, forty students participate in a week long
summer institute, performing investigations at Montclair State's main campus and
at its "wilderness" campus of Stokes State Forest in far northwestern NJ. In the
second summer, selected students will be participating in a month-long
geoscience internship at a university, government agency, or nonprofit agency.
The project is testing the effectiveness of several different strategies to
engage/attract underrepresented youth in schools in middle-class communities,
who are already predisposed to attending college and pursuing a professional
career. It also is making comparisons of the effectiveness and feasibility of
different strategies for distinct minority student populations, as well as
investigating any differences between fully integrated high schools and nearly
100% minority schools.