* 1203438
* EAGER: Defining the function and mechanism of YUC1 in tryptophan-dependent indole-3-acetic acid metabolism
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2011,07/31/2013
* Adrian Hegeman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jill Zeilstra-Ryalls
* 07/31/2013
* USD 75,000.00

For more than 60 years the question of how plants make the growth hormone auxin
has been of major interest to plant biologists. Several issues have created
significant confusion including the fact that auxin production at the low levels
required for signaling appears to be closely linked to that of several compounds
produced in much greater quantities. Auxin is involved in many aspects of plant
growth, from early embryo development, to plant stature and form, to root
initiation, to fruit development and ripening and plant responses to light,
gravity and stress. Improving our understanding of auxin production and the
mechanisms for regulation of auxin levels, therefore, has great potential for
enhancing both our basic knowledge of these processes and our targeting of
genetics for plant improvement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers are now poised
to solve the steps for the first pathway for auxin production using a
combination of genetic and biochemical approaches. Recent genetic evidence makes
it appear that two enzymes, an aminotransferase and a flavin monooxygenase,
originally assigned to separate pathways, may together be sufficient for auxin
synthesis from tryptophan. To fully define this pathway requires demonstration
that the flavin monooxygenase can carry out the novel terminal reaction that has
precedent only in enzymes from microbes. This project will test a working
hypothesis that the most likely mechanism for the flavin monooxygenase involved
in auxin production is a combination of two activities, the oxidative
decarboxylation as shown by bacterial lactate monooxygenase and a catalytic
cycle using NADPH similar to that of a bacterial phenylacetone monooxygenase. To
date, however, no biochemical analysis of the action of the plant flavin
monooxygenase protein has been reported on the expected substrate nor is the
reaction mechanism known. It is the goal of this EAGER project to elucidate the
biochemical reaction carried out by Arabidopsis YUC flavin-monooxygenase, to
describe the reaction mechanism, and to determine if the reaction measured in
vitro can be shown to occur in vivo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;This project will support two graduate students and involve the
students in both research and scientific writing. These laboratories also serve
as a resource in plant metabolomics and to auxin researchers interested in
analysis and measurement of hormones at low abundance levels and their
metabolism in plants. These laboratories also maintain and encourage ties with
several primarily undergraduate institutions, and have been welcome hosts to
visitors who require the resources they develop.