* 1203121
* GSE/EXT - STEM Equity Pipeline 2.0
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2019
* Mimi Lufkin, National Alliance for Partnerships in Equity Education Foundatio
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 09/30/2019
* USD 2,499,505.00

Intellectual Merit: The National Alliance for Partnerships in Equity Education
Foundation proposes to increase its impact by leveraging its model extension
services project, the STEM Equity Pipeline (SEP), that has been successfully
implemented in twelve states, by expanding its suite of consulting and
professional development services and its reach to ten additional states with
the goal of increasing the number of diverse women completing science,
technology, engineering and math (STEM) programs of study at the high school and
community college level. A core strength of the SEP model is its integration
with the implementation of the Perkins Act (Perkins 2006), which funds
improvement of career and technical education (CTE) at the state and local
level, and includes an accountability measure requiring all recipients to
increase the participation and completion of underrepresented students in
nontraditional CTE programs (i.e. women in STEM). The project will apply the
Program Improvement Process for Equity in STEM (PIPE-STEM) model that
incorporates performance gap analysis, identification of root causes aligned
with research-based strategies, and evaluation to measure outcomes to sustain
change in educational systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An Extension Services Group
(ESG) of gender equity in STEM research and practice experts will provide
consulting and professional development services to state extension service
agents (SESAs) made up of education professionals that provide technical
assistance and professional development to high school and community college
educators. SESAs will be trained to provide extension services using the suite
of SEP professional development programs via: (1) a train-the-trainer institute;
(2) an annual conference where best practices will be shared; (2) professional
development webinars; (3) a Virtual Learning Community and (4) on-going
consulting. Other unique features of the model include: recruitment and vetting
process for new states, a tested organizational structure; experienced trainers,
training methods and content; a refined institutional change process; guidance
for improving data-driven decisions using Perkins data; research-based resources
on women in STEM programs of study and promising practices; and a focus on
formal education. Each of these capacities has been customized and refined for
greater effectiveness while working with staff in State Departments of Education
and local education agencies. The process is focused on systematically examining
and understanding what barriers women face to participation in STEM related
programs of study rather than jumping to conclusions and implementing a flawed
?silver bullet? solution. The process ensures that State Teams will invest time
and effort in providing consulting, professional development and technical
assistance that leads to the implementation of improvement strategies that
actually achieve measurable results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: SEP
2.0 will increase the number of states served from 12 to 22 and more than double
its reach beyond the current 2690 extension agents already trained. The STEM
Equity Pipeline's suite of professional development programs includes its
signature institutional change model, PIPE-STEM, featuring improvements based on
feedback, and two new professional development programs: Micro-messaging to
Reach and Teach Every Student, teacher training on classroom-based effective
instructional practices; and STEM Equity Counselor training, focused on
effective recruitment and career development strategies. Integral to all the SEP
professional development is the research on the intersection of gender and other
factors such as race, culture, disability, and socio-economic status and their
influence on women and girl?s access and success in STEM education and
transition to STEM careers.