* 1203185
* Travel support for students and young researchers to attend the Summer School on "Biological Complex Fluids", June, 2012, Corsica, France
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Petia Vlahovska, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 05/31/2013
* USD 10,000.00

Vlahovska&lt;br/&gt;1203185&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partial travel support will be
provided for students and young researchers to attend the international Summer
School on "Biological Complex Fluids" in Corsica, France. The school in Cargese,
Corsica (France) will meet in June, 2012, to discuss challenges in and
approaches to the modeling of flows of soft materials. The conference has a
strong interdisciplinary character involving researchers from different
disciplines (physics, engineering, applied mathematics, computer science,
biology and medical science) as well as different generations (expert senior
scientists and students). The school integrates research and teaching aimed at
training the future generations of engineers, physicists, and biologists to
effectively cooperate, which can have significant academic and technological
benefits. The intellectual merit is high. The scientific program brings together
an impressive group of speakers. 14 internationally renowned speakers (including
3 women) from US have been invited. The proposed support will help to recruit
students and young researchers from US to attend the school, which potentially
has great impact on their careers. The school will be held in a 13-day period,
with long 3 hour-lectures on the fundamentals on weekday mornings and short
45min seminar-style lectures on novel/advanced topics in the afternoons.