* 1203769
* Patchwork Barents
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2014
* Aaron Presnall, Thomas Jefferson Institute for the Study of World Politics
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 01/31/2014
* USD 172,812.00

The following EAGER supports an innovative project to create greater public
access to data and data visualization tools in order to more fully engage
scientific information about the Arctic in public discourse. The PI convincingly
argues that with global environmental change, increasing sea ice and ice sheet
melting, increased interest in natural resource development, tourism, arctic
shipping, human migration, etc. the Arctic region is increasing in importance
within critical public discourse. The researcher contends that this discourse
needs easily accessible, highly accurate data in a form that the public will
find useful. This project is a pilot application of the Jefferson Institutes
long standing Patchwork Nation data visualization tools to a critical region of
the Arctic, the Barent region of Northern Europe and Russia.

In order to construct Patchwork Barents, the researchers will assemble a Barents
data portal pooling public data and building on the existing data visualization
engines built for Patchwork Nation. In this way, the research team will generate
an embeddable Barents data map, equipped with tools for uploading new datasets
and creating visual data displays. In addition, these will be matched with
weekly reporting from representative Barents communities and two pan-Arctic
analytical posts on the Patchwork Nation main page
<http://www.patchworknation.org/>. The research team will utilize the Arctic
Social Indicators report and leverage existing efforts to compile Arctic data at
the county-equivalent (NUTS3 ? regions used by the EU?s Eurostat agency) level,
including the Community Climate Change Survey, SEARCH, AON-SI, and H3l (Humans,
Hydrology, and High Latitude NCAR data set) projects. Added to this will be
physical and social science data from other publically available sources.

The project is a unique effort to match emerging tools for popular data
visualization and community-centered data with public county-equivalent
scientific data on the Arctic. Ultimately, the aim is to empower citizens with
the tools to learn and share more about their own community and to place their
community into the context of intuitively similar and dissimilar places
nationally and across borders. This project fulfills a part of the NSF's mission
to make science data more accessible and useful to broader public audiences.