* 1203262
* Collaborative Research:  Seasonal Synergy between Bacterial Osmoprotection and Algal Production in Sea Ice
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Roy Collins, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 08/31/2016
* USD 230,503.00

The amount of primary production attributable to sea ice algae is seasonally and
quantitatively important to current arctic marine ecosystems and biogeochemical
cycles. Although light and nutrients have been studied for decades as the
determinants of ice-algal production, more complex synergistic effects between
ice algae and other microbial residents of sea ice that may foster primary
production are poorly known. Studies of sea-ice bacteria and algae, including
genomic evaluations, have revealed potential links between compounds called
compatible solutes (CS), commonly used by microbes to protect against osmotic
shock (death by cell explosion) in high-salinity surroundings, and the
availability of regenerated nitrogen within the ice. This research will test a
seasonal-synergy hypothesis whereby CS precursor compounds (like choline) that
are released by ice algae during fall freeze-up are taken up by bacteria in the
ice, converted to CS for survival in the high-salinity brines of winter sea ice,
and then metabolized for carbon, nitrogen and energy as spring temperatures
warm, salinities freshen, and the need to retain CS as osmoprotectants
diminishes. An important end product of this bacterial conversion of CS is
ammonia, increasing the within-ice availability of nitrogen to ice algae on the
verge of blooming as photosynthetically active radiation penetrates the ice.
Elements of this proposed seasonal synergy between bacteria and algae encased in
sea ice will be examined by a combination of field and laboratory approaches.
Sea-ice brines will be collected during fall freeze-up and spring-bloom periods
and tested for bacterial uptake of choline, conversion to CS, and
remineralization, using radiolabeled and stable isotope-based incubations and
spectroscopic methods. The latter will reveal the key bacterial phylotypes
responsible for a CS-based seasonal synergy within sea ice. Measurements of
temperature, salinity, pH, bacterial and viral abundances, chlorophyll pigments,
and extracellular polysaccharide substances will provide environmental and
biological context. Pure cultures of available and newly acquired (on CS- based
media) sea-ice bacteria will be examined across temperature and salinity
gradients to clarify the key processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
help to launch the faculty career of a polar early career scientist and provide
unique training opportunities to graduate and undergraduate students in the
field, in the laboratory, at the computer, and in outreach efforts in Washington
State, Alaska and Greenland. By conducting the proposed field research from the
Greenland Climate Research Center in Nuuk, Greenland, this US team will foster
international cooperation among scientists from the US, Greenland and Denmark,
adding to the outcome and continuing pan-Arctic goals of the recently completed
International Polar Year.