* 1203059
* Galaxy Evolution: Tidal Remnants, Outflows, and Inflows
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Kathleen Barger-Seim, Barger-Seim             Kathleen       A
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 07/31/2014
* USD 172,826.00

Dr. Kathleen Barger is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at the University of
Notre Dame. One of the most pressing problems in galaxy formation concerns how
gas accretion and feedback influence the evolution of galaxies. Galaxy evolution
is regulated by the ability of galaxies to accrete and retain gas to continue
star formation, but how does matter cycle in and out of galaxies? Recent
theoretical studies suggest that predominantly ionized material may infall onto
galaxies through intergalactic filaments, but it is unclear whether the gas will
evaporate in the halo before reaching the galactic disk. In contrast, feedback
from massive stars expels gas and quenches star formation by heating and
ionizing the gas. To understand outflow and inflow processes in galaxies at
greater distances, the fellow in this project will study them in the local
Universe, where they can be studied in detail.

To decipher the flows in the circumgalactic gas of the Milky Way, the fellow
will combine Wisconsin H-Alpha Mapper (WHAM) optical and Hubble Space Telescope
ultraviolet spectroscopic observations of the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC)
outflow and Magellanic Stream to test if dwarf galaxies can sustain massive
galaxy star formation and to test the origin of the gaseous structures feeding
galaxies. The Magellanic Clouds are nearby enough to exploit the power of
absorption- and emission-line spectroscopy, allowing investigators to measure
the density, temperature, metallicity, kinematics, and morphologies of the
diffuse circumgalactic gas. Through these observations the fellow will
investigate the LMC stellar outflows and the Magellanic Stream to determine
their basic physical properties, the source of their ionization, their extent
and morphology, and their fate. Establishing a new perpective of the gaseous
flows in our own Galactic environment will provide a firmer basis to understand
the implications of gas detected far from galaxies throughout the Universe.

The broader impacts of this project include a significant educational component.
The fellow will create a Professional Resource Development program for the
Physics Department at the University of Notre Dame. This program will consist of
an annual professional development seminar along with complementary workshops.
The Professional Resource Development seminar will include topics on traditional
academic and alternative career paths, networking, and job applications in
conjunction with members of the Professional Development Committee at Notre
Dame, whose membership includes the Kaneb Center for Teaching and Learning,
Writing Center, Graduate School, English for Academic Purposes, Reilly Center
for Science, among others. Each summer this program will include three workshops
on Curriculum Vitae, research statements, and cover letters and will stress the
importance of strong communication skills and tailoring documents to different
audiences. The fellow's program in the Physics Department will serve as a model
for similar professional development resources applicable across the College of
Science.