* 1203018
* A Grassroots Effort to Diversify Solar and Heliospheric Physics
* GEO,GEO
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2014
* Samaiyah Farid, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 01/31/2014
* USD 40,001.00

This planning grant is being used to develop the Helio-PROTEGEE (Physics
Research Opportunity Toward Equality using a Grassroots Education Experience)
program, which is a grassroots effort to engage talented students from diverse
backgrounds in hands-on research experiences in heliophysics topics, and to
mentor students in heliophysics so that they may be successfully placed in NSF-
REU summer research programs. The program is motivated by daunting statistics.
African-Americans are under-represented in physics at all levels, and it is
estimated that African-Americans make up only about 1% of the approximately 1200
solar, geospace and heliospheric physicists in the United States. One difficulty
of recruiting minority students to heliophysics is simple geography. Fifty-four
percent of African-American's live in the Southeast region of the United States
and 77% of Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) are in the
Southeast. The vast majority of heliophysicists, however, live and work outside
of this region. The heliophysics research groups at University of Alabama-
Huntsville and the Marshall Space Flight Center are notable exceptions. These
institutions are situated within a four-hour drive of 21 HBCUs, offering an
ideal resource for engaging diverse students in hands-on geoscience activities,
facilitating recruitment of under-represented students into the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two key techniques that have been proven to
successfully engage and retain African- American students in STEM disciplines
are mentoring and inclusion in research programs. The ultimate goal of the
Helio-PROTEGEE program is to expose a large number of under-represented students
to research opportunities in heliophysics, to cultivate sustainable connections
with faculty at the HBCU's, to develop mentor relationships with interested
students, and to recruit students for existing and on-going heliophysics summer
research programs, specifically NSF heliophysics research experience for
undergraduate (REU) programs. The planning effort underway will define
strategies for conducting meaningful outreach at 10 targeted universities in the
southeastern US and engaging interested STEM majors in introductory heliophysics
workshops. One goal of the planning effort is to develop mentoring relationships
with a fraction of the students so as to help them find REU positions and
provide them with additional background experiences in solar physics.