* 1203990
* Collaborative Research: Paleoclimate, Paleoenvironment and Other Potential Drivers of Extinction of Mammuthus primigenius , St. Paul Island, Pribilof Islands, Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2017
* Beth Shapiro, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 01/31/2017
* USD 287,846.00

This project will provide new data on the paleoclimates, paleoenviroments and
the biodiversity impacts of sea level rise on the southern edge of the Bering
Land Bridge (BLB), and is intended to facilitate a better understanding of why
woolly mammoths survived late into the mid-Holocene only in the environments of
Arctic islands of this area. Furthermore, this research will attempt to
establish the actual time of extinction of the Holocene mammoth population on
St. Paul Island, Pribilof Islands, Alaska, and apply this information to test
various proposed causal hypotheses for the extinction.

Cores from Cagaloq Lake, St. Paul, will be sampled for chironomids (aquatic
invertebrates), pollen, coprophilous fungi spores, plant macrofossils, charcoal,
ancient DNA and cryptotephras. Oxygen isotopes from the heads of chironomids
will provide an independent climate record that can be supplemented by
paleoecological analyses of the chironomid assemblages. Studies will also test
chironomid species for isotope fractionation to disentangle climate signals from
ground water effects. Terrestrial community changes will be reconstructed from
pollen, spores and plant macrofossils; and charcoal frequency will be used to
document fire events. Analysis of ancient DNA will provide data on cryptic plant
and animal species that have not been detected by traditional methods of
analysis, and can also be used to identify taxa to species.

Spores that grow on animal dung will be used as proxies for the mammoth
population size and to document the time of mammoth extinction on the island.
Ancient DNA will serve as an important cross-check by helping to resolve
specific identifications of these spores as well as providing an independent
estimate the time of extinction by the absence of mammoth DNA.

Digital elevations, bathymetric data, sea level curves, and Geographic
Information System (GIS) technology will be used to reconstruct island size from
the time of its isolation until today. A highly constrained chronology of the
Cagaloq record will be achieved by using 14 C dates and tephras. All data can be
compared temporally in order to test hypotheses for mammoth extinction.

This project will provide opportunities for two PhD students, a postdoctoral
fellow, graduate student assistant and undergraduate student. Results of the
study will be disseminated widely in peer-reviewed journals. An exhibit on the
results of the project will be prepared by the EMS Museum at Penn State
University with a web component. In addition, a special on-line, interactive
exhibit will allow participants to reconstruct the island at various sizes,
populate it with differing mammoth populations and define different climate and
environmental factors to observe how each of these components affects mammoth
extinction. The interactive exhibit will be available on the Neotoma database.
Members of the group will make presentations on the project at the Alaska
Quaternary Center in Fairbanks, which serves as a hub for promoting Alaska
Quaternary research and outreach to the public.