* 1203702
* Collaborative Research:   Field course in next-gen forest survey and monitoring in tropical China
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Charles Cannon, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2015
* USD 146,336.00

The rapid loss of biological diversity, due in large part to changes in land use
related to agriculture and development, has lent a new urgency to efforts to
document and understand patterns of biodiversity and the potential impacts of
its loss. This project will bring US graduate students, recruited nationally, to
tropical China for four weeks where they will work with Asian graduate students,
recruited from the many tropical countries in the region, to study issues of
forest management and restoration and to learn protocols for rapid biological
surveys using cutting-edge technologies. The course will be based at the
Xishuangbanna Tropical Botanical Garden, a well-established research institute
in the Chinese Academy of Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
substantially increase our knowledge of the biological diversity of the forests
of Xishuangbanna, Yunnan, China, which are home to a unique complement of
species and which are under severe pressure from expanding plantation forests.
Several experimental trials have been established to develop environmentally-
friendly mixed agro-forestry management systems and to promote the restoration
of natural forest on degraded and unproductive sites. Digital imagery, audio,
and web-based sharing technologies will be used to study forest biodiversity,
from micro- to macro-scopic scales, and environmental samples will be collected
for analysis using next-generation gene sequencing methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to the training of the next
generation of experts in the field of biodiversity and it will pioneer survey
methods based on commonly available equipment to accelerate the collection and
distribution of meaningful data about forest condition. The resulting protocols
will be freely available and actively updated and improved. The course will
focus on the development of international collaboration skills, and continued
interaction among participants will be encouraged through a 'distributed
discussion' course to be offered in the following fall. Beyond the topic of
forest restoration, the course will allow students to learn best practices for
live web-based interaction and cooperation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly supported by the Dimensions of Biodiversity program and the Office of
International Science and Engineering.