* 1203162
* Lattice Polytopes with a View Toward Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Benjamin Nill, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2015
* USD 90,407.00

The PI pursues the systematic study of lattice polytopes with an emphasis on
applications in neighboring areas, in particular, in toric geometry. The first
project focuses on conjectures and relations to algebraic geometry and geometry
of numbers that arise in the study of Ehrhart polynomials, which count the
number of lattice points in integer multiples of lattice polytopes. Recently, an
Ehrhart-theoretic invariant (the degree of the h*-polynomial) has opened up a
refined way of looking at lattice polytopes without interior lattice points. The
PI investigates the relations to other invariants such as the degree of the
A-discriminant, the spectral value or the nef value of a polarized toric variety
and explores possible generalizations beyond the realm of lattice polytopes. The
goal of the second project is to enhance our understanding of reflexive and
Gorenstein polytopes that play a crucial role in the Batyrev-Borisov
construction of families of mirror-symmetric Calabi-Yau varieties. Here, one
invariant of specific interest is the stringy E-polynomial of a Gorenstein
polytope. A significant part of this research is also concerned with obtaining
classification results in order to check conjectures and to search for
counterexamples.

The theory of lattice polytopes lies at the intersection of algebraic, convex
and discrete geometry, optimization and the geometry of numbers. The definition
of a lattice polytope is extraordinarily simple: it is the convex hull of
finitely many points in a lattice. Because of their elementary nature, these
convex-geometric objects are ubiquitous in various disguises throughout pure and
applied mathematics, and they provide fertile ground for interdisciplinary
research. Most prominently, lattice polytopes provide an explicit, combinatorial
approach to higher-dimensional algebraic varieties, called toric varieties. This
interaction has proven to be successful for algebraic geometry as well as for
polyhedral combinatorics and has unexpected applications in other areas, notably
in string theory. The PI studies open questions on lattice polytopes motivated
from these different viewpoints. The fascination of lattice polytopes lies also
in the fact that many problems can be formulated in an elementary way and are
well suited for computational approaches which makes the area attractive to
students. One component of this project is to finish writing a book on lattice
polytopes with Christian Haase and Andreas Paffenholz that will make it as easy
as possible for students to get into contact with current research topics.