* 1203212
* RAPID: U.S. Instrumentation and Data Processing of a Large-Scale Experiment on Soil-Structure Interaction of Underground Structures on the E-Defense Shake Table in Miki, Japan
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/2011,10/31/2012
* Anne Lemnitzer, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 10/31/2012
* USD 48,973.00

The structural and geotechnical performance and post-earthquake functionality of
underground systems in megacities are of great concern when located in an active
seismic region. Typically, underground systems consist of combinations of
tunnels, vertical shafts, pipeline systems, utility facilities, or
parking/shopping centers coupled via flexible or rigid connections. The large-
scale, soil-structure interaction experiment of underground structures under
dynamic loading conducted on the E-Defense shake table in Miki, Japan, in
February 2012 provides the unique opportunity to study local and global behavior
of tunnel-shaft systems installed in a laminar soil container under a series of
two-dimensional ground motions. The objective of this award is to provide
supplemental instrumentation to be installed in and around the test specimen in
the laminar soil container to measure engineering response quantities such as
the vertical distribution of dynamic horizontal pressures, lateral cyclic
displacements, axial and transverse strain distributions, and the interaction
(forces and displacements) of adjacent systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
measured data is intended to help validate and improve existing dynamic soil-
structure interaction models and assist in filling the database via a unique
large-scale test under various ground motions. Measurements will be provided
through pressure sensors, strain gauges, linear variable differential
transformer transducers, and accelerometers. Planning for this research and test
specimen has been an active collaboration between Japanese and U.S. researchers
during 2010 and 2011. The opportunity of bringing additional instrumentation for
these tests to Japan will enable valuable lessons on successfully integrating
and improving current instrumentation programs in the United States and will
further strengthen research collaboration between Japan and the United States.
The data from the supplemental instrumentation will be archived and broadly
disseminated via the George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering
(NEES) Project Warehouse (http://www.nees.org) and will be valuable for
researchers and practicing engineers in the earthquake engineering community.
This award is part of the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP).