* 1203622
* Curation and digitization of newly acquired invertebrate collections at the of the Florida Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2012,11/30/2015
* Fred Thompson, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Roland Roberts
* 11/30/2015
* USD 339,303.00

An award is made to the University of Florida to curate 33 collections of
mollusks and other marine invertebrates totaling about 65,000 specimen lots
(~400,000 specimens) of about 10,000 species. The bulk of this material consists
of donated, private, quality shell collections; the remainder is collections of
reef-associated invertebrates. Specimens will be made available to all
interested at the Florida Museum of Natural History, and associated data
(identifications, collection data, coordinates for Google Earth or other GIS
systems) will be made broadly available via the Internet. The museum will also
sponsor yearly workshops on mollusks and marine invertebrates, to engage and
empower interested public, especially "shellers" and high school biology
classes, in documenting and appreciating biodiversity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collections represent the library of life on Earth, in a
rapidly changing world. The targeted collections were assembled mostly through
the second half of the 20th century, often from habitats and populations that no
longer persist. They provide a rich record of land snails, marine mollusks and
other invertebrates from American and tropical locations, documenting
biodiversity and the changing land and seascape. Disseminating information
through the Internet and workshops will enable important scientific research and
engage the general public in better understanding and valuing the natural world.