* 1203803
* A Systematic Approach to Increase the Success Rates of Engineering and Technology Students at an Urban Community College
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Marianna Gleger, Baltimore City Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2016
* USD 861,694.00

This engineering technology (ET) project model is designed to increase the
success rates of ET students, especially underrepresented minorities and
disadvantaged veterans. The effort is supported by Morgan State University
(MSU), Capitol College, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI), Carnegie Mellon
University (CMU), Juxtopia LLC, Lockheed Martin Corporation, the AMTEK Company,
Baltimore Gas & Electric (BGE), Advanced Module Inc., NASA Goddard Center,
National Society of Black Engineers (NSBE), Career Communication Groups (CCG),
and the Maryland Center for Veterans Education and Training (MCVET). To achieve
the project goals, the ET model is increasing success rates of ET students by:
(1) implementing an Associate of Science in Electrical Engineering (ASE); (2)
setting up a state-of-the-art electrical engineering laboratory by upgrading the
existing electronics laboratory at the college; (3) developing curriculum
materials using the RPI Mobile Studio for the first two years of electrical
engineering and electronics technology courses; (4) revisiting the existing
engineering and technology curriculum at the college to ease the transition for
students moving between engineering and technology programs; (5) developing
strong, mathematics centered and ET focused advising and activities; (6)
creating a career pathway from ET programs to the MSU School of Engineering for
an engineering related baccalaureate degree, and from the ET programs to Capitol
College for a technology related baccalaureate degree; (7) providing internship
and job opportunities to ET graduates; and (8) introducing ET concepts to
underserved and disadvantaged 11th and 12th graders in the Baltimore City Public
School System (BCPSS) and veterans, and recruiting them into ET programs.

The expected outcomes of this project are to: (1) produce a nationally ready
math centered ET advising model; (2) implement a new ASE program with 50
students enrolled at the end of the project; (3) produce 10 more graduates
annually with higher GPAs in Robotics/CIS/CADD programs; (4) implement a career
pathway to MSU and Capitol College for at least 15 ET graduates; (5) provide
internship and job opportunities to 90% of the ET graduates; (6) recruit 20%
more currently enrolled students and 100% more veterans into ET programs; (7)
offer ET seminars to 1000 students annually who are enrolled in underserved high
schools and MCVET; (8) provide scholarships to selected ET students annually,
and (9) increase the success rates in targeted ET programs by an average of 20
to 25%.

The intellectual merit of the project is the development of a nationally
designed and systematic model that is increasing the success rates in ET through
innovative degree programs, systematic advising, enhanced articulations,
improved developmental math education, and reliable career pathways. To achieve
these goals, the approach is facilitating an academic collaboration among two-
year community colleges, public secondary schools, four-year colleges and
universities, various organizations, and industry.

The project is demonstrating broader impacts by first improving ET education for
a significant number of underserved and disadvantaged students. Secondly, the
project is motivating an increased number of community college students and
veterans to pursue an engineering or technology profession. Thirdly, the project
is establishing a national dissemination ready bridge model between engineering
and technology majors in urban community college settings.