* 1203021
* Collaborative Research: Diversity and Innovation for Geosciences in Texas (DIG TEXAS) - an Alliance for Earth Science Literacy
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2017
* Katherine Ellins, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 01/31/2017
* USD 340,316.00

DIG TEXAS (Diversity and Innovation for Geosciences in Texas) is an alliance
comprising earth scientists, educators and other stakeholders with a shared
vision to elevate the stature of the geosciences in Texas. With funding from
NSF's Geoscience Education program, DIG TEXAS is using cybertechnology to
promote collaboration among alliance members and support activities designed to
strengthen earth science education in Texas. The project is creating five on-
line course road maps, or blueprints, for use in high school earth science
classes. Each blueprint consists of an original scope and sequence, packaged
with links to pre-existing, exemplary learning activities and resources.
Regional teams are working to tailor the blueprints so that they address the
specific needs of the diverse student population and educators who work with
them throughout the state. The Science Education Resource Center (SERC) at
Carleton College serves as the repository for the blueprint web pages, which
also is accessible from the DIG TEXAS website. CYBER-ShARE, a Center of
Excellence at the University of Texas at El Paso, is collaborating with SERC to
create structural frameworks for organizing information in the collections.
Coherent blueprints for implementation of a 21st century earth science course
are lacking, not only in Texas, but also throughout the nation in general.
Therefore the blueprints are also expected to serve as examples of earth science
instruction in other states by demonstrating the integration of stellar teaching
resources into earth science courses.