* 1203612
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Food Procurement Practices in Low-Income Urban Neighborhoods
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2012,11/30/2014
* Gerald Shannon, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Holly Hapke
* 11/30/2014
* USD 11,943.00

This doctoral dissertation research project considers the factors that
contribute to food availability and procurement practices in inner city urban
environments. Recent research on urban food access in geography and related
fields has focused on the presence of food deserts: areas in cities where
healthy variety of non-processed foods such as fresh fruits and vegetables are
either too expensive or difficult to obtain. These studies often measure the
presence of food deserts through distance-based metrics, such as distance to the
nearest supermarket, and demographic characteristics such as socio-economic
status. Results have been used as the basis for initiatives at the local, state,
and national levels to improve food accessibility. While the research has
focused extensively on the supply of healthy foods, spatially specific data on
the food consumption practices of neighborhood residents has been largely
absent. This research project, based in the twin cities of Minneapolis/St. Paul,
takes up this issue by focusing on the range of factors influencing food
procurement practices in low-income urban neighborhoods. It utilizes a mixed-
methods approach with two main components. First, it uses a GIS based analysis
of disaggregated data on benefit disbursement and redemption from two federal
food assistance programs, the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP,
formerly known as food stamps) and the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program
for Women, Children, and Infants (WIC). The analysis of benefit usage from these
two datasets will be compared against results of a conventional neighborhood
analysis and benefit usage in areas with high numbers of program clients will be
analyzed. Second, the project will conduct an in-depth study with residents in
two case study neighborhoods utilizing GPS tracking, food diaries, and semi-
structured interviews. This section of the project will identify specific
physical, cultural, and economic constraints on residents' access to food and
the role of racial/class identities, social networks, and ethical norms in
shaping spatial food procurement practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
offers a new approach to the study of the relationship between urban residents
and their neighborhood food environments by integrating rarely used data on food
assistance programs into models of food accessibility. By adding this
information to an analysis of how and why distance matters to neighborhood
residents in their food procurement, better information will be available for
policy and planning initiatives meant to facilitate easier access to healthy
foods. This project also highlights the key role of individuals? social
positions on their decisions about where and how to get food. Rather than
assuming a largely homogenous, immobile, and passive population, as is assumed
in many research projects to date, this project focuses on the heterogeneity of
food procurement practices within low-income neighborhoods. In doing so, this
project may suggest multiple pathways by which to improve food security in these
areas, broadening the conversation about how to best define a just and fair food
system and how to measure the success of proposed interventions. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish an independent research career.