* 1203268
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Centennial Scale Human Ecodynamics at Skutustadir Iceland
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Thomas McGovern, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2014
* USD 39,990.00

This research project, will support the PhD research of doctoral student M.
Hicks under the supervision of Dr. T. McGovern. The project Centennial Scale
Human Ecodynamics at Skútustaðir will contribute to the understanding of long-
term economic and ecological practices in N. Iceland by examining the
archaeological record of a district-center farm, Skútustaðir, first settled
during Iceland's initial settlement period (871-950 CE) and occupied through to
the present. During this farm's long history, inhabitants experienced economic
consolidation, colonialism, changes in land tenure and land use in addition to
fluctuations in their natural environment including climactic change and soil
depletion. These factors interacted directly with subsistence practices
(McGovern et al. 2007, McGovern et al. 2006). Long term sites such as
Skútustaðir would have been the social and economic backbone of their regions.
Their study is crucial to generating the long term picture of settlement
history, ecological history and social history in this region though time.
Theoretical foundations of this research include Historical Ecology in
archaeology as laid out by Carole Crumley (1994) with its concern for historical
context and emphasis on long term investigations of landscapes changing through
time while dialectically influenced by human activity. The project's main method
is zooarchaeology which is particularly relevant in Iceland as the vast majority
of dietary subsistence and economic transactions were based on animal products.
The proposed field research includes the excavation of additional
zooarchaeological material (animal bones) as evidence of subsistence practices
from the middle ages to complete the chronology of this long term site. The
research proposed includes the analysis of dated samples of eggshell already
excavated- evidence of a sustainable long term tradition of egg harvesting at
Skútustaðir a tradition with social and ecological dimensions in the most
diverse waterfowl habitat on earth (Lake Mývatn). Archival work proposed will
provide a rich social context for archaeological remains.