* 1203295
* Collaborative Research: A combined proxy and model investigation of Late Holocene paleoclimate in the Horn of Africa
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Peter DeMenocal, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2015
* USD 10,098.00

This project seeks to investigate the mechanisms causing drought events in the
Horn of Africa over the last 4,500 years using a combination of proxy
measurements and modeling. Researchers from the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institute and Columbia University's Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory will
collaborate to generate the first known paleoclimate record for the region. The
project will use proxy data from a sediment core collected in the Gulf of Aden
to determine regional sea surface temperatures (Mg/Ca, TEX86) and hydroclimate
(carbon and hydrogen isotopes from plant leaf waxes) at a resolution of ~20
years. The regional sea surface temperature data will be used to drive Community
Earth System Model (CESM) simulations of key drought and pluvial events. Model
output will be compared with the proxy hydroclimate record to assess the Horn of
Africa's sensitivity to regional SSTs versus more remote (global) climate
drivers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drought history in the Horn of Africa is closely
tied to political instability, making its population particularly vulnerable to
climate change. The investigators will engage policy makers focused on this
issue through a workshop held in collaboration with the Woodrow Wilson Center's
Environmental Change and Security Program. The project will support three early-
career researchers, two of which are female with no prior NSF support, as well
as training of an undergraduate student.