* 1203580
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Characterizing Land-Management Impacts on Ecosystem Structure in the Botswana Central Kalahari
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Kelley Crews, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 03/31/2014
* USD 11,605.00

Arid and semi-arid savanna ecosystems are globally significant and are an
important element of the Earth system due to their major role in land-atmosphere
energy balance as well as carbon and nutrient cycles. They are essential
contributors to both productivity and biodiversity, especially in southern
Africa, where they support high populations of economically critical
domesticated livestock, some of the largest expanses of protected wildlife
habitats, and wildlife-based tourism. Recent changes in land-use pressure,
altered fire regimes, and climatic shifts have led to large-scale changes in the
vegetation structural and functional attributes of xeric systems, which have
important implications for both biogeochemical processes and the availability of
habitat-related key structural resources, such as solitary nesting trees,
foraging grounds, breeding zones, hiding places, and safe migration routes. This
doctoral dissertation research project will focus on the semi-arid savanna
system in the central Kalahari, Botswana, in order to examine the differential
impacts of three dominant land-management strategies (protected areas, game
ranching, and open access/cattle ranching) on ecosystem structure and function.
The doctoral student will build on field-based data collection and subsequent
analysis of areas within the Central Kalahari Game Reserve (CKGR) to extend
sampling to neighboring and similar systems outside the reserve. He will use a
bottom-up hierarchical approach to integrate field-derived vegetation
measurements with spatio-temporally coincident data from high- and medium-
resolution satellite imagery to quantify the vegetation and soil
characteristics. Estimates derived from analysis of high-resolution imagery will
be used to validate the estimates derived from spectral mixture analysis of
medium-resolution imagery across the central Kalahari. To better understand the
spatial heterogeneity of savanna systems, fractional estimates will be combined
with other topographic and spectral variables representing slope, aspect,
elevation, soil moisture and vegetative productivity) to map physiographic-
physiognomic landscape units. Fractional cover and landscape units will be
integrated and then parsed into the three land management designations to
comparatively assess their impacts on savanna ecosystem structure in the central
Kalahari.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will help to fill a
void in the scholarly literature of savanna ecology, where structure assessments
typically are conducted either remotely or in the field but rarely are
integrated into a cohesive multi-scale sampling strategy. The project will
generate both field- and satellite-derived ecosystem variables and test new
research methodologies in an understudied and remote area that is functionally
similar to savanna systems globally. Project results will be provided to
wildlife, park, and agriculture government authorities, local researchers,
ranching associations, and rural administrative district officers, thus
facilitating the integration of lessons learned at this locale into the practice
of rangeland ecology and conservation management. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research career.