* 1203323
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: Liquid Nitrogen Facilities for Biological Specimen Curation and Research at the California Academy of Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Jens Vindum, California Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Roland Roberts
* 05/31/2015
* USD 178,937.00

The project will establish a modern liquid nitrogen storage system to ensure the
long-term preservation of the tissue and genetic collections housed at the
California Academy of Sciences (CAS). This one-year project will acquire and
install new liquid nitrogen freezers, an oxygen deficiency safety monitor, and a
dry ice maker. This will be followed by the transfer of tissues and DNA
collections from -80ºC electric freezers to the new system. Liquid nitrogen
provides colder storage (-190ºc) and reduces costs and risks of electric
freezers. This new system will provide efficient, stable, and reliable long-term
storage for irreplaceable biological resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The growing
tissue and genetic collections at CAS support the global scientific community.
These genetic resources have been used in numerous studies, including studies of
biodiversity, the effects of global climate change, studies of conservation
policy and management, as well as basic scientific research. In addition, every
step of the proposed project will be documented by the CAS Science Visualization
team, who will produce a video for the "Science in Action" exhibit. This video
will be used in the museum public floor, web pages, and other institutional
resources, and it will communicate the value and importance of frozen genetic
collections.