* 1203623
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Natural Resource Governance with Indigenous Communities: Shifting Sovereignties Through Co-Management?
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2012,10/31/2014
* Kimberly TallBear, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Holly Hapke
* 10/31/2014
* USD 12,000.00

This doctoral dissertation project examines the co-management of environmental
resources between native communities in North America and state actors as a
means of recapturing and reconfiguring indigenous sovereignty claims. Natural
resource management between indigenous communities and state agencies is
characterized by a high degree of distrust and conflict over lands and
resources. Although collaborative management agreements are increasingly viewed
as a solution, co-management is often criticized as a state-driven project that
does not achieve meaningful power sharing. This project assesses the ways and
degree to which indigenous sovereignty over contested lands and resources can be
advanced through co-management agreements. The research evaluates two exemplar
cases in Pacific Northwest salmon watersheds, the Karuk Tribe in California, USA
and the Xaxli'p Indigenous Community in British Columbia, Canada, where
communities are combining ecological and cultural restoration as a primary
management goal. The project's research questions are: 1) How are community
articulations of eco-cultural restoration goals being used in co-management to
establish legitimacy for community claims to natural resources?; 2) How are
indigenous sovereignty claims shaped by co-management over time?; and 3) How
does access to land and resources shift through the co-management process for
the community and state agency? Methods include semi-structured interviews of
key participants in co-management processes; participant observation of
restoration activities; document analysis; and participatory mapping. Analysis
involves coding interviews with software and employing an access analysis
approach to compare benefits received from co-management by both communities and
state agencies, and the mechanisms by which co-managers control resources.
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) mapping and overlay analysis will help
identify similarities and differences between Karuk and agency land management
plans.

Research findings will extend knowledge of environmental governance,
particularly how co-management processes affect indigenous sovereignty struggles
over territory, as well as issues of access and control over land and resources.
Investigators also consider how indigenous communities are developing new
knowledge, as well as linking ecological and cultural restoration, to influence
natural resource management decisions on indigenous lands. In addition, a case
study comparison will provide insight into different laws and policies in Canada
and the U.S. that impact indigenous sovereignty and self-determination.
Furthermore, a more comprehensive understanding of co-management, both in terms
of possibilities and limitations, will help indigenous communities and state
agencies move beyond lawsuits over resource management conflicts. Finally,
research outputs will include practical tools for the Xaxli'p and Karuk
communities to use as they continue eco-cultural restoration activities. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a doctoral student to establish an independent research
career.