* 1203747
* GEM: Modeling Dynamics of the Radiation Belts Using Scattering Rates Computed in a Realistic Magnetic Field and Accounting for Adiabatic Effects
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2012,12/31/2016
* Yuri Shprits, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 12/31/2016
* USD 282,000.00

This project will enhance the already existing Versatile Electron Radiation Belt
(VERB) model of Earth's radiation belts to include effects that result from the
fact that the magnetic field is not a simple dipolar field. The new model will
include the effects of adiabatic variations particle fluxes as well as the
effects of magnetic local time (MLT) dependent pitch-angel and energy
scattering. The Full Diffusion Code (FDC) will be modified to compute scattering
rates in a realistic non-dipolar field for various MLT sectors and different
values of geomagnetic activity. Comparisons with observations and numerical
sensitivity experiments will significantly improve our understanding of dominant
acceleration and loss processes in the radiation belts and will provide
important tools for understanding data from several upcoming satellite missions.
Key questions that will be examined are: (1) what are the mechanisms responsible
for the acceleration of particles in the radiation belts? (2) what mechanisms
are responsible for the loss of particles from the radiation belts? (3) How does
the stretched, non-dipolar magnetic field affect resonant interactions between
magnetospheric waves and the radiation belt electrons? (4) How do pitch-angle
scattering and energy diffusion vary as a function of radial distance from the
Earth (L-shell), the magnetic local time and geomagnetic activity? (5) How does
drift-shell splitting affect the phase space density of the particles? This
comprehensive analysis will make it possible to quantify the adiabatic effects
and also compare the adiabatic changes to the non-adiabatic energization,
scattering, and radial transport.

Understanding the interactions of magnetospheric waves with the energetic
particles in the radiation belts is important for understanding and predicting
space weather phenomena. In addition to the relevance of the work to space
weather, the project is directly relevant to NSF's Geospace Environment Modeling
program. Much of the research for this project will be carried out by a graduate
student and a postdoctoral researcher. The project also has relevance to several
upcoming space missions such as NASA's Radiation Belt Storm Probe mission.