* 1203186
* Germanium Nanostructures for Efficient Silicon-Compatible Optoelectronics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Alexander Zaslavsky, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 05/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program
(EPM) in the Division of Materials Research (DMR) and the Energy, Power, and
Adaptive Systems Program (EPAS) in the Division of Electrical, Communications
and Cyber Systems (ECCS).

Technical Description: Efficient optoelectronic active materials, based on
confined germanium quantum dots and germanium/silicon quantum wires, promise
enhanced photoconversion mechanisms useful for chip-compatible photodetectors
and solar cells with broadband absorption. This project focuses on two
interrelated classes of optoelectronic materials and devices: (1) a close-packed
array of Ge quantum dots for high-efficiency photodetectors and (2) Ge/Si
heteronanowires for tandem solar cells. Materials properties of Ge quantum dots
(such as concentration, crystallinity and surface passivation) are directly
correlated to optoelectronic functionalities and optimized to improve the
photodetection speed while retaining high responsivity. The response time and
gain mechanisms are studied using time-resolved measurements as well as
theoretical modeling of charging and inter-quantum-dot hopping. For the second
class of materials and devices, the Ge/Si nanowires are grown using the vapor-
liquid-solid technique to overcome lattice mismatch limitations. The transport
and optical response of individual heteronanowires are correlated with nanowire
diameter, length, doping and composition, and are used to predict the collective
behavior of dense nanowire arrays with improved spectral coverage and reduced
reflectivity. Simulations are performed to match the short-circuit currents in
the Ge and Si sections in order to achieve enhanced photoconversion efficiency.

Non-technical Description: This research project is on light-matter interactions
in germanium-based nanostructures, including quantum dots and quantum wires.
These nanostructures combine attractive physical properties enabled by more
efficient light-matter interaction at the nanoscale. Specifically, the project
seeks to use these nanomaterials for higher-efficiency photodetectors and
broadband solar cells. The research has educational impact in and out of the
classroom at Brown University. It includes long-term collaboration between
faculty and graduate students at Brown University and scientists at the Los
Alamos National Laboratory, on nanowire growth. Undergraduates also work on
parts of the research. In addition, solar energy-based K-12 outreach activities
are expanded and local high-school students participate in laboratory summer
research.