* 1203658
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Ursula Anderson, Anderson                Ursula         S
* Fellowship Award
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 07/31/2014
* USD 120,000.00

Researchers believe that relational concepts are the basis of higher-order
cognitive skills like understanding mathematical operations and reasoning with
analogies. Well before the emergence of higher-order cognitive skills, infants
are visually exposed to pairs of objects, quantities, and numerosities between
which relations may exist while they hear words delivered from their caregivers,
television, and toys. Soon after infancy, relational thinking can contribute to
a child's success in preschool (e.g., "Bring me the bigger one" and "Use the
same one that I am using") and place a child at an advantage when they enter the
formal education system. This research project uses operant/associative methods
within an anticipatory eye movement paradigm to investigate the extent to which
processing and conceptualization of the identity-nonidentity (e.g., the brown
cube is identical to the brown cube), larger-smaller (e.g., the horse is bigger
than the cat), and more-less (e.g., one quarter is less than two dimes)
relations that exist between objects, quantities, and numerosities are affected
by linguistic and nonlinguistic factors during the first 1.5 years of life. This
project builds on previous research demonstrating that young infants are capable
of discriminating relations by charting the normal developmental course of
relational thinking and describing the role of nonlinguistic and linguistic
factors therein. The information provided by this research may be used to design
interventions that catalyze relational thinking and to delineate predicative
relationships that exist with cognitive abilities that emerge in childhood.

Intellectual Merit: Few empirical studies investigate relational thinking during
infancy even though researchers believe that relational concepts are central to
the way that humans understand the world, that conceptualizing relations is not
innate, and that the topic receives considerable attention in the nonhuman
animal literature. In addition, researchers know very little about the factors
that influence relational concept formation in humans. Is the conceptualization
of relations driven by experiencing variability in the irrelevant properties
across examples of the relation, experiencing nested comparisons within the set
of examples of the relation, hearing linguistic labels applied to examples of
the relation, or by some combination of the aforementioned? Young infants are
regularly visually exposed to objects and collections of objects while hearing
words from their caregivers, the television, and their toys. Identifying the
specific type of visual object comparisons, with or without linguistic input,
advances relational thinking during infancy may be especially important to
parents, early child educators, and the makers of educational toys. This line of
research contributes to understanding the link between categorization and
concept formation by evaluating whether the patterns that characterize the
development of categorization extend to the development of relational thinking.
Moreover, the use of active methods to index infant processing and
conceptualization enables direct comparisons to the existing data concerning the
abilities of nonverbal animals, children, and adults and sidesteps the concern
that complex conceptual understandings may not emerge when infants passively
attend to stimuli. Finally, investigating relational thinking in pre- and early-
verbal infants offers a significant opportunity to address the larger,
longstanding issues about the connections between language, concept formation,
and the representation systems that underlie numerical encoding.

Broadening Participation: As part of the initiatives to integrate research and
education, broaden dissemination to enhance scientific understanding, and
broaden the participation of underrepresented groups, students at minority-
serving postsecondary institutions and parents in the community will have
opportunities to learn about the relationship between early child education
practices and fundamental and emerging infant cognitive research through
understandable oral lectures. In addition, this project will establish an
educational partnership with a minority-serving postsecondary institution to
invite undergraduate students to receive research training in cognitive
development research.