* 1203008
* SHF: Small: Effectful Software Contracts
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Amal Ahmed, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2014
* USD 440,760.00

The long-term goals of this project are to bring the technology of software
contracts to widely-used programming languages and, through&lt;br/&gt;the use of
manifest contracts, to provide software developers with a migration path from
simply-typed code to fully functional correctness. Since computational effects
are notoriously hard to reason about and&lt;br/&gt;pervade even the simplest
realistic programs, the proposed research should have significant impact on
programmers' ability to develop&lt;br/&gt;software that is more reliable and
more secure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contracts in software establish clear
interfaces between program components. Like contracts in the legal realm, they
delineate each&lt;br/&gt;party's expectations and obligations. Such contracts
are becoming increasingly important for the regulation of modern software
systems,&lt;br/&gt;providing an expressive framework for verification and error
tracking. To be effective in a software environment, contracts must have formal
semantics and must be supported by a monitoring system that
precisely&lt;br/&gt;tracks the flow of values as they cross interfaces. To date,
however, the formal study of contracts has mostly been limited to
small&lt;br/&gt;idealized languages without computational effects, such as
reading data from or writing data to a display or file, managing
resources&lt;br/&gt;such as memory, and performing probabilistic or speculative
computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to extend the semantic
framework of software contracts to languages with various computational effects:
the&lt;br/&gt;extension is qualitative in nature and will enable the use of
contracts in new application domains. Specifically, the PIs propose&lt;br/&gt;to
add support for computational effects to the two flavors of contracts studied to
date: latent contracts, which are runtime checks&lt;br/&gt;not reflected in the
type system, and manifest contracts, where a system of precise types records the
most recent runtime check applied&lt;br/&gt;to each value. The extension of
latent contracts will be done in the context of a monadic meta language. The
extension of manifest&lt;br/&gt;contracts will make use of a variant of Hoare
Type Theory to precisely record computational effects. The PIs will also
implement prototype systems and use them to present novel applications of
software&lt;br/&gt;contracts.