* 1203834
* Squeezing Simple Molecules to Novel Conducting Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,12/31/2017
* Choong-Shik Yoo, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 12/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt; At sufficiently high pressures, all molecules are
expected to transform into metallic extended solids that can, arguably, be
considered either elemental metals or metallic alloys. Made of low Z elements
such as H, C, N, and O, these extended solids constitute a new class of highly
conductive organic polymers or molecular alloys that can exhibit metallic
conductivities and novel electronic and chemical properties. We propose a
systematic study of pressure-induced transformations of highly covalent Group
IV, V, and VI elemental molecules such as C, N2, CO2, and their chemical analogs
to novel extended solids of (A) metallic and superconducting states, (B)
charge/spin-ordered states, and (C) low-dimensional metallic states. The
proposed study will use integrated experimental capabilities to probe
crystalline structures (synchrotron x-ray diffraction), electronic structures
(inelastic x-ray Raman spectroscopy and optical reflectivity), electrical
transport properties (four-probe resistance and susceptibility), as well as
phase transitions and bonding (Raman and IR spectroscopy), at Mbar pressures (1
Mbar ~ 100 GPa = 106 atmospheres). &lt;br/&gt; The proposed research, supported
by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program will establish a new periodic
perspective on low Z molecular solids at the most fundamental level of elemental
alloys. In doing so we will explore several key scientific challenges of
extended solids under extreme conditions: (i) the relationships between
structural orders (or disorders) and electronic structures, (ii) the charge and
spin ordering processes near molecular insulator-to-metal transitions, (iii) the
nature of internal pressures in low-dimensional and/or incommensurate
structures, and (iv) the differences (or similarities) between low Z covalent
polymers and high Z metallic alloys. Addressing these challenges is not only
important in understanding the relationships of crystalline structures, electron
correlation, and functional properties, but will also have strong implications
for novel materials and technology developments at ambient
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt; The present
study will impact broad scientific disciplines including condensed matter
physics, solid-state chemistry, and materials and planetary sciences. It will
yield new and unexpected discoveries and help establish new periodic systematics
of low Z elemental solids at extreme pressures. The study will also help develop
a new class of highly conducting metallic and superconducting polymers at
ambient conditions, utilizing the concept of chemical alloys and internal
pressures. The study will augment and enhance collaborations with national
laboratories, synchrotron x-ray facilities, and other academic institutes.
Hence, the benefits will reach well beyond the immediate scope of the present
proposal. We will train graduate students, undergraduates and post-doctoral
fellows, providing significant hands-on opportunities to learn cutting-edge
experimental technologies. The present work will provide them with critical
tools needed for career development and carrying out independent research.
Finally, the proposed study will produce a variety of real-time images and
movies showing the beauty of crystal facets and elemental solids and revealing
nature's fascinating structural and morphological transformations. These will
have many uses, among them, stimulating the scientific imagination and
excitement of both K-12 and undergraduate students in this fundamental physical
science research.