* 1203166
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: How Attitudes and Practices Shape Enduring Relationships
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Orlando Patterson, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* kevin Leicht
* 06/30/2014
* USD 6,000.00

SES-1203166 Orlando Patterson Yovonne Bickerstaff Harvard University

Abstract

Doctoral Dissertation Research: How Attitudes and Practices Shape Enduring
Relationships

Social scientists have tried to identify the factors behind rising divorce rates
and delayed marriage for decades, trends even more pronounced among African
Americans than in the general population. However, far less attention has been
paid to "what works." What is distinctive about how couples in lasting
relationships? How do they conceptualize and conduct their relationships? How do
they develop attitudes and practices that facilitate enduring unions? This
dissertation addresses these questions by comparing working- and middle-class
black married couples. In doing so, the project shifts the focus towards how
interpersonal relations, support networks and resources influence durability.
The project employs interviews with approximately 70 relationship experts and
with couples, as well as observational data regarding the dynamics among couples
as they tell their relationship stories.

Broader Impacts Family stability is a topic of interest to a broad set of
stakeholders. The general public, marriage professionals (counselors), as well
as policy makers have expressed sustained interest in fostering an environment
conducive to stabilizing families. Findings from this study may inform public
debate about these factors. In addition, by focusing on strategies used by
African American couples, this study seeks to complement extant work and
contribute to our understanding of what helps relationships endure more
generally. Finally, insights from this research may enable us to formulate a
range of "best practices" that can inform counseling and policy programs
designed to foster an environment conducive to relationship longevity.