* 1203303
* Supporting Community Use of the Community Earth System Model for Polar Science
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Jennifer Kay, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 08/31/2014
* USD 100,000.00

Climate models have consistently indicated that polar regions are among the most
sensitive to perturbations in climate forcing. This has been born out in recent
years as the Arctic has undergone significant warming and unprecedented sea ice
loss. In contrast, Antarctic sea ice has experienced little consistent long-term
hemispheric change. Climate model studies suggest this is related to Southern
Ocean heat uptake and is influenced by trends in atmospheric modes of
variability. Although a basic understanding has been obtained, much remains
unknown about the complex interactions in both polar regions and the relative
role of various processes. The current generation of Earth system models have
higher resolution and incorporate new physics and capabilities. As such, they
provide increasingly powerful virtual laboratories to investigate polar climate
processes. Model improvements based on observations and process understanding
are needed to further increase the fidelity and predictive capability of earth
system model projections.

Broader impacts: The complexity and inaccessibility of existing earth system
models has long been a barrier to their widespread use. The Community Earth
System Model (CESM), which is based at the National Center for Atmospheric
Research (NCAR), is a true community model, built and used by the broad earth
science research community to understand a wide variety of processes. Unlike
other earth system modeling efforts, the CESM source code and simulation output
are made freely available to the scientific community through supported
releases. The broad research community is invited to participate in model
development, analysis, and experimental design through involvement in working
groups, including the Polar Climate Working Group (PCWG), that are open to all
participants. Enabling fruitful interactions that allow the broader research
community to be involved in the development and use of an earth system model
requires resources. This proposal will enable the use and development of CESM by
the polar science community through funding to support liaisons between the
Polar Climate Working Group and the scientific community.