* 1203600
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: Completing the rehabilitation of the orphaned USGS fossil invertebrate collection at the University of California Museum of Paleontology
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Charles Marshall, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Roland Roberts
* 05/31/2015
* USD 471,778.00

In 1997 the University of California Museum of Paleontology (UCMP) accepted
responsibility for the extensive invertebrate collection (170,000 fossils from
12,100 localities) from the United State Geological Survey (USGS), Menlo Park.
Unfortunately, the comprehensive documentation stored with the fossils was not
preserved as archival material and is deteriorating. Moreover, during the move
the collection was scrambled, many of the wooden cases damaged, and the doors
lost. In 1998, one third of the collection was integrated into UCMP's main
collection. This project will (1) re-house the remaining two thirds of the
collection in museum-grade cabinets, (2) reorganize, re-label, and digitally
capture the contents of the drawers, and (3) digitally capture and store the
documentation in archival media.

This collection, largely from the West coast of North America from the last 25
million years, is unique and irreplaceable. It has generated over 1,000
publications, including systematic and biostratigraphic studies, paleoecological
and paleoclimatic research, resource assessments, and geologic surveys. This
project will provide important curatorial experiences for graduate students and
will also engage undergraduate students in authentic research activities. The
Berkeley's Biology Scholars Program, which promotes the success of students from
economic, gender, ethnic and cultural groups historically underrepresented in
biology, will assist with undergraduate recruitment. The project will also
provide increased science awareness to a broader public audience as we make
available, both physically and digitally, this world-class paleontological
collection.