* 1203234
* GSE/RES Beyond the Deficit Model:  Gender Schemas, Computing, Preferences, and IT Careeer Choices
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Zeynep Tufekci, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 09/30/2016
* USD 497,504.00

Intellectual Merit: This mixed-method study will investigate how different
aspects of computing are embedded within masculine and feminine gender schemas,
and how this embedding interacts with students' perceptions of these aspects, as
well as with course-taking and career intentions. Computing differs from other
STEM fields in that it is associated with a pervasive everyday object which
people encounter from an early age. The computer, moreover, incorporates a
complex set of possible practices which are deeply entangled with gender
schemas. For example, interest in "looking under the hood" and approaching an
artifact as interesting per se, as if it were a toy, is associated with
masculinity in Western cultures, whereas using objects as a tool within a social
context, with attention to social rewards, is associated with femininity. This
toy vs. tool duality may manifest in computing with boys showing interest in
fixing or hacking the computer, and with girls being attracted to blogs and
social networking. It is these dualities, and the specific uses of computing
associated with them, that maintain relatively stable gender associations. While
boys and girls both use computers, the modalities of computer use that continue
to be associated with computer courses, majors and careers appear to be embedded
within a masculine cultural schema. Thus, everyday use can equalize across
genders while career-oriented attitudes and behaviors see an increasing gender
disparity. This research begins with a qualitative exploration and then develops
theoretically based, updated scales which measure how current computing
practices of middle school students are lived and gendered. These new measures
will be used in a comprehensive survey to be administered to 2,000 students in
the Howard and Prince George's County, Maryland, public schools. The study
incorporates two potentially transformative concepts: recognition of the
importance of the cultural context of computing and development of updated
measures which operationalize theoretical concepts that have not been
quantitatively explored in this context. The research also moves away from a
"deficit model" where girls' lack of enthusiasm is seen as a result of
deficiencies in girls, and, focus on why computing majors are failing to attract
girls. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The findings and the new measures
will help educators and researchers understand what girls find unattractive
about computer courses and occupations. This is important for design and
implementation of computer science curricula in high schools and for efforts to
increase inclusive practices in computing majors and professions. The findings
will also provide guidelines for designing curricula in high school that are
attractive to girls as well as boys, and for publicizing aspects of computing
jobs that are not strictly associated with masculine gender schemas. A diverse
group of undergraduate and graduate students will develop research skills and an
understanding of opportunities in higher education. UMBC's partnership with
school districts will be enhanced. Middle school students will be exposed to
research and a diverse group of researchers. Findings will be disseminated
broadly, across sociology, education and IT disciplines and to educators as well
as parents.