* 1203278
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: Developing Ericaceae research resources through collections enhancement and data integration
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Paola Pedraza, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Roland Roberts
* 02/29/2016
* USD 187,523.00

The plant family Ericaceae (4000 species) has a global distribution and includes
economically important members, such as blueberries, cranberries, and
rhododendrons. The New York Botanical Garden (NYBG) received an award to updated
species identifications, curate, refurbish with archival storage materials,
image, and database Ericaceae research specimens at both NYBG and Rutgers
University. The unique assemblage, which supports biodiversity research,
includes herbarium specimens, liquid preserved tissue, anatomical microscope
slides, wood, DNA samples, and images of living plants. Computerization upgraded
to a web framework will enable the integration and simultaneous searching of all
these collections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education is a primary intellectual
merit of this project. A doctoral student will receive two years of support
while being trained in the stewardship of an array of natural history
collections. NYBG also develops under-represented groups by training students,
interns and international collaborators. Upgrading collections infrastructure
and electronic data dissemination will facilitate collections use in educational
endeavors beyond NYBG. Using these research materials, an on-line atlas of
Ericaceae anatomy and a K-12 teachers workshop will be developed. A symposium
will educate Rutgers University biology under- and graduate-students about
NYBG's collections as a global tool for research, education, and ex situ
conservation.