* 1203332
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Private-Sector Recruitment Practices in Brazil
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2014
* Sandra Smith, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* kevin Leicht
* 03/31/2014
* USD 6,342.00

SES-1203332 Sandra Smith and Felipe Dias University of California, Berkeley

Abstract

Doctoral Dissertation Research: Private-Sector Recruitment Practices in Brazil

This study examines how perceptions affect hiring decisions. The project is
grounded in literature on the sociology of labor markets, much of which has been
conducted with a focus on hiring practices in the United States. As a case study
in point, this project examines hiring processes in corporations located in
Brazil, where hiring norms differ significantly from the US and Western Europe.
The study also examines whether the gender and race of the applicant affects
hiring decisions. The project employs an experimental design that involves
vignettes (audit study). Managers associated with selected companies in two
cities will be presented with matched resumes of applicants, who represent
distinct demographic categories but resemble each other in terms of
socioeconomic and human capital dimensions.

Broader Impacts Brazil is one of the world's largest economies and a major
trading partner of the U.S. Employers around the world continue to finetune ways
to optimize the recruitment and retention of workers. This also involves
adjudicating between qualifications related to human capital and broader company
goals, including but not limited to workforce diversity goals. Findings could be
of interest to employers, unions, and policy makers. Moreover, findings will be
of interest to scholars interested in the social construction of race and its
impact on social mobility.