* 1203500
* Career Pathways for STEM Technicians
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Daniel Hull, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 03/31/2014
* USD 74,489.00

This project addresses two problems that are facing our nation: &lt;br/&gt;o
There are not enough technicians to support continued technological innovation
or to staff the industries that could improve our country's security and
economic position in the world. &lt;br/&gt;o There are not adequate educational
opportunities for capable, struggling high school students who need - and
deserve - an opportunity to enter a rewarding career.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are tools and institutions in place to solve these
problems: &lt;br/&gt;o Associate-degree technical-education programs. Community
and technical colleges offer these programs, often developed initially with
Advanced Technological Education (ATE) program support, using curricula and
teaching materials that have been informed by the industries and employers who
want to hire technicians. They are taught by capable faculty members who have
been educated in both the content and in the strategies that can help technical
students succeed in their careers.&lt;br/&gt;o High School STEM programs and
academies. Specialized STEM programs have been formed over the past decade to
interest, attract, and cultivate students to enter postsecondary education in
preparation for careers in engineering, science, and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dilemma is this:&lt;br/&gt;o Most of the
colleges offering technician education in the new and emerging technologies do
not have an adequate number of capable students enrolling in and completing
their associate degree programs.&lt;br/&gt;o Most of the high school STEM
programs are not attracting and serving the students who have the greatest
potential to become the technicians we need. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is developing a set of papers to be distributed electronically and in a
publication that &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o Present a compelling, urgent and
factual need for creating secondary/post-secondary Career Pathways for STEM
technicians.&lt;br/&gt;o Provide information about the breadth of curricula and
AS/AAS college programs to educate STEM technicians.&lt;br/&gt;o Describe the
vision, strategies and models for extending high school STEM programs and
academies to support potential technician students.&lt;br/&gt;o Provide
information and secondary school guidance strategies for identifying and
encouraging high school students with the potential to be successful as STEM
technicians.&lt;br/&gt;o Showcase models of high school - college pipelines to
support a STEM technician programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The target audiences
for the publications are high school STEM leaders, leaders in community
colleges, and those affecting educational policy at the local, state and federal
levels. The project is coordinating and editing papers from authors with a wide
range of expertise in areas that affect technician
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has been active in developing Career
Pathways, and he has written and edited other books in this area. The project is
following up the release of the publication with selected speaking engagements
to state and national audiences, and with strategies that encourage interested
people to access the electronic form of the articles and the entire publication.
In addition, the project is collecting information on how the publication is
used and what is its effect on technician programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit lies in the information contained about STEM technician
needs, the vision and methodology to create the alternate Career Pathways and
the examples of models for creating high school pipelines for STEM technician
programs at two year colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact is the
potential changes needed to encourage and accommodate potential STEM technicians
through new Career Pathways, which should result in larger enrollments, lower
student attrition, and more well-educated technicians.