* 1203341
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Ecological Restoration's Genetic Culture: Participation and Technology in the Making of Landscapes
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Richard Schein, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2013
* USD 4,000.00

Ecological restoration is a set of scientific practices, methods, and bodies of
knowledge used to re-create functional, historical ecosystems. Practitioners
consider ecological restoration an inclusive conservation paradigm and advocate
broad public participation, but in practice, public engagement in projects can
be limited by volunteers' initial understanding of ecological theory and
restoration techniques, especially when high-tech methods are used. The Chicago
Botanic Garden's decision to employ genetic technology into its ecological
restoration efforts provide a special challenge for public participation in the
production of expert knowledge and restored landscapes. This doctoral
dissertation research project will examine the conduct of restoration projects
at the Chicago Botanic Garden in order to explores how the engagement of
restorationists with genetic technology provides different opportunities and
barriers to public participation in restoration processes. The doctoral student
will seek answers to the following questions: (1) How do botanical scientists
and restoration participants use genetic technologies to decide which plants are
included in native ecosystem restorations? (2) How do these practices define who
should use or make knowledge about native plants and their restorations? (3) How
do scientists and volunteers use genetic concepts to facilitate social
interactions during the restoration process? The student will use semi-
structured interviews and participant observation with geneticists,
restorationists, and volunteers to generate information about discontinuities
and connections between expert and citizen scientists in the restoration
process. He will identify the specific contributions of volunteers to restoring
and producing knowledge about native landscapes and assess the degree to which
the use of genetic technology affects public participation in restoration
projects, with special emphasis given to identifying what role genetic
technology plays in interactions between experts and non-experts.

This project will analyze the potential for the emerging ecological restoration
approach to include volunteers in knowledge-making practices. Because the
Chicago Botanic Garden has emerged as a model for botanical garden-led
conservation programs, its promotion of high-tech restoration practices and
commitment to public participation make it likely that citizen scientists will
have a voice in shaping future genetic restoration practices. This project will
help identify the broader participatory potential for restoration programs
through its examination of the Chicago Botanic Garden's social and scientific
experiments. The project will bring together ecologists, social scientists, and
non-experts/citizen scientists to critically reflect on the benefits and
consequences of genetic restoration practices on volunteer participation. This
research will elucidate how the public-science interface can be made more
inclusive and responsive to volunteer restorationists, their knowledge, and
their site-specific restoration visions. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career.