* 1203417
* Collaborative Research:   Glacial Retreat and the Cultural Landscape of Ice Floe Sealing at Yakutat Bay, Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2012,06/30/2022
* Aron Crowell, Smithsonian Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Erica Hill
* 06/30/2022
* USD 316,902.00

This multidisciplinary study of the ancient, historical, and contemporary
harvest of harbor seals at icefloe pupping grounds near Hubbard Glacier in
Yakutat Bay, Alaska models the reshaping of both an environment and a human
hunting system in response to Late Holocene climate change. The project joins
indigenous knowledge, language, and oral heritage with the material and
chronometric evidence of&lt;br/&gt;archaeology, geology, and paleoenvironmental
studies to document the cultural history and landscape of Yakutat Bay, where
dramatic glacial recession after C. E. 1100 attracted major concentrations of
harbor seals and opened the fiord for Sugpiaq, Eyak, Ahtna, and Tlingit
settlement. The research team proposes that a clan-based system of local and
external access rights developed around Yakutat sealing because of its economic
centrality for peoples of the eastern Gulf of Alaska; that sealing camps shifted
from the outer&lt;br/&gt;to the inner bay over time to follow the receding
glacial front; and that the locations, artifact assemblages, faunal remains, and
spatial layouts of camps express the cultural and social organization of hunting
in different eras. They hypothesize that situated knowledge of Yakutat Bay?s
human and environmental history is encoded in living oral traditions and
multilingual toponyms that richly delineate this nine-century cultural
landscape, and that oral heritage can be chronologically correlated with
archaeological and geological data. The study leads from the past to the present
day, when the continuity of sealing and of the community?s cultural and
linguistic heritage are matters of urgent local concern. The methodologies and
results of this study are highly relevant to questions of human adaptation and
resiliency in the changing North and to the challenge of building coherence
between indigenous and scientific knowledge systems.