* 1203057
* Dark Matter Halos of the Most Massive Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2012,01/31/2014
* Jeremy Murphy, Murphy                  Jeremy         D
* Fellowship Award
* Joan Schmelz
* 01/31/2014
* USD 146,996.00

Dr. Jeremy D. Murphy is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at Princeton
University. The current cosmological paradigm includes a significant and unknown
physical entity called "dark matter." While the presence of dark matter (DM) in
galaxies is well established, the extent of galaxy DM halos and the role DM
plays in galaxy formation and evolution is largely unknown. As the current
cosmological paradigm governing the hierarchical clustering of DM halos makes
specific predictions about their formation timescales and merger history, a
clear understanding of the mass of DM halos on galaxy scales is needed. In this
project the fellow will focus on directly constraining the mechanisms and
timescales of elliptical galaxy formation.

The recent discovery of quiescent, red elliptical galaxies at redshift around
z~2 raises many questions regarding the Lambda Cold Dark Matter hierarchical
picture of galaxy formation. Fortunately, galaxies leave both chemical and
kinematic clues to their formation histories. Advances in integral field
spectroscopy and dynamical modeling have begun to open the window into
understanding the DM distribution, DM central density, the stellar orbital
anisotropy and chemical abundance gradients of elliptical galaxies. In this
project the fellow will continue his study of the formation and evolution of
massive elliptical galaxies. Specifically, this project has the following aims:
(1) The fellow will use 2D stellar kinematics from VIRUS-P and orbit-based,
axisymmetric dynamical modeling to constrain the DM halo mass, the DM central
density, the stellar orbital anisotropy and stellar abundance gradients. From
this he will be able to place direct constraints on the timescales and possible
mechanisms of galaxy formation. (2) The fellow will compare mass estimates based
on stellar kinematics to other methods of estimating mass in galaxies in order
to quantify any systematics between these different methods. (3) The fellow will
bring his experience with the commissioning of the VIRUS-P spectrograph, and his
detailed study of the instrument's fiber optics, in order to successfully
install a duplicate instrument on the DuPont telescope at Las Campanas
Observatory. He will then use this instrument to expand his current galaxy
sample into the Southern Hemisphere.

The broader impacts of this project include a significant educational component.
The fellow will develop and teach a new course for the Prison Teaching
Initiative (PTI). The PTI program teaches college-credit courses to inmates at
two youth correctional facilities near Princeton University. The students can
earn a two-year degree through the program and go onto four-year colleges upon
release. The course will focus on physics and astronomy and aim to develop both
a scientific approach to problem solving and an appreciation of the practical
application of science in daily life. The large majority of evidence indicates
that improving education in a prison population is the leading cause in reducing
a return to crime upon release. The fellow will bring his previous teaching
skills and enthusiasm for science to a deserving, underrepresented population.