* 1203367
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: Uncrowding, Rehousing, and Digitization of the Insect Collection at the Denver Museum of Nature &amp; Science
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Frank Krell, Denver Museum of Nature and Science
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2016
* USD 366,594.00

An award is made to the Denver Museum of Nature &amp; Science (DMNS) to provide
cabinetry for uncrowding and re-curating the insect collection, ensuring optimum
physical accessibility and preservation, and to initiate the electronic
accessibility of the collection through populating the Museum's new database
system, KE Emu. The collection comprises more than 796,000 specimens recording
130 years of changing biodiversity in the region and the world, and since 2007,
has experienced the greatest period of growth in its 110-year history, a 728%
increase in overall size. This increase has been coupled with concurrent
research and focused collecting programs. DMNS is currently building a new
state-of-the-art collections preservation facility. Over 100,000 records will be
databased over the course of the project. Substantially improved accessibility
and visibility will increase the use of the collection for scientific and
outreach purposes. The butterfly and moth collection will be showcased,
partially uncrowded and in new cabinets, during an international lepidopterist's
conference that DMNS hosts in July 2012.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As one of the
larger natural history museums in the country with 1.4 million visitors
annually, DMNS will build on a record of providing access and opportunities to
the public to view and learn about collections (3,600+ visitors to the
entomology collection in 2011). The collection will continue to be leveraged to
enhance the Museum's exhibits, visitor programming, various educational
programs, and online venues. The Museum's large volunteer program, which unites
the public with collections and science, will help carry out project-related
tasks. A series of Scientists-in-Action satellite broadcasts that connect
curators with grades 4-12 students will highlight the collections and their
importance. Additionally, underrepresented high school students (young women and
minority students) interested in science careers will work in the entomology
collections on research and collections projects through the Museum's successful
Teen Science Scholars Program.