* 1203473
* Collaborative Research: Eurasian and Makarov basins observational network targets changes in the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2012,12/31/2021
* Vladimir Alexeev, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 12/31/2021
* USD 13,330,270.00

Responding to urgent needs for a long-term multidisciplinary observation system
for understanding rapid high-latitude climate change in the Arctic Ocean, a
Eurasian and Makarov Basin (EMB) observational network is proposed as an element
of the Arctic Observing Network (AON). Three August-September cruises, one every
two years, will be conducted, with extensive measurements along continental
margins, a boundary current conduit; cruises will cover vast areas from Svalbard
to the East Siberian Sea. The program ties together oceanographic, chemical, and
ice observations using moorings, repeated oceanographic sections, and Lagrangian
drifters to provide vital information about Arctic Ocean changes. The
overarching goal of the study as an AON element is to compile a cohesive picture
of the state and transformations of Atlantic Water (AW) in the EMB, with
particular focus on three major observational targets: (1) along-slope AW
transport by the boundary currents (2) interaction of AW branches with shelf
waters, deep basin interior and upper ocean (3) EMB indications of changes in
the upper ocean circulation. The proposed targets are broad in scope and pose a
wide range of challenges to modern high-latitude observational oceanography. The
EMB's size and location mean that this part of the Arctic Ocean is
representative of pan-arctic conditions and processes, and therefore appropriate
for long-term observing. Therefore, the project is an important element of the
pan-AON. Graduate students will be supported; female and Alaska Native students
will be encouraged to participate. Program outreach will culminate in 2013 with
a shipboard summer school. Data and products, critically-needed benchmarks for
Arctic satellite sea-ice and altimeter measurements, will be available per AON
data policy.