* 1203147
* Meeting:  3rd North American Comparative Immunology Workshop,  University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester NY, June 6-8, 2012
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Jacques Robert, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Mary Beth Saffo
* 04/30/2013
* USD 5,400.00

The goal of this workshop is to bring together established investigators and
students at graduate and post-graduate levels that have a common research
interest in fundamental and applied aspects that can be defined broadly as
comparative immunity, and that can have relevance to pathology, infectious
diseases, ecology, development, evolution, and conservation
biology.&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this workshop are to: (1) establish and
maintain an active scientific, educational and professional network among
laboratories working in the diverse areas of comparative immunology; (2) provide
better and updated information of the scientific activities of the different
laboratories; (3) connect students with potential laboratories that have
postdoctoral position available; (4) develop collaborations among various
laboratories; and (5) improve and diversify student education and training in
comparative immunology.&lt;br/&gt;The scientific program will include 30-minute
keynote presentations by selected leading investigators who will provide an
overview and update of their particular area of research. Other talks of 10-12
minutes will be selected based on abstracts and delivered by an equal number of
established investigators and trainees. To provide further opportunity for
discussion and interaction among investigators and students, a poster session
including both established investigators and students is also
planned.&lt;br/&gt;This workshop is strongly focused on education, training,
connectivity and career building for graduate and post-graduate students. To
this end, the organizers will ensure an equal number of presentations by
students and established investigators Further, the attendance will be kept
modest (50 to 70 participants), and there will be no parallel sessions. To
encourage excellence in research and presentation, an award will be given for
the best oral and the best poster presentation by a student. To enhance the
educational component of the workshop, written feedback from evaluators will be
provided for each student presenter