* 1203237
* Conference: Recent Developments in Discontinuous Galerkin Finite Element Methods for Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Yulong Xing, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 01/31/2013
* USD 21,000.00

The principal investigator (PI) and Co-PIs organize the 2012 John H. Barrett
Memorial Lectures in the University of Tennessee at Knoxville from May 9-11,
2012 (www.math.utk.edu/~xfeng/barrett/). The Barrett Lectures have been held
annually since 1972. Each year a different topic is chosen, representing the
research interests of the mathematics faculty of the University of Tennessee.
Since 1993, the lectures have consisted of three one-hour survey talks by each
of two or three leading researchers representing different themes and directions
in a single field. The topic of the 2012 Barrett Lectures is: ``Recent
Developments in Discontinuous Galerkin Finite Element Methods for Partial
Differential Equations". The main speakers of the 2012 Barrett Lectures are
Franco Brezzi of University of Pavia(Italy) and Chi-Wang Shu of Brown
University. Each of them will deliver three one-hour survey lectures on recent
developments in discontinuous Galerkin finite element methods with respective
emphases on interior penalty and local discontinuous Galerkin methods. In
addition to the main speakers, ten speakers are also invited to give one-hour
talks on topics related to one of the main lectures and on applications of
discontinuous Galerkin finite element methods to hyperbolic conservation laws
and Hamilton-Jacobi equations, convection-diffusion equations, shallow water
equations, porous media flows, elasticity, high frequency wave equations, and
materials phase transitions. Moreover, a poster session is also scheduled in the
Lectures, giving the opportunity to those who attend the meeting to present
their work in these areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Barrett Lectures are partly
funded by a grant from the University of Tennessee and have often received
additional support from the National Science Foundation. They attract wide
interest, with an audience of between 40 and 60 participants from the whole
country, in addition to faculty and students from Knoxville and the Oak Ridge
National Laboratory. They represent one of the few long standing lecture series
in mathematics in the southeastern United States. The main objective of the 2012
Barrett Lectures is to provide the participants with an exposition of modern
discontinuous Galerkin finite element methods for partial differential equations
arising from various scientific/engineering/industrial applications, through in-
depth survey lectures and informal discussions with the leading researchers in
the field. Additional goals are to foster interdisciplinary collaboration,
particularly with researchers in the domain sciences departments and in the
College of Engineering at the University of Tennessee and several other
southeastern institutions, and to generate a set of written surveys in the
subject, which the organizing committee will endeavor to have published in book
form. The fund being requested from the NSF will be spent providing partial
support towards travel and accommodation for thirty graduate students, postdocs,
and junior researchers who do not have research grants.