* 1203848
* GOALI: Defining Dynamic Morphology, Order-Disorder Transitions, and Interfaces in Gradient Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Joe Zhou, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2016
* USD 362,856.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in materials science occur when
synthesis and detailed characterization methods combine to generate new
understanding. In this GOALI project, the collaborators will use anionic
polymerization to create gradient copolymers with systematic variations in the
interfacial dimensions and co-monomer contents. A fundamental premise of the
work is that the interfacial transition zones are active components of the
overall morphological character of gradient copolymers and play a very important
role in final physical properties. The collaborative research team plans to
demonstrate that systematic tailoring of the interface in gradient copolymers,
with the same overall chemical composition, can lead to a range of final polymer
properties. New solid-state NMR experimental strategies, developed in the PI's
laboratory, will be an integral part of the project since these methods offer
the potential to detect changes in rigid and mobile fractions at the chain
level, and identify if one or both co-monomers can occupy different distinct
morphological regions. The proposed strategy offers the key benefit of providing
component-specific data for each co-monomer component in heterogeneous gradient
copolymers across wide temperature ranges. Deliberate mixed-morphology materials
will be created and analyzed to discern if physical property improvements (e.g.,
in impact strength and/or flex modulus) are possible through tailored
construction of the amorphous interfacial
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Jeffery White and his research group, in
collaboration with Chevron Phillips Chemical Company, seek to discover how to
control the creation of useful new materials made from existing macromolecules,
but in new ways. These new types of materials are called gradient copolymers,
which are created from different types of large molecules that are chemically
bonded in different sequences. The collaborators have found through preliminary
experiments that relatively small regions out of the total material synthesized,
known as the interface (since it corresponds to the transitions in the different
types of molecules bonded together), actually have a large impact on the overall
bulk behavior of the material. In an effort to find out the contribution of each
type of molecule in the mixture that gives rise to desirable or undesirable end
properties, advanced characterization experiments have been and will continue to
be developed. The unique feature of these types of experiments is that they have
the potential to specify which types of molecular structures in the overall
material have the largest impact on desirable bulk behavior. Due to the special
aspects of this collaboration between university and industrial scientists
within the State of Oklahoma, students from all levels will have the opportunity
to participate in research, and observe differences in the practice of science
and technology in academic and industrial environments. Further, these
intelligent schemes for making new materials appear suitable for eliminating the
necessary addition of environmentally deleterious additives that have caused
problems in earlier materials.