* 1203874
* The Genetic Basis of Adaptation to Climatic Stress in Siberian Indigenous Populations
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2016
* Tatiana Karafet, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 03/31/2016
* USD 295,535.00

Our species originated in Africa, and subsequently dispersed to all other
continents except Antarctica. During this dispersal, human populations were
exposed to a variety of climates that differed substantially from those in their
African homeland. Nowhere do these climatic conditions differ more dramatically
than in the far northern reaches of Siberia. Indeed, humans represent the only
primate species other than the Japanese macaque that has adapted to boreal
conditions?where temperatures remain far below freezing for more than half the
year?pointing to intense selection pressures that likely drove the enhancement
of physiological processes that generate and conserve heat. However, despite the
fact that humans have lived in cold climates for millennia, we still know very
little about how this process of adaptation occurred at the genetic level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The native populations of Siberia provide the best
opportunity to investigate the genetic basis of cold resistance given their
long-term residence in some of the coldest climates on earth. While much of
northern Europe was under ice throughout the last glacial period, Siberia
remained relatively ice free, and archaeological evidence suggests that people
inhabited this region for more than 40,000 years. The successful long-term
settlement of this area by humans undoubtedly required multiple adaptations to
deal with the extended severe cold stress, dramatic variation in photoperiod,
and limited and highly variable food resources. This project will gather genome-
wide polymorphism data from 15 populations that live across a large area of
Siberia, from regions of southern Siberia to the northernmost settlements on the
Taymyr peninsula within the Arctic Circle. Patterns of variation in these cold-
adapted populations will be compared with those from Central and East Asian
populations that live in warmer climates. Particular attention will be paid to
genomic regions containing genes that have been previously implicated in cold
adaptation, or that function in known pathways connected to energy metabolism or
cold-adapted traits. The combination of dense genetic data, wide geographic
population coverage, and several powerful methods for detecting the signatures
of natural selection will offer the most comprehensive picture of genetic
adaptation to cold in humans to date.