* 1203634
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Jorge Valdes Kroff, Valdes-Kroff            Jorge          R
* Fellowship Award
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 07/31/2014
* USD 120,000.00

Bilinguals in the presence of other known bilinguals typically engage in
codeswitching, generally described as the fluid alternation between languages in
speech. Despite popular misperceptions, codeswitching is a highly intricate
linguistic skill that is a hallmark of high levels of proficiency across a
bilingual's two languages. Yet little is known in how bilinguals successfully
integrate lexical, grammatical, and prosodic information in codeswitched
contexts. In parallel, a recent hypothesis has implicated cognitive control
(i.e. the general ability to negotiate between parallel representations) in the
mediation of conflicting representations in both linguistic and non-linguistic
domains. The current proposal works within this framework by viewing
bilingualism as a case of parallel representations across a bilingual's
languages. Codeswitching, therefore, presents a specialized linguistic situation
in which parallel representations are brought into direct competition,
particularly in comprehension. As such, the investigation of the comprehension
of codeswitched speech presents an ideal case study for further testing whether
conflicting representations incur heightened use of cognitive control.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate this issue, the current project examines
the comprehension of codeswitched speech in two studies. The first study
examines general costs to comprehension in codeswitching. The second study takes
a more fine-grained approach to investigating what kinds of linguistic cues
might influence the comprehension of codeswitched speech. By simultaneously
using both functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and eye-tracking
methodologies, the proposed studies will provide converging evidence on the
timecourse of comprehension (eye-tracking) and the role of cognitive control in
specialized brain regions implicated for the successful integration of
codeswitched speech (fMRI). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits. These
studies make significant contributions to research in how humans comprehend
multiple languages both in unilingual, i.e. one language, and dual language,
i.e. codeswitched, contexts. These studies constitute the first systematic
investigation of the comprehension of codeswitched speech simultaneously using
fMRI and eye-tracking. By investigating the role of cognitive control in
language comprehension, the proposed studies contribute to our understanding of
the claimed cognitive advantage in bilinguals. Moreover, the anticipated results
help uncover the types of linguistic cues that facilitate or delay language
comprehension, further informing current psycholinguistic models of sentence
processing. Because codeswitching is hypothesized to involve the successful
integration of competing representations across languages, these studies
directly address how humans negotiate multiple representations. Pursuing this
line of research has great implications for understanding the cognitive
mechanisms implicated in language contact and language change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. As the U.S. increasingly becomes
multilingual, studies of the linguistic skills available to bilinguals offer a
more representative account of U.S. society and expand current understanding of
language comprehension processes. The project provides training opportunities to
the Fellow and to undergraduate bilingual researchers who are members of
underrepresented groups, thus increasing diversity in STEM fields. In light of
the fact that codeswitching continues to face negative stigmas, the proposed
studies directly counter such negative stereotyping by providing empirical
support for the view that codeswitching is a highly intricate linguistic skill
requiring considerable cognitive flexibility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadening
Participation. By including bilinguals who codeswitch, these studies contribute
crucial empirical evidence while broadening representation of underrepresented
groups in scientific inquiry. The Fellow is committed to disseminating the
results through public lectures to target audiences in order to better
communicate research that directly impacts multilingual families. These lectures
are intended to increase awareness of the importance of maintaining a
multilingual society, mainly through the preservation of minority languages
spoken at home. Finally, through a series of interactive activities that allow
high school students to explore the types of experiments that language
researchers utilize, the Fellow plans to heighten and spark the interest of high
school students from underrepresented groups to pursue higher education in STEM-
related fields.