* 1203232
* GEM: Comprehensive Assessment of the Space Weather Modeling Framework for Magnetic Field Mapping
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2012,12/31/2016
* Gabor Toth, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Therese Moretto Jorgensen
* 12/31/2016
* USD 320,000.00

Global magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) models are the most self-consistent way of
mapping features from the ionosphere to the magnetosphere. However, stand-alone
MHD models cannot account for the kinetic ring current physics in the inner
magnetosphere, which strongly affects the accuracy of mapping. Coupling inner
magnetosphere models with global MHD models is an important step forward in
establishing a reliable means of mapping. Other features of MHD models, such as
anisotropic pressure can better describe some features of magnetospheric
dynamics such as magnetic reconnection and may improve mapping as well. Recent
developments of the Space Weather Modeling Framework (SWMF) include
implementation of two-way coupled inner magnetosphere models and the global MHD
model, Block Adaptive Tree Solar-wind Roe-type Upwind Scheme (BATSRUS). The
BATSRUS model has also recently been extended to incorporate more sophisticated
physics, such as anisotropic pressure, multi-species and multi-fluid. This
project will compare the simulation results with various observations and
proxies, such as the boundary between open and closed magnetic field lines, the
location of the reversal in the direction of plasma convection and the boundary
between isotropic and anisotropic pitch-angle distributions of energetic
particles. The project will investigate which model describes the observations
best under various geomagnetic conditions, and will identify what physics
associated with that model is the key to the improvement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mapping between the ionosphere and the magnetosphere is an
important but difficult problem in studying the geospace system. Uncertainty
associated with mapping prevents our understanding of fundamental physical
mechanisms that are responsible for important space weather events. The
objective of this project is to assess the weaknesses of existing mapping
techniques and determine how global simulations of the ionosphere/magnetosphere
system compare with reality in terms of mapping.