* 1203198
* Collaborative Research: GSE/EXT: Expanding the Pool Local Cooperatives for Recruiting and Retaining Women in Disciplines with Least Women
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Lucinda Sanders, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2018
* USD 936,623.00

Intellectual Merit: The University of Colorado at Boulder, in collaboration with
the University of Texas at Austin, the University of Virginia, and the
University of Washington are supporting an extension service project that is
synergistically serving the disciplines most in need of help for improving
women's representation: computer science, computer engineering, electrical
engineering, and mechanical engineering. At each of 30 institutions,
interdepartmental teams of change agents from computer science, computer
engineering, electrical engineering, and mechanical engineering departments are
being established. In each institution, high-level administrative commitment is
elicited. At each "client" institution, the interdepartmental teams recruit
cooperatively for "net new women," as opposed to raiding each other's pool of
potential majors. Each department is adopting research-based methods for
retaining undergraduate women, such as improved faculty-student interaction, and
will be held accountable for initiatives, evaluation, and reporting. Cooperative
department teams are supported and guided by a cadre of highly trained and
experienced consultants. These train their assigned interdisciplinary teams on
proven practices and methods for recruiting and retaining women. In addition,
experienced staff and external evaluators will support departments and
consultants with tracking and evaluation tools, collect and review periodic
progress reports, and recommend improvements. This extension service focuses on
reforming departmental and faculty practices in sustainable ways for long-term
improvement in their undergraduate gender balance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The project will significantly raise the number of women of all races
and ethnicities who receive bachelor's degrees in the neediest fields: computer
science, computer engineering, electrical engineering, and mechanical
engineering. Explicitly including minority-serving institutions will help to
meet national diversity goals in these areas. Use of data to identify minority
women's typical major choices will support local recruiting on each campus. The
project will bring explicit, widespread attention to the exemplar institutions
and document their approaches so that others may emulate their practices.