* 1203301
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Quantifying Climate Thresholds for High Elevation Pines Using Landscape Heterogeneity to Improve Climate Reconstructions from Tree Rings
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Andrew Bunn, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 09/30/2017
* USD 178,987.00

The goal of this project is to evaluate the effects of microclimate variations
on tree ring growth. The collaborative project includes researchers from the
University of Arizona Tree Ring Laboratory and Western Washington University.
Based on previous work, the researchers documented that tree ring growth can be
affected by climate variability passing certain thresholds related to elevation
and fine scale topography. To further analyze these thresholds, the PIs will
deploy a set of microclimate recording systems, set up to record important
physical variables, in a variety of locations in the western United States,
including the Sierra Nevada mountains, the dry mountain ranges in the Great
Basin, and the lower and central Rocky Mountains. High elevation pine trees will
be studied because they play an important role in the reconstructions of past
climate in the region using tree rings. By quantifying the effects of the
microclimates on tree ring growth, and determining the geographical extent over
which the effects are recorded by the pine trees, the investigators will attempt
to improve the paleoclimate reconstructions for the region. The revised
reconstructions will then be used to test late Holocene general circulation
model (GCM) reconstructions for the same region.

The results of this project should lead to better understanding of the recent
history of climate in the western United States and also better projections of
the future impacts of climate changes on the high elevation trees. The project
also includes undergraduate and graduate student training and research
experience.