* 1203135
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Impacts of Underemployment in the New Economy
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* David Pedulla, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 03/31/2013
* USD 9,800.00

SES-1203135&lt;br/&gt;Devah Pager and David Pedulla&lt;br/&gt;Princeton
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Doctoral
Dissertation Research: The Impact of Underemployment in the New
Economy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, a phenomenon called "precarious
work," which includes underemployment, temporary and contract employment, part-
time work, and long-term unemployment, has grown rapidly. While social
scientists have begun to address its consequences for employers and employees,
important gaps remain. This project examines two central issues. First, using
survey- and field-experimental methods, the dissertation examines the impact of
precarious employment histories on future employment patterns for individual
workers. It also examines how the effects of these employment histories differ
across demographic groups. Second, the project explores the consequences of this
shift for full-time, permanent employees in organizations that rely on such
contingent employees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The
recent economic downturn has resulted in growing rates of under- and
unemployment. Findings from this research may improve our understanding of
sectoral and economic change as well as growing income inequality in the U.S.
Findings from this research may be of interest to the general public as well as
policy efforts designed to create jobs, both permanent and temporary. Findings
may also be of interest to employers, for whom downsizing and hiring strategies
carry both known and unknown opportunity costs.