* 1203476
* Winter School and Workshop on spin physics and topological effects in cold atoms, condensed matter, and beyond
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/2011,10/31/2012
* Jairo Sinova, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 10/31/2012
* USD 7,000.00

This award provides support for the Winter School and Workshop on Spin Physics
and Topological Effects in Cold Atoms, Condensed Matter, and Beyond. The
school/workshop will be held at the Mitchell Institute for Fundamental Physics
and Astronomy in College Station, Texas from December 12th to the 17th, 2011.
The main ojective is to bring together both experts and younger researchers in
the areas of condensed matter and cold atom physics, to focus on spin and
topological effects in materials and cold atom systems. These have become
important themes of modern research in both fields. The school/workshop will
facilitate the exchange of ideas and cross collaborations.

In condensed matter the spin of electrons plays a crucial role in the
understanding of diverse phenomena and phases. The study of how to manipulate
and control spin has led to the notion of spintronics, a new paradigm in
electronic device technology. The link of electron spin to the topology of the
band-structure of materials, through spin-orbit coupling, has given rise to the
discovery of new phases of matter and other phenomena such as spin Hall Effect
and topological insulators.

Cold atoms, which can be trapped and manipulated, can serve as simulators of
models for strongly interacting electrons in materials without disorder and
other complicating effects that occur for electrons in materials. Cold atom
systems have gone beyond recreating simple well controlled systems whose
outcomes are expected and mimic large coherent atomic physics, to a new level in
which new states of matter and emergent phenomena can be tested and fundamental
questions of many body interacting systems can be addressed.

This award provides support to enable the attendance of young researchers such
as students, post-docs and junior faculty without external funding. The PI will
actively seek to recruit members of underrepresented groups to participate in
the workshop.

The goal of this workshop/school is to bring together leading experts on
spintronics and spin-related phenomena in conventional condensed-matter and on
cold atoms to stimulate cross-fertilization of these fields.

Topics of the workshop/school include: spin and anomalous Hall effect; spin
transfer, spin pumping, and current-driven domain wall motion; cold atoms as
simulators for quantum magnetism; spin orbit coupling in cold-atom systems;
spin-imbalance in cold Fermi gases; pseudospin physics in graphene and
semiconductor bilayers; and topological insulators.