* 1203945
* Interpretation of Arctic North Slope Permafrost Borehole Thermal Evolution in Light of Spatial and Temporal Variation in Surface Temperature Fields
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2012,10/31/2015
* Robert Anderson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 10/31/2015
* USD 91,444.00

Permafrost is ground that has remained below 0°C for more than two years. It has
the greatest areal extent of any component of the cryosphere in the Northern
Hemisphere. Feedbacks between permafrost, the hydrologic cycle, and the
atmosphere are key components of the Arctic system. As the health of permafrost
is directly dependent upon temperature, the thermal state of permafrost is one
of the key signals of climate change. In addition, the thickness, distribution
and temperature of permafrost influences both ecology and engineering in the
Arctic. Between the atmosphere and the top of the permafrost is the active
layer, which freezes and thaws on an annual basis. This active layer translates
the climate signal at the Earth?s surface into heat flow into or out of the
underlying conductive permafrost. The heat flux at the base of the active layer
can be determined from profiles of temperature within the active layer, based on
well-known physics of conduction.

The goal in this project is to identify both spatial and temporal patterns of
change in the permafrost of Alaska?s Arctic North Slope, and the critical
processes that govern these patterns. Temperature profiles documented in the
1970s from abandoned exploratory boreholes suggested that the permafrost had
warmed significantly to depths of many tens of meters, in a pattern that could
be best explained by a 2-4°C surface warming over the prior half century. Since
then, an array of 21 boreholes, spanning the National Petroleum Reserve-Alaska
(NPR-A), has been repeatedly re-logged by USGS researchers, providing a record
of dramatic change. The simplest interpretation of these profiles suggests yet
more rapid increases in surface temperature, with a change of 3°C/decade
occurring in the 1990s. The surface meteorology and active layer thermal
structure has simultaneously been documented in an array of automated surface
stations that span the region, and have been maintained for periods ranging from
one to two decades. Nine of these surface stations are co-located with deep
boreholes; all are embedded in international efforts to monitor the thermal
state of the globe?s permafrost. The USGS network represents both the largest
array of deep boreholes in the world used for monitoring the thermal state of
the permafrost, and the densest array of surface stations in the global network.

The investigators will integrate the observations of temperature profiles
collected periodically from the deep boreholes, and 1-2 hourly observations of
near surface meteorology and near surface soil temperature, to constrain the
spatial and temporal record of the energy going into the permafrost. It will
also extract the cleanest climate signal possible from the borehole measurements
over the measurement interval (1970s onward) with the aim of answering questions
about the thermal state of the landscape and the processes responsible for its
evolution. To accomplish these goals the PI will first work with USGS colleagues
to finalize quality control of their observations (preliminary data available
at: http://data.usgs.gov/climateMonitoring/region/ show?region=alaska). He will
then develop numerical models that predict the thermal disturbance from site-
specific effects (e.g., length of time drilling, presence of lakes). Finally,
using the ?cleanest? climate signal of warming and heat flow into the
permafrost, the team will analyze the spatial and temporal pattern of this
signal.

Results will be available through both the scientific literature, and the
Community Surface Dynamics Modeling System (CSDMS,
http://csdms.colorado.edu/wiki/Main_Page) Educational repository. We will
develop interactive models, animations, and classroom exercises based on this
dataset, modeling effort, and final analysis.