* 1203716
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: How Internet Engagement Shapes Social Movement Organizational Dynamics
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Kim Voss, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 06/30/2013
* USD 7,980.00

SES-1203716 Kim Voss Jen Schradie University of California, Berkeley

Abstract

Doctoral Dissertation Research: How Internet Engagement Shapes Social Movement
Organizational Dynamics

How is the digital age affecting democratic practices within social movement
organizations (SMOs)? The "iron law" of oligarchy (Michels) poses that all
organizations eventually become more centralized and hierarchical. In contrast,
scholars of online activism have argued that the Internet allows for less
hierarchical, and implicitly more democratic, organizations to emerge. This
dissertation compares existing SMOs which all target the same issue but have
varying levels of online engagement. The project is grounded in literature on
social movements, organizations, and new media. The methodology includes
interviews, observations, and digital content analysis. The central hypotheses
are that (1) digital engagement both overcomes and exacerbates iron law dynamics
at the organizational level, and (2) this effect is moderated by the social
class and political ideology of the SMOs.

Broader Impact Findings from this research are intended to deepen our
understanding of the relationship between democracy and technology. Especially
given the increasingly visible role of new media in shaping political movements
around the world, findings from this study may be of interest to the general
public, as well as policy makers and governments. Findings may also inform
policy efforts that regulate Internet access around the world.