* 1203973
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Tracking Long-Term Glacial-Interglacial Wind Pattern Variability in Central Asia Using Geochemical Analysis of Aerosol Derived Detritus
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* George Gehrels, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2015
* USD 200,976.00

This is a project to reconstruct the position of the winds, the patterns of the
circulation and the source regions for the dust in central and eastern Asia
during the Quaternary, the last 2.5 million years. The researchers will employ a
novel technique of "fingerprinting" the chemical composition of the dust found
in wind-derived sediments as well as in a variety of potential upstream source
regions. The chemical characterization will be made using laser ablation mass
spectrometry and the measurements will include U/Pb dating, trace metal
measurements, and Hf (hafnium) isotope variability to determine source regions
for the dust. The approach - using laser ablation mass spectrometry on
individual zircon grains - is likely to provide unprecedented chemical
information about the minerals and the rapid rate of sample analysis will
produce strong a strong statistical basis for evaluating changes in grain
chemistry and source region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include:
1) application of a novel, new approach for characterizing the chemistry of the
dust grains; 2) support for graduate students and undergraduates at two
universities to participate in the research; 3) support for a new researcher
embarking on an academic career; and 4) a strong element of international
collaboration between the Institute of Tibetan Research in China and two
universities in the United States.