* 1203555
* EAGER: Impact of nanoparticles containing rare earth elements onto different bacterial communities
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Vinka Craver, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 02/28/2014
* USD 49,704.00

1203555-Craver&lt;br/&gt;There is much current interest in rare earth elements
(REE) as a result of their critical uses in industrial and military applications
in products such as biomedical instrumentation, green energy products, and .
However, there is little information on their environment, health, or safety
impacts, particularly as nanomaterials. This work will begin development of
protocols to examine possible harmful effects of these nanomaterials and pave
the way for a broader examination of this class of
nanomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will (i) establish reliable analytical techniques and experimental
methodologies, (ii) assess the magnitude of the impact of REE nanoparticles
(nREE) to different populations of microorganisms, and (iii) generate
preliminary data for further work. Cerium and Dysprosium nanoparticles will be
characterized and examined with respect to their impact on E. coli bacteria.
Ceria impacts have been well-studied and will be used as a control, while the
effects of dysprosium nanomaterials are unknown. Effects on cells such as
viability, membrane permeation, cell growth, respiration, compartmentalization
within the cells, effects of different media chemistries will be examined.
Methods developed in this research will provide both new information about the
impact of this rare earth and the means of examining other materials in the same
class. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
study will provide fundamental data regarding the potential toxicity of nREEs
and REE ions released from these nanoparticles and nanoproducts.
Additionally,information regarding the fate of these materials in a variety of
natural water conditions will be evaluated. This information will help to
understand the impact of the materials once released into the environment.
Graduate and undergraduate students will work on this research including 2
Hispanic students. The work will be incorporated into the PIs courses and the
results disseminated through scientific and public media.