* 1203182
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSE: Software for integral equation solvers on manycore and heterogeneous architectures
* CSE,OAC
* 08/18/2012,06/30/2013
* George Biros, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Thomas F. Russell
* 06/30/2013
* USD 250,000.00

We propose to develop and deploy mathematical software for boundary-value
problems in three-dimensional complex geometries. The algorithms in the library
will be based on integral equation formulations. The library will be designed to
scale on novel computing platforms that comprise special accelerators and
manycore architectures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integral equations can be used to
conduct simulations on many problems in science and engineering with significant
societal impact. Three example applications on which the proposed simulation
technologies will have an impact in this project are microfluidic chips,
biomolecular electrostatics, and plasma physics. First, microfluidic chips are
submillimeter-sized devices used for medical diagnosis and drug design.
Optimizing the function of such devices at low cost requires efficient computer
simulation tools, such as the ones we propose to develop. Second, understanding
the structure and function of biomolecules such as DNA and proteins is crucial
in biotechnology. The proposed technologies can be used to resolve bimolecular
electrostatic interactions. Third, plasma physics, which is related to fusion
nuclear reactors, includes electrostatic interactions in complex geometries, and
the proposed work will enable large-scale three-dimensional simulations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key features of the proposed software are: (1)
parallel fast multipole methods, (2) efficient geometric modeling techniques for
complex geometries, (3) simple library interfaces that allow use of the proposed
software by non-experts, and (4) scalability on heterogeneous
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Along with our research activities, an
educational and dissemination program will be designed to communicate the
results of this work to students and researchers. Several postdoctoral,
graduate, and undergraduate students will be involved with the project.
Additional educational activities will include research experiences for
undergraduates, leveraging ongoing programs such as NSF REUs. We will encourage
participation by women, minorities, and underrepresented groups.