* 1203714
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Local Political Context and Immigrant Incorporation Strategies
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Howard Winant, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 03/31/2014
* USD 6,267.00

SES-1203714 Howard Winant and Samuel Prieto University of California, Santa
Barbara

Abstract

Doctoral Dissertation Research: Local Political Context and Immigrant
Incorporation Strategies

In recent years, states and local governments have begun to implement policies
designed to address federal immigration mandates, ranging from attempts to
shield immigrants to collaboration with federal agents. In addition, local
regulations have affected e.g., immigrant access to housing, social services,
and driver?s licenses. In other words, the local political context plays a major
role in shaping civic participation on the part of immigrant communities.
Comparing two cities in one California county that pursue notably different
strategies, this dissertation project asks: How do these different local
political environments shape the ways in which immigrants are incorporated into
the wider community? The project draws on 50 interviews, as well as extensive
on-site observation, to assess the degree to which the local political context
shape the strategies of immigrants to participate in local civic life. The
political context as defined here includes factors related to electoral
politics, the presence and field of community organizations, law enforcement
practices, and the choices made by immigrants themselves.

Broader Impacts Immigration policy is a topic of considerable public interest,
as are reform efforts aimed at ensuring the successful social and political
integration of immigrants. Findings from this research may be of interest to
community organizations and law enforcement. Findings may permit the formulation
of a set of ?best practices? of interest to policy makers and law enforcement
agencies at local, state, and federal levels.