* 1203183
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Reproduction of Vulnerability in Santa Fe, Argentina
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2012,10/31/2014
* Jesse Ribot, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Holly Hapke
* 10/31/2014
* USD 12,000.00

This doctoral dissertation research project examines the vulnerability of urban
populations to hazards. As one of the most important additions to social science
research on climate change in the last three decades, vulnerability studies have
enriched the understanding of the factors that predispose people to climate-
related risk. Yet, earlier engineering-based analyses of hazards still guide
contemporary policy and practice, while the social causes are consistently
overlooked. This project is a case study of Santa Fe, Argentina, a city ravaged
by consecutive floods over the last decade, to analyze how social, political,
and economic factors at multiple scales interact to reproduce vulnerability. Due
to a legacy of hydraulic works, government officials and residents fail to
question engineering-based responses (i.e. technical fixes) to floods and flood
risk, allowing them to become deeply embedded in, rather than autonomous from,
the local political landscape. In contrast to the development literature that
often characterizes policy as a government imposition on local people, this
dissertation project examines how governmental schemes work in conjunction with
and through the practices and desires of local populations. By conceptualizing
clientelism as both an adaptive response of the urban poor to maintain their
livelihoods as well as an outcome of dynamic political-economic processes, this
research will show how clientelism placates the urban poor's everyday problems,
while deepening the root causes of their vulnerability. The project research
questions are: 1) How has the conventional framing of hazards come to dominate
and shape practice in Santa Fe?; and 2) How do local political actors and
residents become complicit in sanctioning engineering fixes that emerge from
this framing? In addition to surveys and mapping techniques, in-depth interviews
with key informants, government officials, and local residents will provide data
on how different actors influence political decisions related to floods and
flood risk; who is made less vulnerable by those decisions; and how those
decisions affect the urban poor's access to resources in political and social
institutions. The findings from this project will help illuminate different
types of human adaptive responses to climate-related change, particularly in
areas persistently at risk of hazards. The investigators expect to demonstrate
the complex and multiscalar interplay between the social, political and economic
processes that shape how hazards affect people and the institutions that
facilitate maladaptation by rendering risk technical.

Over the coming decades, national governments and international development
agencies will invest billions of dollars to support climate change efforts. Thus
far, climate change negotiations have mostly focused on mitigation. But as the
political repercussions of the 2006 Stern Review on the Economics of Climate
Change and the 2007 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's 4th Assessment
Report demonstrated, the challenge of designing effective policies to protect
vulnerable people remain. Responding to the call for rigorous social science
research on climate change, the results of this project will serve to fill
theoretical and practical gaps in the understanding of the social dimensions of
vulnerability as well as adaptive responses to climate-related hazards. In
addition, research results will help identify ways that governments and
international development agencies can develop more robust and politically
feasible policies to protect vulnerable groups. This study of maladaptation aims
to help policy makers better understand the everyday processes that produce
climate-related vulnerabilities in order to identify pathways towards more
sustainable policy responses. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish an independent research career.