* 1203035
* From Classrooms to  Geosciences Careers: Developing, Testing and Disseminating a High School Module on Modeling Water in Urban Environments
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Steven Gordon, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2015
* USD 149,638.00

"From Classrooms to Geoscience Careers: Developing, Testing and Disseminating a
High School Module on Modeling Water in Urban Environments" is a Track 1 project
aimed at developing resources to increase interest in geoscience careers for
high school students. Ohio State University is undertaking activities to
develop, implement, test, evaluate, and disseminate a module to be used in high
school classrooms that promotes geoscience careers by allowing students to
engage with mathematical (numerical) models to investigate local problems in
hydrology. Though it is being tested locally, the module includes hands-on
activities that can be deployed anywhere it rains. A sequence of modeling
exercises of increasing complexity are being used in the classroom environment.
The exercises culminate in a project in which students make a design decision as
a result of land use change, viz. adapting to development. Training in using the
module is being offered as an incentivized professional development workshop to
the teachers in the partnering institution, the Metro School. After training,
teachers will implement the module in their classrooms during the subsequent
school year. OSU is evaluating the impact of this workshop, which helps STEM
teachers meet standards outlined in the National Science Education Standards, as
well as stated goals for several scientific literacies and Chapter 11 on models
in the Common Core State Standards Initiative for Mathematics.