* 1203017
* Solving the Puzzle of the Galactic Bar
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Gail Zasowski, Zasowski                Gail
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2015
* USD 267,000.00

Dr. Gail Zasowski is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out a program of research and education at The Ohio State
University (OSU). One of the greatest unresolved puzzles of our Milky Way Galaxy
(MW) is the nature of the long central bar: its structure, dynamics, and stellar
chemical composition. The bar is expected to have a significant impact on mass
and abundance distributions in the inner Galaxy, which are used to characterize
the MW's global properties and their relation to those of other galaxies. This
characterization is crucial for understanding not only the MW but also general
galactic evolution because the proximity and accessibility of the MW makes it
the most powerful resource that investigators have to develop models of galaxy
formation and aging. Unfortunately, a thorough understanding of the MW's
fundamental properties has been precluded as its inner regions, where most of
the stellar mass is located, are behind the thick dust of the midplane. New
infrared (IR) data from multiple photometric and spectroscopic surveys are
providing a way to probe these inner regions at a level never before possible.
The fellow plans a comprehensive analysis of the inner MW that focuses on the
spatial, dynamical, and chemical properties of the influential but poorly-
understood long bar. This project will take advantage of the unprecedented
availability of both photometric and spectroscopic infrared observations of the
inner MW midplane, including unique high resolution IR spectra from the Sloan
Digital Sky Survey III's Apache Point Observatory Galactic Evolution Experiment
(APOGEE).

The fellow will combine near- and mid-IR photometry to produce an extinction-
corrected catalogue of stars spanning the long bar and outer bulge, and she will
use this catalogue to make the first stellar density map of these regions that
is capable of measuring the long bar's position, axial ratios, and structural
coherence. She will collect radial velocities with APOGEE for a large sample of
red clump (RC) giants in the long bar and compare them to kinematical
predictions from N-body and stellar dynamics models to measure the bar's
systematic velocity, dispersion, and dynamical coherence. Of particular interest
are the kinematics of the "transition regions" where resonances influence the
bar-bulge and bar-disk relationships. Finally, the fellow will use the APOGEE-
derived metallicities and abundances of the RC sample to measure the metallicity
distribution along the bar, including the presence of multiple stellar
populations. The result will be a complete picture of the long bar's spatial,
dynamical, and chemical distributions, which can be used to establish the bar's
properties compared to external galactic bars, along with its stellar properties
and mixing efficiency.

The broader impacts of this project include a significant educational component.
The fellow will leverage OSU's partnership with Ohio's 4-H program to
demonstrate to children and the general public that science and scientific
inquiry are fun, relevant to their lives, and perhaps most importantly,
accessible to all. In partnership with the Ohio 4-H state office, the fellow
will contribute to two projects teaching scientific concepts through interactive
activities, with an emphasis on those that can be easily done in the home.
First, she will develop astronomy-themed activities for an annual summer Space
Camp targeted at middle-school students. Second, she will combine astronomy-
themed activities with suitable background information and evaluation metrics
into a Space Science Project Book for 4-H's Project Book series, which
encourages students to select, design, and evaluate their own learning
experiences beyond the classroom. The close association of 4-H with rural and
often economically disadvantaged schools means that the materials that she
develops will impact the scientific literacy of these underserved communities.