* 1203239
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Urban Farming and the Politics of Abandoned Land in Detroit
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Sara Safransky, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Hammel
* 10/31/2013
* USD 12,000.00

This doctoral dissertation research project examines the phenomena of green
redevelopment in the City of Detroit. Approximately 100,000 urban lots - one-
third of Detroit's available land - lie vacant after decades of industrial
decline, suburbanization, and poverty. Over the last few years, however,
planners, activists, and city officials have proposed a number of ambitious and
controversial plans to reorganize Detroit's post-industrial landscapes around
farming and other economic activities typically associated with rural areas.
Proposals range from establishing the world's largest urban farm in the center
of Detroit to schemes that include planting commercial forests, creating planned
wilderness zones, turning old factories into fisheries, and expanding the city's
already vast network of community gardens. Detroit is not alone in these
efforts. Around the world, environmental and economic crises are reshaping
processes of urbanization and responses to urban economic decline. Many cities
are beginning to experiment with 'green urbanism' or agrarian development as a
means of alleviating the effects of a common set of problems: industrial
decline, poverty, toxic landscapes, food insecurity, and racial and ethnic
discrimination. However, there has been little theoretical work or empirical
research on new urban agricultural frontiers or what new green development
strategies mean for post-industrial cities and the people who live in them. This
study will contribute to scholarship on the changing nature of post-industrial
cities in the twenty-first century with a particular focus on economic
transformation, redefinitions of spatial relations, and racial inequality. Using
a qualitative, mixed-method approach to data collection, including semi-
structured interviews, participant observation, document analysis, life
histories, and mapping, the research examines how and why formal and informal
claims to abandoned land for agrarian or green projects are being made, how
these land claims are negotiated, constructed, and governed in the political
arena, and the differences in the ways groups and individual actors
conceptualize their rights to abandoned land and envision the city's future.
Building on scholarship from urban geography, property theory, critical race
studies, and political ecology, this study looks at the formation and
consequences of urban farming and land redistribution in Detroit and develops a
framework to study environmental politics in other cities undergoing 'green'
transformations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detroit's agrarian turn represents a new
engagement with longstanding debates over economic development and emerging
concerns over urban environmental sustainability in the 21st century. The
'greening' of Detroit through community gardens and urban farms has attracted
considerable attention from the media, researchers, and actors who see the
city's abandoned lands as attractive grounds for investment and for building
alternative social worlds. Yet, for all its promise, agrarian development raises
important theoretical and empirical questions about 'green' gentrification and
the processes and practices of land and resource control in Detroit and beyond.
The implications of a 'new Detroit' for residents, especially the poor, black,
and marginalized, depend in large part on how abandoned land is claimed and how
property rights and new forms of ownership are imagined, negotiated, and enacted
across racial and economic difference. The final products of this research will
include a doctoral dissertation, articles in peer-reviewed academic journals,
and an academic trade book. The findings will also be shared broadly with
collaborators and communities in Detroit, at academic conferences, and by
publishing non-technical descriptions of the research in public media.