* 1203195
* GEM: Validating Self-Consistent Inner Magnetospheric Models: Assessing Effects of Uncertainties in Plasma Sheet and Electric Field Boundary Conditions on Simulating Storms
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2017
* Margaret Chen, Aerospace Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 05/31/2017
* USD 340,000.00

This project will examine the uncertainties in the magnetospheric cross polar
cap potential (CPCP) and in the plasma sheet population and how these
uncertainties affect the intensity and spatial distribution of the
magnetospheric ring current during magnetic storms. It will examine how much of
the disagreements between models and observations of the ring can be attributed
to the uncertainty in the boundary conditions rather than other causes such as
missing physical processes in the models. Previous simulation studies have shown
that changes in the magnetospheric convection electric field and the plasma
sheet distribution, which is the major source to the ring current, strongly
influence the ring current. For this reason, success in modeling common ring
current observables, such as the Dst index, ground magnetic perturbations and
magnetic field at geosynchronous orbit, and plasma parameters is dependent on
knowing the CPCP and the plasma sheet densities and temperatures. Because of
limited spatial and temporal resolution of in-situ measurements of such
quantities, averages from statistical re-analysis or empirical models are often
used to specify the boundary conditions for inner magnetospheric models.
However, there are large uncertainties associated with these boundary condition
specifications. This project will quantify how sensitive simulated storms are to
the uncertainties in the CPCP and in the ion and electron plasma sheet density
and temperature boundary conditions of self-consistent inner magnetospheric
models. The approach is to investigate the statistical variations of plasma
sheet parameters measured by the NASA THEMIS spacecraft and the CPCP from DMSP
(Defense Meteorological Satellite Program) measurements relative to reference
models commonly used to provide simulation boundary conditions. For these data
sets, a statistical model of the residual errors of reference models for CPCP
and central plasma sheet parameters will be developed. The multivariate error
covariance statistics will be computed and Monte Carlo scenarios of the plasma
and electric field boundary conditions will be generated. In some cases, the
Monte Carlo scenarios will be constrained by available in-situ data. For the
different boundary conditions scenarios, the magnetically and electrically self-
consistent Rice Convection Model-Equilibrium (RCM-E) will be used to simulate
Dst, ground magnetic perturbations and magnetic field and plasma parameters at
geosynchronous orbit. By comparing the metrics for the different boundary
condition scenarios, the project will determine whether the RCM-E is physically
sufficient given the uncertainties in the boundary conditions, or whether it
needs additional physical processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will help
determine whether researchers need to continue to focus on adding more realistic
physics to models of the ring current or if they should shift their focus toward
improving the specification of the boundary conditions the control the models.
Ultimately it will pave the way to generating ensemble space weather nowcasts
and forecasts of the inner magnetosphere's plasma and fields. The project is
headed by a woman scientist and also involves research ties between industry
(Aerospace Corp.) and universities.