* 1203773
* Weathering of western Greenland: Influences on oceanic fluxes of radiogenic isotopes
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Jonathan Martin, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 12/31/2017
* USD 484,439.00

This proposal addresses the hypothesis that as the Greenland Ice Sheet (GrIS)
retreats, increased exposure and weathering will alter fluxes of radiogenic
isotopes to the oceans. Radiogenic strontium (Sr) and lead (Pb) isotopes, and
nonÂ­radiogenic neodymium (Nd) are preferentially leached during initial
weathering of fresh bedrock and sediments in glacial terrains. With increased
duration and intensity of weathering, isotopic compositions of runoff approach
parent rock values. Therefore, magnitudes of offsets between Sr, Nd and Pb
isotope values of water and bedrock provide information about the extent of
weathering. Specific hypotheses to be tested are (1) more radiogenic Sr and Pb
and less radiogenic Nd discharge in water originating from the GrIS than from
deglaciated watersheds without connections to the ice sheet, (2) values of
isotope ratios depend on the exposure age of the deglaciated watersheds and the
intensity of weathering in each environment, and (3) the total flux of
radiogenic isotopes from continental glaciers depends on the relative aerial
extents of glaciated and deglaciated watersheds. These hypotheses will be tested
in western Greenland near Kangerlussuaq, where retreat of the GrIS since the
Last Glacial Maximum has exposed an approximately 175 km wide strip of land.
Water, sediment, and moraine material will be sampled from subglacial streams
discharging from the outlet portals of the Russell and Leverett Glaciers, in the
proglacial watershed of the Watson River, and in four deglaciated watersheds,
not connected to the GrIS that drain moraines ranging in age from about 600 to
18,000 years. Water samples will be measured for major and trace element
concentrations to model potential mineral dissolution and contributions to
isotope fluxes, and for Sr, Nd, and Pb isotope ratios to assess their fluxes
from subglacial, proglacial, and deglaciated watersheds. This work will link
terrestrial weathering products in a continental glacier setting to oceanic
fluxes of radiogenic isotopes, thereby improving the ability to interpret marine
records. The work is important because of its location near the formation
regions of North Atlantic Deep Water and it should contribute to planning for a
proposed ocean drilling expedition off Greenland. The work will impact human
resources through incorporation of 4 students from undergraduate to Ph.D. level,
all of whom will participate in field work and will work collaboratively to
complete laboratory and data analyses. Results of the work will be used in
several graduate and undergraduate courses and will be presented at national and
international scientific meetings and through publications. Outreach will
include lectures at local schools, as invited speakers at colleges and
universities, and in the annual open house at the Florida Museum of Natural
History.