* 1203784
* Collaborative research: Warming and irradiance measurements in the Arctic: Determining the link between solar energy absorption and surface warming through long term observations
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Victoria Hill, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 12/31/2016
* USD 998,150.00

The objectives of the proposed research are to quantify the connection between
seasonal warming of arctic surface waters and the absorption of solar energy,
and additionally to identify the presence and seasonal cycling of materials
responsible for this absorption. Seasonal changes in the attenuation of solar
radiation within the sea ice and upper 30m of the water column will be measured
at high temporal resolution (hourly) by a new proof of concept buoy system.
Temperature and PAR (photosynthetically active radiation) irradiance
measurements will be made using optical sensors paired with thermisters within
the water column and sea ice. A fluorometer will be used to quantify
chlorophyll, colored dissolved organic material (CDOM) and light backscattering
within surface waters. These sensors will be used to calculate diffuse
attenuation coefficients (Kd) within the ice and water column, and to determine
the seasonal cycling of phytoplankton and CDOM under the ice. The relationship
between these optical and temperature observations will enable one to constrain
the daily water column absorption component of the Arctic heating budget. The
ultimate goal of this concept would see a network of these buoys throughout the
Arctic, in both ice-covered and open waters. The work plan includes several
deployments in multiyear ice, including the Beaufort gyre and the Geomission ice
base in early spring. Data at this site will be augmented by additional
measurements made whilst at the camp, along with complementary studies by other
Geomission projects. Results will be disseminated through collaboration with
Science Alliance Live, at Polar Science Weekend, and in curricula at the
University of Washington. Buoy data will also be visualized in near real time on
the project website. All data will be submitted within 1 year to CADIS.