* 1203591
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: Consolidation of Botanical Research Collections at Texas A&M University, College Station
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2012,05/31/2019
* Vaughn Bryant, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2019
* USD 499,224.00

Biological collections contain a storehouse of information that span
considerable spatial and temporal scales. As a land-grant institution, Texas A&M
University is committed to the preservation and enhancement of its existing
herbaria as an integral component of the university's core mission. This project
will consolidate three existing botany-based research collections on the College
Station Campus of Texas A&M University. Each of these collections are committed
to transferring research products to the general public through active service
and extension programs, promoting collections based research in their respective
fields, and preserving extant collections for future generations. The
consolidation of these collections will assemble and preserve a diverse and
comprehensive botanical collection of approximately 320,000 specimens and
thereby facilitate improvements in education, outreach, and research efforts at
multiple scales.

This consolidation project will provide numerous opportunities to recruit,
educate, and employ graduate and undergraduate students from differing under-
represented groups. Diverse user groups: student workers, adult learners, and
disadvantaged students, will benefit from direct exposure to these unique
resources and the knowledge base possessed by researchers working in these
collections. Reaching beyond the local utilization of these collections, updated
and expanded web content will provide a comprehensive and easily accessible
resource for educators, researchers, law enforcement interests, and others
worldwide.