* 1203444
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Mapping and Modeling Shrub Expansion in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Adam Naito, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2014
* USD 12,000.00

Shrub expansion is a global phenomenon involving the transition from herbaceous
to woody cover. This phenomenon is one of the most recognized components of
terrestrial changes in the Arctic, but its precise characteristics in the latter
half of the 20th century are largely unknown. This doctoral dissertation
research project seeks to quantify the historic spatial characteristics of shrub
expansion in the northern Alaska and investigate how landscape-scale
environmental characteristics (topography, hydrology, shrub reproductive
characteristics, and the existence, strength, and directionality of associated
feedbacks) influence its development. The doctoral student's first objective
will be accomplished by using historical (1950s-1980s) aerial imagery available
from the United States Geological Survey (USGS) and high-resolution satellite
imagery from the late 2000s. These imagery sets facilitate the mapping of shrub
patches and their expansion over this time period. Pattern metric analysis then
will be applied to these maps to determine how characteristics like patch
density, patch size variability, and distance between patches have changed. The
second objective will be accomplished through the development of a simple
computer model that simulates shrub expansion over time in response to
manipulations of shrub reproductive characteristics, topography and hydrology,
and the existence, strength, and directionality of associated feedbacks.
Statistical comparisons of the model output and maps of observed patterns of
expansion will facilitate the generation of hypotheses regarding the landscape-
level environmental controls on expansion. Because of variability in the
cartographic scale of the USGS images, underestimations of shrub cover are
likely. In order to assure its utility, the computer model to be refined will
require fine-scale data regarding changes in shrub patches available from the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the National Park Service. These new imagery
sets will provide the detail needed for validation of the computer model.

This research project will provide an improved understanding of the changing
characteristics of shrub expansion in northern Alaska as well as a stronger
foundation for the generation of hypotheses regarding its landscape-scale
environmental controls. This will allow for future research avenues, such as
field-based observations and/or experiments to test these hypotheses and the
incorporation of nutrient-cycling characteristics (a dominant fine-scale
environmental control on shrub expansion) into the simulation model. The project
will provide an excellent education and training opportunity for an
undergraduate student, and it will include a set of outreach efforts, including
research presentations to students and members of the public in communities of
primarily Alaskan Natives, such as Atqasuk, Barrow, Kaktovik, and Anaktuvuk
Pass. Because shrub expansion is a process that affects the environment of
native communities, the research should help communities address historic
patterns and mechanisms. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish
a strong independent research career.