* 1203140
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Landscapes of Pastoral Nomads in Southeastern Turkey
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2015
* Jason Ur, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2015
* USD 10,440.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Jason Ur, Emily Hammer will examine the spatial
organization of nomadic pastoral inhabitation over the last 500 years in
Diyarbakýr province, southeastern Turkey. The study area is located at the
northern edge of ancient Mesopotamia, along the Tigris River at the interface
between a fertile plain and an agriculturally marginal area of eroded limestone
hills. For approximately 9000 years Middle Eastern economy and society was
composed of both sedentary agriculturalists and transhumant pastoral nomads. To
date however, Mesopotamian archaeologists have collected data almost exclusively
on the sedentary sector of ancient societies with economies based on
agriculture. The ephemeral traces of nomadic pastoral encampments rarely survive
in the archaeological record because they are typically destroyed by modern
farming activities. The study area is of particular importance because it has
preserved the remains of both campsites and surrounding landscape features such
as cisterns, corrals, and caves resulting from at least 500 years of nomadic
pastoral land-use. This provides a unique opportunity to begin to correct
biased, "sedentary-centric" understandings of Middle Eastern history.

The project will contribute to anthropological theory by investigating an
enduring anthropological phenomenon - the transformation of natural resources
into socially constructed places of significance. Many studies of space and
place have focused on the cultural transformations associated with public and
urban spaces; the proposed research extends these studies by focusing on the
meaning invested in landscapes by past mobile groups through seasonal re-
inhabitation and the manipulation of natural resources. By investigating
cisterns as spatial nodes in the landscape orienting people's camping and
pasture patterns over long periods of time, the project will contribute to
ongoing discussions of how people inscribe their presence on the environment in
an enduring way.

Archaeological survey and satellite imagery work have mapped features that
provide evidence for diachronic patterns in nomadic pastoral winter land-use,
including campsites and spatially associated landscape features such as
cisterns, corrals, and caves. In the current phase of the project, analyses will
focus on how water accessibility relates to inhabitation and herding patterns.
Via sediment coring and radiocarbon and terrestrial in-situ cosmogenic nuclide
dating methods, the project will determine the relative dates of campsite use
and cistern creation in order to evaluate hypotheses about the evolution of
mobile settlement and landscape.

The research has broader implications for internationally collaborative salvage
research, geoarchaeology, and anthropology. As the Ilýsu Dam reservoir on the
Tigris River will soon flood the study region, the proposed fieldwork and
analysis will gather data on features and landscapes that will soon be
destroyed. Collaborative fieldwork, analysis, and publication will strengthen
cooperation between American and Turkish archaeologists. Fieldwork will involve
training both Turkish and American graduate students in field methodology and
GIS technology. Results will be published in peer-reviewed publications and
presented at scientific conferences in Turkey and the US. The application of
terrestrial in situ cosmogenic nuclide dating, a geological technique whose
archaeological applications have been limitedly realized, will help add another
method for dating inorganic materials to the archaeological toolkit. The
proposed methodology is novel and will have wider geological applications.