* 1203393
* Collaborative Research: Continuation of Development and Application of AO-FVCOM to Improve Understanding of Arctic Changes
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Chang-Sheng Chen, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 07/31/2017
* USD 357,698.00

The PIs have successfully developed a high-resolution unstructured-grid,
finitevolume&lt;br/&gt;coupled ice-ocean model for the Arctic Ocean (AO-FVCOM).
AO-FVCOM has been&lt;br/&gt;validated via comparison to observed data under
climatological conditions. Now they seek support to work on the following three
tasks: &lt;br/&gt;1) Calibrate and validate AO-FVCOM using observational data
collected in the Canada Arctic Basin and its marginal Chukchi and Beaufort Sea.
This region is chosen for intense study because it has the most pronounced loss
of sea ice extent and thickness in recent years and its unprecedented coverage
by multiyear national and international field and modeling studies.
&lt;br/&gt;2) Apply the new calibrated and validated AV-FVCOM to investigate the
following scientific topics: &lt;br/&gt;a) improve understanding of the
circulation of the Alaskan Coastal Current and Pacific and Atlantic waters in
the study region, &lt;br/&gt;b) revisit scientific questions and methodological
problems associated with shelf-basin exchange (SBE) processes in the region, and
&lt;br/&gt;c) apply AO-FVCOM to investigate transformations and transports of
fresh water (both liquid and solid) from freshwater sources (Bering Strait,
rivers, central Beaufort Gyre, precipitation) towards the North Atlantic Ocean
via Fram and Canadian Archipelago Straits. &lt;br/&gt;3) Train a Ph.D. student
in advanced Arctic Ocean modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of
this project will provide an additional protocol for modeling Arctic Ocean
processes. It will also advance understanding of the circulation and mixing
processes in the Arctic Ocean, processes which will grow in socio-economic
importance with increasing ice loss and development activities in this part of
the globe.