* 1203616
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: Securing the BRY and OGDF Vascular Plant Collections Though Increased Storage Capacity and Web-based Data Availability
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Leigh Johnson, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Roland Roberts
* 08/31/2015
* USD 341,006.00

The Brigham Young University Herbarium is the largest herbarium in the
Intermountain west in size (560,000 specimens), species representation, and
geographic breadth. Increased storage capacity has become an urgent priority for
the herbarium given normal growth rates and the acquisition of 36,000 specimens
by gift and adoption of a regionally important collection orphaned by the Forest
Service. This project will address immediate needs and long term growth by
installing compact storage with 113 double-wide herbarium cabinets. This project
will also provide the means to capture digital images of specimens and to
database collection data associated with each specimen, both of which will be
made available on-line for public accessibility. In total, 84,000 specimens will
be imaged and databased, resulting in a 620% increase in databased specimens and
17% of the total collection being online by the project
termination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BYU herbarium is frequently used by
government agencies and land managers, for scholarly research, and for public
outreach and education. By providing physical accessibility to the orphaned
collection and online accessibility to collection data and images, this project
will enhance the value and usefulness of this resource by all patrons.
Accomplishing this project will provide training to student curators in a
mentored-learning environment that emphasizes curatorial practices and the value
of specimen-based data. Online accessibility includes tools for exploring
biodiversity in several ways. A museum exhibit focusing on collection-based
research will be constructed that includes a computer kiosk for exploring plant
diversity and the role and application of biological collections in contemporary
life.