* 1203246
* GEM: The Excitation of Magnetospheric Ultra-low Frequency Waves via Solar Wind Magnetic Field Fluctuations
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Seth Claudepierre, Aerospace Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 07/31/2017
* USD 240,000.00

Many studies have established a link between solar wind parameters and electron
flux enhancements in the radiation belts. However, the intermediary physical
mechanism(s) responsible for the observed link has yet to be definitively
established. There is increasing evidence that ultra-low frequency wves within
the solar wind may, at times, be responsible for electron flux enhancements in
the radiation belts. This project will investigate the role that interplanetary
magnetic field (IMF) fluctuations play in the generation of magnetospheric ULF
pulsations within the magnetosphere. It will used controlled, numerical
experiments, through the use global, three-dimensional magnetohydrodynamic (MHD)
simulations. Simulations can be powerful tool for studying solar wind driven ULF
pulsations, since both real and synthetic solar wind conditions can be used to
drive the magnetosphere. The use of synthetic, idealized solar wind
configurations allows individual solar wind parameters to be isolated for
detailed investigations into the magnetospheric response. In the first component
of the project, MHD simulations will be driven by idealized monochromatic and
broadband-type IMF fluctuations. These simulations will be conducted as a
numerical experiment to fully assess the generation of magnetospheric ULF
pulsations via IMF fluctuations. The results from these numerical experiments
will aid in the interpretation of results from the second component of the
project which will involve simulations of specific real events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energetic radiation belt electrons are one of the most
significant hazards to such space-based technologies. This project will
investigate a particular class of magnetospheric waves that may play a role in
creating energetic electron flux enhancements in the outer radiation belt. Thus,
this research has an important societal impact. The development of a Geospace
General Circulation Model (GGCM) is a long-term goal of NSF's Geospace
Environment Modeling (GEM) program and this project will contribute to such
model development, by rigorously and systematically subjecting the model to IMF
fluctuations.