* 1203093
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying changes in the Arctic hydrological cycle at the landscape scale using advances in water vapor isotope (18O &amp; D) techniques and aircraft
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Jessica Cherry, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Erica L. Key
* 08/31/2013
* USD 0.00

The hydrological cycle has a central role in Arctic climate change, and is
coupled to&lt;br/&gt;alterations of terrestrial, aquatic and cryosphere
processes, including shifts in biogeochemical cycles. Monitoring these changes
is a central part of the NSF Arctic Observing Network (AON), a consortium of
projects with site-specific responsibilities and measurement packages. The next
frontier for AON is facilitation of approaches that better quantify landscape
and regional ecohydrological process by employing new analytical technologies
(laser spectroscopy based water isotope analyzers) and integration of platforms,
such as aircraft and satellites. This transformation of AON will initiate
studies that quantify and integrate the heterogeneous landscapes of the Arctic
tundra, while developing parallel capabilities to the NEON (National Ecological
Observatory Network) program, thereby extending the relevance of AON to the
continental-scale. We propose an EAGER project that applies a novel
interdisciplinary approach by combining isotope geochemistry with boundary layer
processes and measurements to monitor and measure the ecohydrology of tundra
ecosystems and landscapes. This is a high-risk approach because it is a novel
use of this particular instrument and it will change how Arctic ecohydrology is
monitored and assessed. EAGER is the correct venue for our project because this
novel application of water isotope spectroscopy in an aircraft is ?high risk,
high reward? research and represents a radically different approach from
laboratory-based studies that are the status quo. The intellectual merit of this
project will be accomplished by addressing these primary questions: a) What are
the spatial and temporal patterns in water vapor isotopes during the growing and
shoulder seasons across the tundra ecosystems in the Arctic Foothills and
Foothill-Coastal Plain boundary in Northern Alaska? To a more limited extent, we
also ask: b) What is the ET isotope signature associated with different
ecosystem types and disturbances (fire and thermokarst) relative to background
moisture? c) What is the strength of the ecosystem ET signal in the overlying
atmosphere (above the ecosystem boundary height)? The first question focuses on
flight measurements, the second on ecosystem tower easurements, and the third on
integrating the two measurement scales. The broader impacts and outreach of our
project will be accomplished by initially sharing our findings with the
scientific community at the fall meeting of the American Geophysical Union and
with students as part of our teaching and seminars at the University of Alaska
Anchorage (UAA) and the University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF). We will also
collaborate with AON colleagues on data sharing and data posting after post-
processing our flight data and information. Our primary aim with this AON EAGER
is to take the transformation step in our&lt;br/&gt;capacity to quantify
hydrological processes at the landscape and region scale by: a) collaborating
with Picarro Inc. (http://www.picarro.com/) in modifying the L2120-i for
aircraft and thus landscape scale purposes and b) conducting a series of
field/aircraft campaigns on the North Slope of Alaska. Our program would
transform the measuring and monitoring of the terrestrial hydrological cycle
beyond the point-based measurements of the past and that are currently in place
with AON support (ie. Oberbauer and Welker at Toolik, Bret-Hart and Shaver at
Imnaviat Creek). Our EAGER project would also provide a critical linkage between
AON and NEON as the Alaska network of sites are planned to come on-
line&lt;br/&gt;in 2012 and/or 2013. Landscape-scale monitoring is critical for
stitching together the intricacies of the changing ecohydrolgy in the
north.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The water cycle
has a central role in Arctic climate change, and is coupled to alterations of
land, rivers and lakes as well as permafrost processes, including shifts in the
cycles of nutrients. Monitoring these changes is a central part of the NSF
Arctic Observing Network (AON), a consortium of projects with site-specific
responsibilities and measurement packages. The next frontier for AON is
facilitation of approaches that better quantify landscape and regional eco-
hydrological process by employing new analytical technologies (laser
spectroscopy based water isotope analyzers) and integration of platforms, such
as aircraft and satellites. This transformation of AON will initiate studies
that quantify and integrate the heterogeneous landscapes of the Arctic tundra,
while developing parallel capabilities to the NEON (National Ecological
Observatory Network) program, thereby extending the relevance of AON to the
continental-scale. We propose an EAGER project that applies a novel
interdisciplinary approach by combining isotope geochemistry with boundary layer
processes and measurements to monitor and measure the ecohydrology of tundra
ecosystems and landscapes. This is a high-risk approach because it is a novel
use of this particular instrument and it will change how Arctic ecohydrology is
monitored and assessed. Our primary aim with this AON EAGER is to take the
transformation step in our capacity to quantify hydrological processes at the
landscape and region scale by: a) collaborating with Picarro Inc.
(http://www.picarro.com/) in modifying the L2120-i for aircraft and thus
landscape scale purposes and b) conducting a series of field/aircraft campaigns
on the North Slope of Alaska. Our program would transform the measuring and
monitoring of the terrestrial hydrological cycle beyond the point-based
measurements of the past and that are currently in place with AON support at
Imnaviat Creek. This project would also provide a critical linkage between AON
and NEON as the Alaska network of sites are planned to come on-line in 2012
and/or 2013. Landscape-scale monitoring is critical for stitching together the
intricacies of the changing ecohydrolgy in the north.