* 1203390
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Schools, Families and Children's Food Allergies
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2012,09/30/2013
* Peter Conrad, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 09/30/2013
* USD 5,479.00

Project Summary &lt;br/&gt;Doctoral Dissertation Research: Schools, Families and
Children's Food Allergies&lt;br/&gt;Peter Conrad&lt;br/&gt;Vanessa Lopes
Muñoz&lt;br/&gt;Brandeis University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;About 4% of children
reported a food allergy in 2007-an increase of nearly 18%&lt;br/&gt;during the
course of a decade. Preventing and responding to severe allergic reactions
can&lt;br/&gt;require the involvement of many actors in schools, restaurants,
and childcare centers. By&lt;br/&gt;examining how multiple actors adhere to food
allergy policies and guidelines, this study&lt;br/&gt;seeks to fill an existing
gap in sociological studies of health and
illness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. A longstanding concern in
sociology and in medicine is explaining&lt;br/&gt;under what conditions, and to
what ends, people adhere to medical regimens. Conrad and&lt;br/&gt;others have
argued that ill persons make decisions about following medical
regimens&lt;br/&gt;largely based on their everyday lives, making the case that
daily social interactions are at&lt;br/&gt;least as important as doctor-patient
relationships. Conditions that are managed primarily&lt;br/&gt;through lifestyle
changes,such as changes in diet,raise questions about the role
of&lt;br/&gt;multiple actors in managing health conditions. To address these
questions, this study&lt;br/&gt;examines how families and schools adhere to food
allergy policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. This study would expand
knowledge about the management of health&lt;br/&gt;conditions that are rising in
prevalence-food allergies. Results from this study may&lt;br/&gt;inform health
policies related to an array of conditions that require intensive
lifestyle&lt;br/&gt;changes, such as asthma, diabetes, and food intolerances.
Findings may also be of interest&lt;br/&gt;to healthcare professionals,
families, and school administrators. This research will be&lt;br/&gt;used for a
doctoral dissertation and in undergraduate teaching.