* 1203545
* Collaborative Research:   Evaluating hydrologic and ecologic responses to late-Glacial (9-33ka) abrupt climatic transitions in the coastal southwest United States
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Dorothy Peteet, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 08/31/2015
* USD 123,981.00

Climate projections for the coastal southwestern United States predict a change
in the frequency and magnitude of precipitation, perhaps with an overall drying.
Despite the uncertainty in model projections, it is clear that any change to the
region's winter dominated, "feast or famine" hydroclimatology will have
consequences for the highly-populous, water-stressed region. This proposal
develops a decadal to subcentennial scale, continuous sedimentary archive from
Lake Elsinore, California using physical (grain size), biological (pollen),
chemical (C:N), and isotopic (leaf wax hydrogen isotopes) analyses.
Characterized by exceptional resolution and archive continuity, this unique
terrestrial site in the coastal southwest offers an unparalleled opportunity to
evaluate hydrologic and ecologic change across abrupt climatic transitions
during the late Glacial period (9-33ka). The cores will be characterized using a
diverse, multi-proxy approach to capture large magnitude, late Glacial
transitions, including leaf wax D/H shifts of >100 per mil, grain size evidence
for variable run-off, and palynological evidence for changes in catchment
vegetation. Lake Elsinore's exceptional archive is characterized by continuous
deposition, high sedimentation rates, and the capacity for very high resolution
radiocarbon age control using discrete organic material. Beyond representing a
high quality archive of past terrestrial environmental change, Lake Elsinore
sediments will enable proposed correlations with published marine
reconstructions including local and distal marine records of Pacific sea surface
temperatures (SSTs), as well as Atlantic SSTs and evidence for Meridional
Overturning Circulation in order to assess the driving causes of the region's
hydrologic and ecologic change. The team will focus on global abrupt climatic
transitions including Heinrich events 1-3, and the transitions into and out of
the Bolling-Allerod and the Younger Dryas. Although these transitions differ
from the projected anthropogenic climate change, they offer large magnitude,
abrupt transitions capable of providing maximum insights into forcing-response
relationships. The working hypothesis is that hydrologic changes and ecologic
shifts are closely in step and responding to local and global abrupt climatic
transitions in the late Glacial to early Holocene. The questions are how much
and how fast are these local responses demonstrated, and what might be the
implications for the future.

The lead investigators institution, Cal State Fullerton, reaches a large number
of minority, and especially Hispanic students. The proposal engages two female
co-investigators, one of whom is an early career Assistant professor. The
proposed study will provide training and research opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate research at three institutions, with a focus on building the
analytical and interpretative skill sets. This research will also provide the
first terrestrially-based, decadal to subcentennial scale record of how the
vegetation of the coastal southwest responds to abrupt climatic transitions. The
development of a baseline understanding of the causes, responses, and recovery
of past hydrologic and ecologic change is of interest beyond the paleoclimate
field with implications for ecologists, conservationists, and policy decisions
pertaining to the California Floristic Biodiversity Hotspot.