* 1203409
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: Compactorization of the vascular plant herbarium of NC State Univ to alleviate space constraints and allow research- and training-driven growth
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Alexander Krings, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2017
* USD 148,338.00

The North Carolina State University vascular plant herbarium (NCSC) is
specialized in the flora of North Carolina and the southeastern US, continuing
its mission to document and understand plant diversity and to transfer the
taxonomic expertise developed to various users that depend on the generated
knowledge. This project focuses on the: (1) compactorization of NCSC to
alleviate specimen damage from current space constraints and allow for continued
research- and training-driven growth, and the (2) imaging and databasing of a
component of the collection, providing a training opportunity for undergraduates
and engagement of the public through a citizen science approach.

The resulting publically available database of specimen label information,
species distribution maps, and images has many practical applications, including
increased capacity for survey and documentation, climate studies, and precision
natural resource management. Also, because of NCSC's initiative to require
silica-gel collections in addition to standard vouchers in floristic research,
NCSC holdings will be significantly informative to studies at various levels of
organization from molecules to ecosystems. In addition, to close the gap between
modern collections-based research and K-12 education, NCSC is partnering with NC
4-H and high school teachers to develop lessons on genetic diversity,
classification, and adaptive evolution. For additional information, see the NCSC
website: http://herbarium.ncsu.edu/