* 1203222
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: Curation and Digitization of Recently Acquired, Major Fossil Vertebrate Research Collections at the Florida Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Richard Hulbert, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Roland Roberts
* 04/30/2016
* USD 455,330.00

The Florida Museum of Natural History (FLMNH) at the University of Florida,
houses the third largest cataloged collection of vertebrate fossils in United
States, providing the most complete basis available for study of vertebrate life
and evolution in the eastern United States and the circum-Caribbean Basin area
over the past 65 million years. Recent acquisition of three major fossil
vertebrate collections from this region has outpaced the museum's ability to
store, prepare, curate, and digitize these important fossils in a timely manner.
This project provides support for these activities allowing for over 50,000
significant vertebrate fossils, including images, to be made available for
scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project allows for expansion of
the already successful FLMNH web site. Digital images will be featured on an on-
line database, in more popular-oriented web pages on fossil species and
localities, and will be used to develop on-line fossil identification guides,
and to update the still popular web site on fossil horse evolution. Graduate and
undergraduate students and post-graduate assistants will be trained in
curatorial activities and receive mentoring in scientific research,
communication of results to the public, and professional development skills
improving their ability and desire to implement broader impact activities as
future professionals.