* 1203164
* GSE/DIF: WEPAN Faculty Professional Development Initiative
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Susan Metz, Wepan Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2016
* USD 375,000.00

Intellectual Merit: WFPDI is a three-year Dissemination of GSE Outcomes project
proposed by WEPAN, Women in Engineering ProActive Network. The goal is to engage
engineering faculty with strategies and materials that will increase their
awareness, interest, and willingness to create engineering education experiences
that are engaging and motivating to a diverse community of women students and
their racial and ethnic minority male counterparts. WEPAN has collected,
organized and made available more than 1,000 research and practice-based
resources on women in science and engineering in its searchable web-based
Knowledge Center. The proposed project will use these resources and other
materials to develop how-to agenda papers and companion PowerPoint presentations
to be offered via webinar and face-to-face workshops. The practitioner audience
selected for WFPDI is engineering faculty. Evaluation will focus on gains in
knowledge, changes in attitude/affect, and changes in
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed project will
promote teaching and learning by disseminating to engineering faculty
actionable, research-based strategies and materials on issues of gender in
science and engineering to support persistence of a diverse community of women
students and their racial and ethnic minority male counterparts. WFPDI faculty
professional development opportunities will be disseminated broadly by
leveraging existing networks of engineering faculty. The benefit to society will
be an engineering faculty that is better prepared to create engaging, motivating
learning environments that support persistence of a diverse community of women
students and their racial and ethnic minority male counterparts.