* 1203541
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Emergence of Financial Geographies: Derivatives, Chicago, and the Growth of Speculation (1972-1987)
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Kristopher Olds, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 05/31/2014
* USD 11,889.00

From global currency flows to nation-state financial solvency and family home
mortgages, much of contemporary life is influenced by derivatives, but social
scientists have barely begun to study how derivatives work, where they came
from, and how their negative impacts might be mitigated. While commonly
associated with Wall Street and New York, these specialized financial
instruments were primarily developed in Chicago because of that city's history
of trading agricultural futures. This doctoral dissertation research project
will investigate the invention and regulation of financial derivatives in
Chicago, Illinois during the period from 1972 to 1987. The doctoral student
hypothesizes that this geography is much more than a simple coincidence as it
has generally been characterized by social scientists to date. Instead, this
geography is vitally important to an improved understanding of both the nature
of financial derivatives and to their role in financial crises, most notably the
credit crisis of 2008. It was in direct relation to Chicago as a center of
agricultural commodity exchange and not to New York's financial landscape that
the U.S. government constructed the foundations of its regulatory structure for
contemporary derivatives; a structure that made industry self-regulation its
principal axiom. As these markets rapidly expanded away from Chicago in the late
1980s and 1990s, they carried the self-regulatory model with them, but as they
transformed the global financial landscape, they brought with them none of the
other localized institutions that made Chicago's self regulation successful. The
student will employ political-economic and institutional perspectives in
economic and urban geography to reveal the fundamentally spatial dimensions of
the origin, early regulation and precipitous growth of financial derivatives. He
will seek to construct a rich description of the early history of financial
derivatives and the struggles over their political legitimacy by empirically
investigating the negotiations between the financial industry, the federal
regulatory agencies, and the U.S. Congress. To accomplish this, he will employ
in-depth interviews with key members of Chicago's 1970s and 1980s financial
community as well as a critical reading of industry and government documents,
congressional hearing records, trade journals, and business periodicals.

While financial derivatives were widely discussed in the mainstream media as
contributing to the 2008 global financial crisis and subsequent economic
recession, they have received little scientific attention beyond the discipline
of economics. Scholarly inquiry on derivatives generally has failed to examine
the history of their regulation or to draw connections between derivatives and
financial crises. This project will help fill these gaps by investigating the
early Chicago-based history of financial derivatives. The project will use
qualitative methods developed by urban and economic geographers to analyze how
the history of agricultural exchange and the specific financial institutions in
Chicago set important precedents for the governance of derivatives. While these
precedents, many of which allowed the derivatives industry to police itself,
functioned relatively well for the industry when it was isolated in Chicago, the
original governance model was unable to prevent market failures and financial
crisis in the1990s and 2000s when derivatives trading spread to New York,
London, and eventually across the globe. The project therefore will improve
policy makers' and society's comprehension of derivatives markets and the
institutionally and geographically contingent nature of their regulation. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.