* 1203863
* Collaborative Research:  P2C2--Reconstructing Central Alaskan Precipitation Variability and Atmospheric Circulation during the Past Millennium
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2017
* Cameron Wake, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2017
* USD 207,061.00

Large-scale atmospheric circulation systems affect the geographic distribution
of precipitation in western North America, yet little is known about how these
systems may have varied before the instrumental period of the last 150 years.
The main goal of this project is to reconstruct the history of precipitation in
Alaska during the last thousand years using ice core records of snow
accumulation. The researchers plan to collect several new ice cores from the Mt.
Hunter Plateau in the Alaska Range of Denali National Park and the new ice cores
will be combined with an existing spatial array of ice cores in the region to
map changes in the spatial patterns of precipitation. Because changes in
atmospheric circulation patterns caused by ENSO and the Pacific Decadal
Oscillation (PDO) affect where the precipitation falls, this spatial array of
ice cores will provide a record of how these larger scale climate systems have
varied during the last thousand years. The project will focus on determining the
differences in the precipitation patterns at the Little Ice Age (approximately
200 to 600 years ago) and Medieval Climate Anomaly (approximately 800 to 1,200
years ago).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will evaluate how changes in the
climate state affect atmospheric circulation and precipitation. In addition the
project includes K-12, undergraduate and graduate education activities, and, in
conjunction with the National Park Service, the development of an interactive
display showing the climate history of the region and the history of glacier
advance and retreat in Denali National Park.