* 1203394
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: Support for the AMNH Invertebrate Paleontology Collection; Addressing a critical need to conserve and digitize the Microfossil Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2012,11/30/2016
* Ruth O'Leary, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 11/30/2016
* USD 219,755.00

The American Museum of Natural History (AMNH) contains one of the largest
invertebrate paleontology collections in the world, estimated at 4.8 million
specimen lots. This award provides funds to rehabilitate part of that collection
- the Foraminifera and Ostracoda Microfossil Collection which contains unique
and scientifically valuable specimens. The collection is important because of
its broad range, making it possible to study the diversity of these organisms
and their distribution geographically, and over geologic time. The collection is
at risk due to suboptimal storage and lack of databasing. Specimens will be
identified, rehoused, conserved and catalogued. Data associated with specimens
will be made available to the public and researchers via the online database,
along with digital images of over 1,000 specimens and CT-scan images of 50
specimens.

The improvements to this collection will enhance its utility and accessibility
for researchers and students. Correctly identified and curated specimens will be
used in evolutionary studies and in research in which foraminifera are used to
evaluate the impacts of present and past climate change on ecosystems. Student
interns supported by this grant will be trained in collection and data
management and in specimen identification. Specimens will be highlighted for
exhibit display and for use in AMNH's educational activities for K-12 students.