* 1203090
* GeoMoto: An Embodied Learning Approach to Geoscience Education
* GEO,GEO
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Lucien Vattel, GameDesk, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 07/31/2014
* USD 149,929.00

Geomoto is a Track 1 game/learning project, designed to foster engaging and deep
conceptual learning of geoscience topics. The project will create a digital game
learning module that leverages embodied learning technologies, such as Microsoft
Kinect or SMALLab, to track students' physical motions and integrate them into a
game/simulation experience designed to develop their understanding of dynamic
geoscience concepts. Geomoto will bring common misconceptions to the surface and
include opportunities for students to correct their understanding through
experience and interaction. This project links state standards to game
mechanics, simulations, and embodied-learning interactions that make student
thinking explicit at all levels, including conceptual, procedural and
conditional. Through interacting with this dynamic system, students will form a
conceptualization of the earth as a fluid, multilayered, complex and
interrelated dynamic system rather than as a static, homogenous object. The
Geomoto project merges the assessment-driven game-learning design practices of
the GameDesk Institute with content experts from Caltech's Tectonics
Observatory, Boston University, Michigan State University, Bill Nye the Science
Guy and the Planetary Society, and the New York Hall of Science to foster deep
conceptual learning of geoscience topics. The project includes experimental
studies to evaluate the effectiveness of the modules for yielding strong
learning outcomes.