* 1203106
* Collaborative Research: CSBR: Natural History Collections: Georeferencing U.S. Fish Collections: a community-based model to georeferencing natural history collections
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Christopher Taylor, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Roland Roberts
* 07/31/2015
* USD 130,858.00

An award is made to use computing technology developed in connection with
previous NSF support to collaboratively geospatially reference, a.k.a.
georeference, (i.e., determine latitude and longitude coordinates for) the
estimated two million ungeoreferenced fish species occurrence records currently
in the now greatly enhanced and soon to be expanded Fishnet2 network of fish
collection databases (http://www.fishnet2.net/). The records will be
georeferenced using the Community Georeferencing System of the GEOLocate
software platform based at Tulane University
(http://www.museum.tulane.edu/geolocate/). Each coordinate determination will
include a new polygon method for describing uncertainty, which will be compared
to the more traditional point-radius-based uncertainties currently in wide use
to inform best practices in future georeferencing projects. Experiments in crowd
sourcing will also be performed on subset of the georeferenced work at Tulane as
an education and outreach activity involving local high school students and
Tulane undergraduates. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Georeferencing natural history
collection data is a critical step in a process of mobilizing biodiversity data
that starts with digitizing collection records, continues through databasing and
networking, and ultimately gives researchers remote access to the vast specimen
and data resources of natural history museums. Having access to georeferenced
specimen occurrence data allows researchers to address important scientific and
societal questions in areas such as endangered species conservation,
environmental restoration, and preparing for global climate change. The resource
of georeferenced locality records provided by this project will serve several
purposes, beyond its usefulness to the fish collection community. It can be used
for georeferencing data for other groups of organisms, especially aquatic
organisms, which were likely sampled at many of the same access points (e.g., in
rivers near bridge crossings) or at the same time as many of the fish specimens.
This project will reult in a compiled gazetteer of all georeferenced localities
that is available to other collection digitization projects, including projects
in the Advancing Digitization of Biological Collections (ADBC) program. The
resource of georeferenced collection localities created through this project
will also serve the fish collection and broader natural history collection
community as a resource for cleaning taxonomic data, thanks to the map
visualization of data it supports. Mapping specimen occurrences makes it easier
for taxonomic experts to detect errors in specimen identity and distribution,
resulting in more accurate taxonomic and geographic data. The education and
outreach activities of this project will specifically target underrepresented
minorities from New Orleans area schools in an effort to increase minority
participation in natural history collection based research.