* 1203640
* Searching for Abrupt Climate Change Precursors Using Ultra High Resolution Ice Core Analysis
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Paul Mayewski, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2015
* USD 797,560.00

The project will undertake an ultra high resolution, multi-parameter
investigation of past climate to develop predictors for future abrupt climate
change through identification of the "tipping points" which occur prior to an
abrupt climate change events. Ultra-high resolution (up to 4 micron) ice core
records will be produced -- well beyond the ~1cm resolution currently available
-- using continuous flow injection into both a Thermo Element 2 ICP-MS and a
Picarro Inc. L-2130-I H2O isotope analyzer sampled using a newly developed
state-of-the-art cryocell chamber integrated with digital image recording and
annotating software. The PI will look for precursors that reveal evidence of
changes in, for example, the timing and magnitude of temperature, precipitation
and atmospheric circulation from multi-decadal down to hundreds of sampling
levels per year. The project will train students to be well versed in advanced
laboratory and numerical modeling methods. Students will learn data reduction
and visualization algorithms while also helping to provide a data stream that
has broad applicability to climate. Cyberinfrastructure developed under NSF
funding to the Climate Change Institute will be used to store, process, and
visualize this high volume of ice core data while also making the information
available to the public with high transparency for climate change use and
attribution.