* 1203528
* EAGER: Transformation System for Psychrophilic Fungi
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2012,09/30/2018
* Sudha Chaturvedi, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Standard Grant
* Purnima Bhanot
* 09/30/2018
* USD 265,920.00

Abstract - Geomyces destructans, a newly discovered cold-loving fungus
("psychrophile"), has devastated bat populations in North America. We know very
little about this fungus as there are huge gaps in our knowledge of how fungi
thrive in cold conditions and what unique traits make them pathogenic.
Specifically, the forms and functions of fungi at low temperature have not yet
been subjected to genetic analyses. Therefore, the unique enzymes and proteins
that make psychrophilic life possible at such extreme low temperature remain
unknown and their biotechnology potential remains unrealized. The investigators
in this project propose to remove major barriers to experimental investigations
of psychrophilic fungi by providing a molecular toolkit for the experimental
manipulation of G. destructans and its psychrophilic sibling species G.
pannorum. The experimental focus will be on the development of reliable systems
for the manipulation, deletion or over-expression of target genes in G.
destructans and G. pannorum. These approaches would allow assignment of specific
roles for various genes of interest. Additional objectives will focus on
labeling two fungal species with stable fluorescent proteins so that details of
fungal development can be studied by high resolution microscopy. This project
will lay down the foundation for the study of cellular processes in the
psychrophilic fungi. This is an important pursuit to discover if there is a
unity or diversity of gene functions in different groups of fungi. It is
expected that investigators in mycology, genetics, polar biology, environmental
sciences, infection biology and industrial biotechnology would benefit from the
reagents and findings generated in this study. This project will also involve
mentoring of a post-doctoral fellow who might pursue study of psychrophilic
fungi subsequently as an independent investigator. Additionally, undergraduate
students will be trained under summer research experience for underrepresented
minorities in an ongoing NSF Program at the host institution.