* 1203136
* Precision Polyolefins Embracing Tacticity, Amorphous Structure Control, and Precision-Enhanced Biological Activity
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* K. Wagener, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2015
* USD 300,093.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Tactic versions of precision polyolefin materials are being prepared to define
the importance of proximity of precisely placed chiral centers in a linear
polymer chain. The chain-length distance between these chiral centers is of
special interest. Crystallization will be examined in detail via variable
temperature X-ray techniques and thermal analysis. The precision work will be
extended to a systematic study of commercially prepared metallocene-generated
polyethylene, since it is now possible to space branches as far apart as 75
carbons. Long-chain alkyl branches will be precisely attached far apart from
each other, and the morphological structure of these materials will be explored.

The morphology of highly interactive structures, including those possessing
ionic liquid entities, will be elucidated as well. Preliminary research suggests
that ionic liquid entities, when placed precisely in the polymer backbone, lead
to enormous inter-chain interaction in these materials. A detailed study of
performance (tensile strength, shear thickening, etc.) as a function of
counterion identity comprises a major part of this work. The research will be
done in collaboration with expert morphology research groups in the USA,
Germany, and Japan.

Finally, the PI will synthesize water-soluble versions of these precision
materials. Potential uses for water-soluble polymers are quite large. Of
particular interest will be a study of ion binding in these water-soluble
macromolecules. The research will begin using precision linear copolymers
possessing both in-chain and grafted poly(oxyethylene) in varying amounts. The
biological activity of these materials, particularly in terms of chiral
response, will be measured as well.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Better understanding of the behavior of the world's largest-volume plastic,
polyethylene, comprises a major theme in this research. The PI and his group
will prepare polyethylene analogues whose molecules contain branches at regular
intervals, thus creating materials with precisely defined architectures. The
properties of these materials will be studied with a variety of techniques. The
research itself serves as an educational tool at both the undergraduate and
graduate level, where the impact of interacting young scientists from a variety
of countries is important. For example, a "Research Abroad for Graduate
Students" program has been established to give students global exposure.
Included are interactions created by government institutions (such as found in
Germany at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research). Further, the PI will
continue to seek and educate undergraduate students who are in the "Florida
Opportunity Scholars Program" and who are the first in their families to go to
college.