* 1203651
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Christy Byrd, Byrd                    Christy        M
* Fellowship Award
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 07/31/2014
* USD 120,000.00

The goal of this study is to understand how adolescents understand the school
climate around race and diversity. Schools where individuals interact positively
and respectfully across racial boundaries promote the wellbeing of youth of all
races, but existing research is limited in several ways. Much of existing
research focuses on a few narrow features of the school, such as discrimination
or diversity programming. Research has also typically focused on diverse schools
rather than schools that range in racial composition. Finally, most research
focuses on students of color, so less is known about how White students think
about race in their schools. The current study builds on the principal
investigator's dissertation work by using interviews and focus groups to explore
how youth of multiple races perceive their schools in schools that vary in their
racial make-up. The participants are 40-50 middle and high school students who
are completing focus groups and individual interviews. Additionally, a small
group of students are being trained to interview their peers about how they
perceive their school climate. The students are drawn from two districts in
Southeastern Michigan. Intellectual Merit The current study contributes to
theory and research seeking to understand how youth conceptualize their school
racial climates. The comprehensive framework being developed in this work will
also inform school improvement efforts and teacher training by providing
specific areas of focus and predictions for how varied initiatives may impact
student attitudes, engagement, and achievement. Broader Impacts In the long
term, this research will contribute to schools being able to prepare youth to
live and work in an increasingly diverse society. In the short term, this
project is developing the principal investigator's skill and expertise with
qualitative research, new theoretical perspectives, and her ability to connect
research to educational practice. This research will produce materials
appropriate for teacher education courses and professional development. Finally,
the findings will be disseminated to the scientific community to advance the
literature on the role of race in the lives of adolescents.

Broadening Participation The project broadens participation of underrepresented
groups in the social sciences by involving minority undergraduate and graduate
students as research assistants. The project also introduces participants, most
of whom are from underrepresented groups, to research as a career and gives them
the opportunity to collect data in their schools and communities, analyze the
data and present their findings. The participants also receive mentoring from
undergraduate and graduate students.