* 1203725
* Collaborative Research: GEM: The Ionospheric Source of Magnetospheric Plasma-- Measuring, Modeling and Merging into the GEM Geospace General Circulation Model (GGCM)
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Robert Schunk, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 05/31/2016
* USD 266,660.00

This project will combine observations of ionospheric ions throughout the
magnetosphere-ionosphere system with the Generalized Polar Wind (GPW) model of
ionospheric outflows and a magnetohydrodynamic code for simulating the
magnetosphere. The GPW is a macroscopic Particle-In-Cell (mac-PIC) code. It will
be coupled to the Block Adaptive Tree Solar wind Roe-type Upwind Scheme (BATS-R-
US) MHD model using a system called the Space Weather Modeling Framework. The
codes will be used to perform a set of simulations, representing a combination
of terrestrial season, level of solar flux, and level of magnetospheric
activity. The results from the coupled models will be compared to uncoupled
results to illuminate the role of the ionospheric plasma in magnetospheric
dynamics. To validate and refine the simulation results, a climatological
observation set of outflowing plasma both in the ionosphere and within the
magnetosphere will be constructed from historical data sets. The climatological
model will be binned by season, magnetic activity, and location. Event
simulations will be performed and compared with the climatological data to
investigate transient dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance
our understanding of the role of the Earth's ionospheric environment in filling
its magnetospheric space environment with plasma. The data-model comparisons,
both on a climatological and event-study level, will advance the accuracy of
ionospheric outflow models and Geospace General Circulation Models. The coupling
of an ionospheric outflow model to an MHD model of the magnetosphere will add a
fundamentally important element to our ability to forecast the dynamics of the
magnetosphere.