* 1203811
* Modeling the Optical Properties of Conjugated Polymer Assemblies: Interchain Vs. Intrachain Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Francis Spano, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2016
* USD 417,842.00

This award is funded by the Division of Materials Research and the Chemistry
Division. It supports theoretical research and education on the interaction of
thin films of pi-conjugated polymers and related oligomers with light. Despite
the many experiments designed to uncover the mechanisms by which polymer films
interact with light, a global appreciation of the relationship between solid-
state morphology and photophysical behavior is still lacking. The H-aggregate
model, which has been successful in describing the photophysics of spin-cast
poly (3-hexylthiophene) films, nevertheless fails to account for several key
photophysical properties of phenylene vinylene- and fluorene-based polymer
films, such as the temperature-dependence of the photoluminescence line shape.
This award supports research to investigate a more sophisticated polymer
aggregate model, the HJ-aggregate model. Unlike the H-aggregate model, the HJ-
aggregate model accounts for multidimensional exciton motion, both along and
normal to the polymer backbone. Specific goals of this project include:

1) A detailed understanding of how photophysical properties are affected by the
competition between interchain interactions, which lead to delocalized Frenkel
type excitations and H-aggregate-like behavior, and intrachain interactions,
which lead to Wannier-type excitations and J-aggregate-like behavior. The
interchain vs. intrachain competition can be understood from the way the
vibronic progressions in the absorption and photoluminescence spectra are
altered as a function of the exciton coupling along and normal to the polymer
chains, the temperature, and the degree of spatially-correlated disorder along
and normal to the polymer chains. The vibronic progressions, sourced primarily
by the ubiquitous vinyl-stretching mode common to virtually all pi-conjugated
molecules, therefore serve as a probe of the exciton bandwidth, exciton
coherence length and generalized morphology. Specific applications will be made
to poly (3-hexylthiophene) assemblies, which behave as H-aggregates when spin-
cast from various solvents, but also as J-aggregates, when self-assembled in a
slowly-cooled toluene solution. The possibility of a morphology-driven
transition from H- to J-aggregate behavior is not only a fundamental novelty but
can be exploited for device optimization.

2) A more complete understanding of exciton coherence in polymer films, with an
aim at optimizing coherent transport by taking advantage of the large coherence
lengths recently measured in single-chain polydiacetylene.

3) A detailed analysis of conformationally disordered polymer chains, with an
aim at understanding how disorder and vibronic coupling conspire to create
conformational units and affect photophysical properties.

Analyses will be based on Holstein-variety Hamiltonians, treating through-bond
and through-space excitonic interactions, linear exciton-vibrational coupling,
and disorder on equal footing. Multi-particle approximations will be employed to
reduce the basis set to a tractable size for numerical analysis without
sacrificing accuracy. Fundamental excitations and their steady-state spectral
signatures will be evaluated using standard numerical matrix techniques.





NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award is funded by the Division of Materials Research and the Chemistry
Division. It supports theoretical research and education on how thin films
composed of a class of long chain molecules, polymers, interact with and emit
light. The research is focused on key issues that impede understanding of the
mechanisms by which these films interact with light, how light is absorbed by
these materials and the nature of the electronic states after absorbing light. A
key feature of the PI?s approach is to account for the interaction of electronic
charge with vibrations of the molecular chains. A thrust of this project is to
investigate a new model to describe the behavior of the electrons along
molecular chains and between molecular chains.

Thin films of particular kinds of polymers may be useful as active materials for
organic-based electronic devices such as transistors, light emitting diodes, and
solar cells. This research project contributes to the intellectual foundations
that will enable the use of these materials for lighting, solar energy
conversion, and other electronic devices. The commercial impact of soft
electronic devices is expected to dramatically increase over the next several
years, through products like flexible displays, electronic labels and solid-
state lighting. In addition, the proposed activities will enhance research
infrastructure through international collaborations.