* 1203516
* GEM: Electromagnetic Ion Cyclotron Waves in a Coupled System of the Earth's Magnetospheric Ring Current, Plasmasphere, and Ionosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Ming Zhang, Florida Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Janet U. Kozyra
* 05/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Electromagnetic ion cyclotron (EMIC) waves are a common feature of the Earth's
magnetosphere and strongly affect ions, thermal electrons, and
thermal/suprathermal ions in ring current. EMIC waves also play in important
role in the formation and loss of relativistic electrons in the outer radiation
belt. This project will use a combination of observational data and theoretical
modeling to obtain the EMIC wave power spectral density (PSD) on a global
magnetospheric scale. The project will examine how the EMIC PSD develops
throughout the different phases of geomagnetic storms. It will use a quasi-
linear approach to the Ring Current-EMIC wave system that is based on a set of
the kinetic equations that self-consistently treat the coupling of the ring
current and EMIC waves. The model will be a development and enhancement of
existing model. The major tasks will be (1) to develop a self-consistent, non-
bounce-averaged, model of EMIC waves in the magnetospheric plasma, (2) to
include a self-consistent magnetic field calculation in the global RC model, (3)
to verify the modeled EMIC waves against the observational data from the Cluster
satellite mission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is relevant to NSF's
Geospace Environment Modeling (GEM) program. It will proved a self-consistent
model of processes that are important in space weather and will enhance our
ability to forecast space weather phenomena in the ring current and out
radiation belt. The project has educational impacts as well. An undergraduate
student will be trained and involved in this study.