* 1203105
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Neighborhood Crime and Property Values
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2013
* Ryan King, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 03/31/2013
* USD 8,265.00

SES-1203105 Ryan King Sarah McGeever SUNY, Albany

Abstract

Doctoral Dissertation Research: Neighborhood Crime and Property Values

The construction of new correctional facilities often faces opposition by
potential neighboring communities. Two primary concerns are consistently cited
as reasons for such opposition: fears of rising crime and declining property
values in the neighborhood. However, few empirical studies have examined this
important and timely issue. This project employs data on almost 10,000 census
tracts from 91 U.S. cities to investigate the relationship between correctional
facilities, crime rates, and property values.

The project is grounded in social scientific theories regarding social
disorganization and routine activities. It pursues three main empirical goals.
First, longitudinal analyses will examine the relationship between the presence
of a correctional facility, crime levels and property values over time to gauge
the degree to which these patterns have changed. Second, cross-sectional
analyses of neighborhoods, disaggregated by the level of socio-economic
disadvantage, will assess the degree to which the type of neighborhood
influences results. Finally, analyses will evaluate whether the type of
correctional facility shapes the effects on crime and property values. The
methodological approach includes several types of multivariate modeling, as well
as propensity score matching. In addition to U.S. Census data (1990, 2000), the
study relies on the National Neighborhood Crime Study and the Time Series
Database available via Geolytics, Inc.

Broader Impacts Findings from this dissertation seek to inform our understanding
of how the presence of correctional facilities impacts the surrounding
communities. Results from this project may be of interest to urban and community
planners, as well as the law enforcement community and the general public. In
addition to policy impacts, this dissertation project will produce a novel,
publicly available dataset containing crime statistics, property value and
correctional facility variables at the census tract level for a number of large
cities.