* 1203433
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Funding Adaptation as Development: Tanzania's Engagement with UN Policy
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2012,11/30/2013
* Brian King, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Hammel
* 11/30/2013
* USD 11,691.00

This doctoral dissertation project seeks to understand how adaptation to climate
change is conceptualized by some policy makers. As global negotiations regarding
the long-term reduction of greenhouse gas emissions continue without reaching a
consensus, adaptation to the impacts of climate change becomes increasingly
significant. Adaptation, broadly speaking, refers to actions that proactively or
reactively minimize the negative impacts of climate change. According to the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, even if carbon emissions were
drastically and immediately reduced, global warming over the next few decades as
a result of past emissions is unavoidable. Adaptation is necessary, yet how it
is defined, financed, and implemented remain subjects of great uncertainty. The
main objective of this study is to understand how adaptation works alongside and
with development in adaptation funding policy. By empirically understanding how
a concept of adaptation is defined and operationalized, this research will
capture the nuanced integration of adaptation and development that is
materializing in one leading international institution: the Adaptation Fund. The
Adaptation Fund is the primary mechanism for financing adaptation in developing
countries under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC). As such, the ways in which the Adaptation Fund defines, finances, and
implements adaptation policies are critically important for understanding future
responses to global climate change. Using research methods that include archival
data collection and analysis, participant observation, and semi-structured
interviews with policymakers and other key individuals involved in the
preparation of a proposal to the Adaptation Fund, this study seeks to understand
what adaptation is according to the Adaptation Fund, how this concept is
implemented and operationalized in the funding process, and finally, how the
concept is accepted, challenged, or transformed by nations applying for funding,
drawing on the specific application experiences of one case study, the country
of Tanzania.

This research will contribute to knowledge about how different
conceptualizations of adaptation to climate change are integrated with
development practices, circulated through policy, and shape the type of
adaptation projects proposed and undertaken in developing countries. How
adaptation occurs, who pays for it, and whose needs are prioritized are among
the most urgent questions currently under debate in international policy. This
project will advance research and policy on adaptation funding by providing
specific empirical detail on how one developing country (Tanzania) is working to
receive funding support for climate change adaptation. This will generate
insights into how developing countries are able to respond to climate change
given the priorities, constraints and requirements encountered in adaptation
funding mechanisms. This research has direct policy relevance for global
institutions including the Adaptation Fund and other climate finance mechanisms
housed in governmental and non-governmental institutions and the private sector.
In particular, findings will contribute to the development and implementation of
the UNFCCC's new multi-billion dollar Green Climate Fund. Finally, this research
will provide beneficial insights to countries, communities, and institutions
applying for funding by clarifying the funding process and illustrating the less
explicit factors that shape the decision to fund or reject proposals. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish an independent research
career.