* 1203355
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: A Hidden Treasure in Northeastern Alabama - Revitalizing the Jacksonville State University Herbarium
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Jimmy Triplett, Jacksonville State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2017
* USD 392,384.00

The herbarium of Jacksonville State University consists of more than 75,000
specimens of regional plants, making it one of the largest (and most diverse)
botanical collections in Alabama while also being largely unknown to the general
scientific community. This project will alleviate overcrowded storage, provide
long-term collection security, and fully modernize access and educational
outreach. Specific actions include (1) installation of new herbarium cases and a
mobile storage system; (2) acquisition of digital documentation equipment; (3)
curation and computerization of the entire JSU Herbarium collection; and (4)
enhancement of visibility and synergy, utilizing new Internet resources and
interdisciplinary initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project represents a
dynamic resource for science education in rural Alabama, providing immediate
training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students and long-lasting
outreach in an underserved community. Backlog curation and full integration of
the holdings will result in a fully functional, easy-to-use resource for natural
history research, and computerization will make it broadly accessible to
scientists, educators, students, and the general public alike. The project will
add a vast diversity of new specimen records and digital images to Internet
databases, including the Alabama Plant Atlas, thereby supporting collaborative
efforts to create a comprehensive online database for the flora of Alabama.