* 1203560
* Collaborative Research: Integrated HPC Systems Usage and Performance of Resources Monitoring and Modeling (SUPReMM)
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Thomas Furlani, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Rudolf Eigenmann
* 06/30/2015
* USD 458,561.00

Todays high-performance computing systems are a complex combination of software,
processors, memory, networks, and storage systems characterized by frequent
disruptive technological advances. In this environment, system managers, users
and sponsors find it difficult if not impossible to know if optimal performance
of the infrastructure is being realized, or even if all subcomponents are
functioning properly. Users of such systems are often engaged in science at the
extreme where system uncertainties can significantly delay or even confound the
scientific investigations. Critically, for systems based on open source software
systems which includes a large fraction of XSEDE resources, the data and
information necessary to use and manage these complex systems is not available.
HPC centers and their users, are to some extent flying blind, without a clear
understanding of system behavior. Anomalous behavior has to be diagnosed and
remedied with incomplete and sparse data. It is difficult for users to assess
the effectiveness with which they are using the available resources to generate
knowledge in their sciences. NSF lacks a comprehensive knowledge base to
evaluate the effectiveness of its investments in HPC systems.

This award will address this problem through the creation of a comprehensive set
of tools for developing the needed knowledge bases. This will be accomplished by
building on and combining work on HPC systems monitoring and reporting currently
underway at the University at Buffalo under the Technology Audit Service (TAS)
of the XSEDE project and University of Texas/ Texas Advance Computing Center
(TACC) as part of the Ranger Technology Insertion effort with many elements of
existing monitoring and analysis tools. The PIs will provide the knowledge bases
required to understand the current operations of XSEDE, to enhance and increase
the productivity of all of the stakeholders of XSEDE (service providers, users
and sponsors), and ultimately to provide open source tools to greatly increase
the operational efficiency and productivity of HPC systems in general.