* 1203304
* CSBR:  Natural History Collections:  RUI: Collection Improvement of Marshall University's WV Vertebrate Survey Museum: West Virginia Natural History Updated and Online
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Thomas Pauley, Marshall University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Roland Roberts
* 04/30/2015
* USD 373,256.00

This proposal's goal is to save West Virginia's primary natural history
collection which includes over 21,000 mammals, amphibians, and reptiles amassed
over 70 years. Almost every species that has been described in West Virginia is
included, even federally endangered species. This collection is larger than in
any other museum nationally and as so is a unique resource and should be
developed for training the next generation of biologists who can then study,
maintain, and protect Appalachia's animals. However, it is in urgent need of new
equipment and curation to ensure its survival. Additionally, once the database
is developed it will be possible to make this collection nationally/globally
accessible via the Web. Marshall University is a primarily undergraduate
teaching institution in southwestern West Virginia. This collection has
tremendous impact on its students and the local Appalachian community. It is
used to train students in biology courses and students actively use the
collections for research, presentations, and publications. The collections are
also used for K-12 outreach focusing on local diversity and conservation
ecology. Education outreach and early exposure to science is crucial for the
development of a scientifically literate population in West Virginia, an
educationally and socioeconomically challenged state.