* 1203311
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Youth, Poverty and Educational Success
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Ranita Ray, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 03/31/2013
* USD 5,900.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: Youth, Poverty and Educational
Success&lt;br/&gt;Ranita Ray&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this research is to investigate why some young adults battling poverty are able
to overcome barriers and achieve success in an environment of deprivation and
inequality, while others fall prey to the same predicaments of poverty. Drawing
on three years of ethnographic study, I provide a holistic lens on the lives of
sixteen young adults from a low-income city. I illuminate how the organization
of daily activities can grant access to the skills and social relations required
for academic success and analyze how these valuable forms of social networks and
skills are cultivated and shared. Instead of primarily focusing on educational
settings, I document the experiences of sixteen youth presenting a holistic lens
on their lives. This detailed ethnography follows the young adults into multiple
components of their lives, including school, work, family, neighborhood, peer
groups, romantic relationships, hobbies, extra curricular activities and
leisure. &lt;br/&gt;In sum, I aim to generate a more thorough understanding of
the effect of class on educational outcome among young adults while
simultaneously examining what is takes to overcome hardships. Data generated by
this project mainly includes ethnographic data drawing on participant
observation and in-depth interviews among a group of youth and their networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact of Study&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Considering
the fact that America's poverty rate rose to 15.1% in 2010, its highest level
since 1993 and those growing up in poverty face tremendous barriers in achieving
educational success, it has never been more important to continue to explore the
processes through which poverty hinders educational achievements and how some
overcome the barriers. At the policy level, my dissertation illuminates ways in
which the transition from high school to college can be better facilitated among
young adults. I will show that educational performance is influenced by multiple
contexts of life, demonstrate the avenues inside and outside school where
interventions can be made and, highlight the resources and skills that are
helpful in making this transition.