* 1203720
* Collaborative Research:  Forum for Arctic Modeling and Observational Synthesis (FAMOS)
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Andrey Proshutinsky, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 08/31/2014
* USD 169,493.00

This is a pilot effort to engage in discussions to change arctic ocean model
inter comparison activities (Arctic Ocean Model Intercomparison Project, AOMIP)
into a new project called the Forum for Arctic Modeling and Observational
Synthesis (FAMOS) that will focus on the organization of arctic ocean science
and enhancing collaboration and coordination among different contributing
disciplines. Observationalists, theoreticians, and modelers will be represented
at all levels of activities starting from generating hypotheses, to planning and
finalizing analyses. This pilot effort will explore how the work will be managed
through annual project meetings, virtual workshops, and scientist-to-scientists
communications and collaborations. The long term FAMOS science goals are to: (i)
Continue validation and improvement of regional Arctic Ocean models in a
coordinated fashion, (ii) Investigate ways to improve reanalysis products with a
focus on data assimilation and the design of comprehensive observing systems,
(iii) Continue investigation of variability of the Arctic Ocean and sea ice at
seasonal to decadal time scales focusing on the processes, and identify
mechanisms responsible for the observed changes, and (vi) Analyze IPCC model
results validating them against observations in the Arctic and results from the
regional Arctic models. The project will sponsor a workshop; encourage and
coordinate formation of intercomparison projects focused on solving current
issues of interest to the observational and modeling communities; prepare papers
and give talks about FAMOS and lead the ongoing intercomparison projects from
initial brainstorming to final publication; provide limited funding for travel
and for publication of results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the future it is
thought that FAMOS will help improve our understanding of oceanic and sea-ice
processes. The most significant FAMOS contributions will likely be: development
of regional arctic models, identification of model errors and causes of these
errors and model discrepancies, recommendations for improvements of existing
regional coupled ice-ocean models and GCMs by implementing new physics and
parameterizations for arctic processes. Within these activities, an important
contribution will be an assessment of the state and variability of Arctic sea
ice and ocean parameters from 1870-present. The coordinated community approach
to the investigation of Arctic Ocean variability is the only way to assess the
degree of uncertainty in results and conclusions made by different modelers,
scientific groups, or institutions. Therefore, FAMOS will contribute to this
assessment and establish a set of benchmarks characterizing the state-of-the-art
of Arctic Ocean modeling, and the newest analysis of the Arctic Ocean climate
and its variability. One of the highest impacts of the FAMOS activity is
educational (including the AOMIP/FAMOS school) because it promotes the growth of
young scientists participating in the project, provides guidelines for critical
analysis of the existing models, and fruitful improvements and developments of
the arctic models by a new generation of arctic modelers.