* 1203492
* Marine Test of the Sensitivity of Ice Streams Entering Baffin Bay to Ocean Warming from LGM through Deglaciation, with an Emphasis on Central West Greenland Ice Streams
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2016
* John Andrews, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 03/31/2016
* USD 372,724.00

The proposed research will evaluate how ocean warming contributed to past ice
sheet dynamics through study of the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) through early
Holocene behavior of ice streams draining into Baffin Bay. This research will
provide a new context for understanding ice sheet response to past warm periods,
in particular, the BÃ¸lling/Allerod interstadial period, which hosted rapid sea
level rise and abrupt climate warming after the LGM. At the LGM the Greenland
Ice Sheet (GIS) was one of three large ice sheets terminating via large, fast
flowing ice streams into Baffin Bay. This project will&lt;br/&gt;study the past
history, dynamics, and ice-sheet ocean interactions in Baffin Bay, and the role
of ocean warming in ice sheet demise, via multi-proxy analysis of existing (2008
and 2009) sediment cores from the West Greenland continental slope. Data from
this proposal will be used to model freshwater flux from the ice streams, and
will provide new information on what role the Greenland Ice Sheet played in past
sea-level rise as the LGM ice sheet began to shed as much as 4.6 m of sea level
equivalent. The research will test three hypotheses using foraminiferal faunas,
sediment mineralogy, stable isotope analyses, stratigraphy of iceberg rafted
detritus (IRD), and visible diffuse spectral reflectance data:&lt;br/&gt;1. The
western margin of the GIS advanced during stadials and retreated during
interstadials in&lt;br/&gt;response to the presence or absence of ocean warming
via the West Greenland Current.&lt;br/&gt;2. Peaks of ice-berg rafted material
(IRD) result from two distinct processes: Proximal IRD is&lt;br/&gt;derived from
retreat of the GIS off the shelf edge, whereas distal IRD results from collapse
of the&lt;br/&gt;Laurentide Ice Sheet and Innutian Ice Sheet/NW Greenland
margins in northern Baffin Bay.&lt;br/&gt;3. Advection of warm water along the
West Greenland margin causes enhanced melting of&lt;br/&gt;northern Baffin Bay
icebergs and sea ice at the polar front, forming an IRD belt along the
W.&lt;br/&gt;Greenland margin, which preserves a record of ice sheet-discharge
events under conditions of&lt;br/&gt;ocean warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
GIS is losing mass in response to modern warming. It stores enough fresh water
to raise global sea level by 6.5 m, making its sensitivity to warming a major
societal concern. It is anticipated that the sensitivity and response of the GIS
to past warming, which are the foci of this project, will help constrain
projections of the future evolution of the GIS.