* 1203426
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Peer Influence and Aesthetic Taste
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Omar Lizardo, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 03/31/2014
* USD 9,100.00

SES-1203426&lt;br/&gt;Omar Lizardo&lt;br/&gt;Sara Skiles&lt;br/&gt;University of
Notre Dame&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Doctoral
Dissertation Research: Peer Influence and Aesthetic
Taste&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine how people's opinions
influenced by their assessment of what other people think. The study contributes
to a classic literature in the sociology of culture and applies it to a
contemporary case study involving art appreciation. The project employs
experimental methods. Specifically, a survey of 2,250 adult respondents requests
their opinion of a particular painting twice, once before and once after
receiving information about the opinions expressed by members of a hypothetical
reference group. Variation in how such information changes the respondents' own
opinions will enable us to assess the degree to which our aesthetic taste and
opinions reflect efforts to engage in what is known as "symbolic boundary work."
A central hypothesis is that respondents' taste expressions will be a function
not only of their own social position, as has been demonstrated in numerous
other studies, but also of attempts to draw symbolic boundaries between or
around themselves and others, and that knowledge of others? tastes will be a
significant predictor of such boundary work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The project is designed to examine the connection between
culture and inequality by investigating how people's opinions of art objects
reflect larger social stratification dynamics. Findings from this study may be
of interest not only to scholars, but to public and non-governmental
organizations involved in art production and conservation. Findings may also
influence art education programs and related forms of community outreach. Data
from this project will be made publically available.