* 1203483
* CSBR: Natural History Collections: Curatorial upgrade and database development of the former George Gray Museum
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Leo Buss, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 137,136.00

In 1994 the specimens of the former George M. Gray Museum of the Marine
Biological Laboratory (Woods Hole, MA) were transferred to the Yale Peabody
Museum. Included in this material were the large collections of New England
region invertebrates amassed by the Systematic Ecology Program (1962-1972).
Although safely stored in the museum's Environmental Science Center, much of the
collection is uncataloged and in need of complete curatorial upgrade. This
material comprises 20,000 fluid-preserved specimen lots accompanied by detailed
collection data. The primary goal of this project is to recurate and
electronically catalog these specimens, with the resulting dataset made
available via the internet to a global audience of scientists, educators, and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to upgrading the utility of the
former Gray Museum collection, this project is an opportunity to introduce
undergraduate student assistants to museum best practices as they complete the
curatorial tasks. Furthermore, a component of this project will be to develop an
image gallery of New England invertebrates; these images will supplement an
existing identification manual for this region. To enhance understanding of the
utility of museum collections for the study of biodiversity, ecology and
evolution, a workshop for science teachers will be developed and hosted by the
Peabody Museum; the primary specimen resource for this workshop will be the
collections that are the subject of this grant.