* 1204904
* Cyber Security Education, Curriculum, and Workforce Development
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Debasis Bhattacharya, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2015
* USD 200,000.00

This project is developing a set of information security and assurance (IA)
courses, using an interactive, hands-on approach, to prepare high school and
undergraduate students for workforce opportunities. The curriculum is being
structured in modular formats, using project-based learning (PBL) scenarios,
which are being adapted to different target groups, including high school and
college students, as well as high school teachers and college faculty teaching
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) curricula.

Intellectual Merit: The project aims to provide opportunities for high school
and undergraduate students to get first hand exposure, practical knowledge and
understanding of the concepts of information security and assurance by creating
a creating a practical, effective, and engaging curriculum for teaching
cybersecurity and information assurance to high school and undergraduate
students. The implementation plan involves multiple course offerings, cyber
camps, and research projects designed to increase the knowledge, skills, and
awareness of high school and undergraduate students in the emerging field of
information security and assurance. It builds on activities such as the Cyber
Patriot program of the US Air Force and the Digital Forensics Challenge 2011,
managed by the US Department of Defense Cyber Crime Center (DC3).

The specific objectives of the project are to: (a) develop and implement modular
course materials and educational resources on cybersecurity, (b) offer high
school and undergraduate students cybersecurity camps and cyber career planning
activities, (c) provide research opportunities for undergraduate students and a
Certificate of Completion for students who complete a series of online courses
related to information security, and (d) establish a career pathway for students
who wish to become entrepreneurs with expertise in information security.

Broader Impact: The need for a curriculum on information security and assurance
is critical to the success of business leaders of tomorrow because information
security practices, policies and technologies are prevalent in every industry
and organization. The threat to corporate data, equipment, and resources is
increasing with the proliferation of global cyber criminals and malicious
software. This understanding and expertise can help launch new careers in
cybersecurity and information assurance. In addition, the program is being
developed with specific groups in mind who are traditionally ignored by
cybersecurity training programs, including women, minorities, and small-business
owners. Training modules are being disseminated online to the community for
general education and learning at www.soihub.org. Formal assessments of the
course modules and all aspects of the work provide a foundation for global
adoption.