* 1204347
* II-NEW: Infrastructure for Change: From a Teaching Department to National Prominence
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Ophir Frieder, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 06/30/2015
* USD 460,000.00

Over the last several years, Georgetown University has espoused
a&lt;br/&gt;policy of growth for its science departments. This project
supports&lt;br/&gt;Georgetown University's growth goals by positing a
multifaceted&lt;br/&gt;research program that explores new techniques for
processing large&lt;br/&gt;collections of text data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project examines how both new and existing text processing methods&lt;br/&gt;may
be applied to a variety of open problems across different&lt;br/&gt;disciplines
within computer science. Research activities include text&lt;br/&gt;mining for
large-scale document collections; machine learning&lt;br/&gt;techniques for
detecting malicious executables; information retrieval&lt;br/&gt;methods for
performing proactive digital forensic investigations; text&lt;br/&gt;processing
approaches for preventing privacy breaches in encrypted&lt;br/&gt;voice-over-IP
(VoIP) communication; and data mining and sentiment&lt;br/&gt;detection methods
for automated content analysis of large quantities&lt;br/&gt;of political
science texts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To support these goals, the project includes
the creation of a&lt;br/&gt;next-generation infrastructure for large-scale text
processing.&lt;br/&gt;Data-intensive tasks will use interconnected front-end
systems,&lt;br/&gt;connected via high-speed networking to scalable back-end
storage&lt;br/&gt;solutions. The infrastructure supports the development and
testing of&lt;br/&gt;novel text processing algorithms on very large
corpora.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's themes of text processing and
information assurance have&lt;br/&gt;been integrated into the undergraduate and
graduate curricula at&lt;br/&gt;Georgetown University. More broadly, the project
benefits society by&lt;br/&gt;improving the ability to (1) process large
quantities of information,&lt;br/&gt;(2) identify malicious applications, and
(3) improve the resiliency of&lt;br/&gt;digital communication networks to
eavesdropping attacks. The project&lt;br/&gt;broadens the participation in
research through the University's Summer&lt;br/&gt;Programs for High School
Students and the Center for Multicultural&lt;br/&gt;Equity and
Access.&lt;br/&gt;