* 1204247
* Longitudinal variation in the physiology, growth and reproduction of white spruce at the Arctic treeline in Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Bjartmar Sveinbjornsson, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 09/30/2016
* USD 680,900.00

The position of the Arctic treeline is an important regulator of surface energy
budgets, carbon cycling, habitat availability and subsistence resources in high
latitude environments. Changes in the health and spatial extent of the arctic
forest are largely governed by relationships among climate and the physiology,
growth and reproductive success of the trees. Previous work along a longitudinal
gradient in the Brooks Range, Alaska, showed a pattern of declining growth in
response to rising temperatures from west to east. This study aims to uncover
the processes underlying this trend and examine the implications for
reproductive success and the establishment of new trees beyond the current
treeline. Its goals are to measure and compare tree microclimates of the
western, central and eastern Brooks Range; compare and contrast continuous
measurements of white spruce canopy gas exchange over several growing seasons in
the western, central and eastern Brooks Range in order to evaluate the relative
importance of drought stress and cold soils at the arctic treeline in Alaska;
make detailed measurements of the seasonality and magnitude of growth in all
major organs of white spruce in the western, central and eastern Brooks Range,
assess the potential for shifts in allocation and to more accurately evaluate
current and future tree performance; and conduct a detailed study of
longitudinal variation in seed production, seed quality, seedling establishment
and seedling performance (physiology and growth) within the Brooks Range, as
these demographic processes will largely determine whether a treeline will
advance, remain static or retreat in response to climate change. Results of the
study will inform policy makers and local residents of the likely outcomes of
interactions between climate change and the health and spatial extent of the
highly sensitive arctic forests of Alaska.

The team will reach out to students and adults in rural and urban Alaska through
four specific activities. They will extend an existing relationship with biology
teachers at Kotzebue High School and visit their classrooms to introduce the
importance of vegetation as a mediator of climate change and to share the
results of previous and ongoing work in the area. They will provide
opportunities for outstanding students from Kotzebue High School to join their
research team in the field at the Kugururok site. They will arrange to be
interviewed by Kotzebue Public Radio to inform the communities about their
research activities and findings, and they will participate in a BLM Campbell
Creek Science Center Fireside Chat series.