* 1204211
* Intermediate Water Records of Radiocarbon and Temperature Variability from the North Atlantic and Southern Ocean Using Deep-Sea Corals.
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Jess Adkins, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 06/30/2015
* USD 472,133.00

Radiocarbon is a well-established tool for understanding past changes in ocean
circulation and climate. However, recent studies of radiocarbon from
intermediate water depths (~500 to 2,000 meters below sea level) have produced
conflicting accounts of ocean behavior during the transition from the Last
Glacial Maximum (LGM) to the Holocene. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, led
by a professor at the California Institute of Technology, seeks to resolve this
problem by generating a new intermediate-depth radiocarbon record for the last
30,000 years using fossil deep-sea corals from the North Atlantic and Southern
Oceans. A key advantage of this approach over measurements of plankton in
sediment cores is the opportunity for uranium-series age control. Furthermore,
fossil coral samples enable the collection of high-resolution measurements
during key periods in the deglacial transition. For a subset of samples, proxy
temperature data (from clumped isotopes) will be compared to radiocarbon content
in order to better resolve changes in intermediate and deep water mass
characteristics. Simple models will be used to provide a quantitative framework
for the results of data analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will advance
understanding of the role of ocean circulation in climate change on glacial time
scales. Samples will be made broadly available through the developing CalTech
deep-sea coral database, which is already in use by scientists from around the
world. The investigator will continue collaboration with NOSAMS (National Ocean
Sciences Mass Spectrometry Facility) to develop rapid and inexpensive techniques
for radiocarbon dating of corals and other carbonates. The investigator will
also continue ongoing climate science outreach efforts for local schools and
organizations, as well as the broader public. Funding will support a female
graduate student.