* 1204011
* P2C2: Constraining Mechanisms of Tropical Climate Change Using Simulations and Proxies of the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Axel Timmermann, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2017
* USD 328,863.00

The Last Glacial Maximum (LGM), that period of time 21,000 years ago when the
earth was glaciated and significantly colder than today, provides a unique set
of boundary conditions to test climate general circulation models. This proposal
aims to use simulations of the LGM to determine if the Walker Circulation, a
coupled atmosphere-ocean system in the tropical Pacific, was stronger or weaker
at that time. The project will attempt to address several important questions
including: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) How important are changes in the
hydrological cycle, sea surface temperature gradients, and exposure of the Sunda
shelf in affecting past intensity of the Walker Circulation? &lt;br/&gt;2) What
is the impact of model bias in the interaction among these mechanisms?
&lt;br/&gt;3) Can the different reconstructions of past climate in the tropical
Pacific be reconciled and used to constrain each of these mechanisms?
&lt;br/&gt;4) How well do state-of-the-art climate models simulate the response
of the Walker circulation to the exposure of the Sunda shelf due to lower sea
level during the LGM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The models to be used in the study
were also used to produce key paleoclimate simulations that will be discussed in
the IPCC AR5 reports. Thus the evaluation of the performance of the different
models will be very valuable to the climate research community.