* 1204375
* EAGER: Deciphering boulder movement history using cosmogenic isotopes - a numerical investigation.
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2012
* Michael Lamb, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 11/30/2012
* USD 45,048.00

We currently lack quantitative field metrics to decipher how often boulders move
by fluvial or debris flow processes. This project aims to develop and run
numerical experiments to test whether the frequency of boulder movement can be
deciphered from cosmogenic exposure dating. Preliminary modeling has shown that,
in some cases, the number of boulder movement events can be determined from the
pattern of exposure around the circumference of a boulder. The proposed work
would include systematic investigation of likely controlling variables (e.g.,
boulder size, erosion rate, and inheritance) on the mean and spatial variance in
nuclide concentration around and within a mobile, eroding boulder. Results from
this effort would form the backbone for future field sampling campaigns aimed at
measuring boulder movement, potentially applicable to a wide range of
environments (e.g., river channels, debris flow fans,
moraines).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Boulders line the beds of many rivers and are an
important control on rates of landscape evolution, yet their long-term behavior
is not well understood. The recurrence interval of large, boulder-mobilizing
events is often beyond the historical record, leaving the probability of these
events poorly constrained. The project aims to improve our ability to predict
the frequency of boulder moving events for hazard mitigation and habitat
restoration. It could potentially lead to the ability to quantify infrequent,
large magnitude flood and debris flow events with recurrence intervals greater
than ~ 1000 yrs, which can cause significant loss of life and property.