* 1204442
* WSC-Category 3: Collaborative:  The role of local water resources in the water sustainability of Los Angeles
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* James Ehleringer, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 459,140.00

Like many cities in semi-arid regions, Los Angeles relies on extensive,
centralized redistribution projects for its water supply. Water is transported
hundreds of kilometers to support agricultural and urban activities in southern
California; however, allocations from remote sources have been declining due to
drought, over-extractions, and competing water needs. Increasingly, local
governments and water districts are relying on local water sources within the
southern California coastal areas including local groundwater, rainwater
capture, conservation measures, and recycled water sources. Yet, these resources
are managed by a complex set of agencies and water districts with different
structures, histories, and priorities, but which often access similar water
resources. In addition, the jurisdictions of different water management
institutions rarely correspond to watershed and other hydrologic boundaries,
such that the connectivities of the socio-political system and the
connectivities of the ecohydrologic system present a set of very complex
networks for water management. This project will focus on understanding the
coupled ecohydrologic and decision-making processes that determine the
availability of local water resources in southern California, with the goal of
addressing the questions 1) What is the current structure of local groundwater,
wastewater, and stormwater management? 2) What are the ecohydrologic constraints
on local groundwater and rainwater resources? 3) What is the regional water
balance? 4) What are the overlaps and disconnects between the ecohydrologic and
decision-making domains? 5) What are feasible targets for conservation given our
understanding of biophysical, technological, political, and fiscal constraints?
6) How are these impacted by scenarios of future climate change? To address
these issues, this project will draw on extensive existing datasets from
previous research as well as public utility and agency data to: model the local
water balance and groundwater flows; analyze the structure of local water
management institutions; compare and contrast the ecohydrologic and political
boundaries and constraints on local water resources; evaluate the
vulnerabilities of the ecohydrologic and decision-making components of the local
water system to climate, fiscal austerity and land use change; and utilize
modeling and decision-making tools to evaluate proposed best
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the most critical issues
for water sustainability in the region, many of which involve decreasing
southern California's reliance on imported water. To do this, the linkages and
mismatches between the natural and human components of the water system must be
analyzed. The project will directly evaluate the decision-making tools currently
used by local agencies and NGOs to plan groundwater infiltration projects. It
will also integrate research datasets with other public and published local
information about water consumption and end uses, outdoor landscaping and
species specific water use, and current information about best management
practices (BMPs) for Los Angeles. These will be evaluated relative to
institutional and political constraints such as resistance to maintaining
existing infrastructure (due to costs) and funding new initiatives. There will
be stakeholder involvement in direct meetings and in a publicly available data
repository. Stakeholder partners will form a Technical Advisory Board to provide
input on usable data products for local applications. In collaboration with
students and a post-doctoral researcher, a central website for project datasets
and results will be developed, and data services that are responsive to the
needs of the Technical Advisory Board will be provided, including reports and
synthetic analyses. The project will engage local students at the high school,
undergraduate, and graduate levels as well as in K-12 teacher training
activities at the participating institutions and outreach activities of local
NGOs. Through a subcontract with the local grassroots organization Urban
Semillas, the project will incorporate the results of the research into "Agua
University," a program for underserved and minority high school students in Los
Angeles. Finally, the project will partner with the non-profit organization
TreePeople to enhance their outreach and education facility focused on water
infiltration, conservation, and quality.