* 1204983
* Career Pathways in Construction, Architectural Engineering, and Design Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Michael Staley, Seminole State College of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 06/30/2016
* USD 857,494.00

Seminole State College of Florida (SSC) partnering with the local school
district and industry plans to enhance and expand viable STEM academic pathways
in the AS degree fields of building construction technology, architectural
engineering technology, architectural design, and drafting and design
technology. Project activities include: (1) reaching out to the high school
level to supplement current secondary instruction with enhanced postsecondary
academic planning and learning opportunities of increased rigor; (2)
strengthening the current articulated and seamless system of multiple education
and career entry and exit points designed to maximize the number of students who
complete a STEM-related associate degree (or higher) to facilitate economic
development; and (3) establishing new research-based intervention strategies to
facilitate postsecondary student retention and completion. In addition, as part
of a broader curriculum enhancement effort, SSC targets the formal integration
of Green and Sustainable Design concepts into the curriculum. The goal is to
increase the enrollment, retention and graduation rate of students in the
aforementioned fields. The project objectives and activities are based on
existing research and data.

The outcomes of this project contribute to the body of knowledge on technician
education and address factors that impact lower division student success and
high school-community college-university collaboration. The impacts of the
project also include increasing the participation of underrepresented groups and
creating a model that can be emulated by other institutions.