* 1204930
* Building Efficiency for a Sustainable Tomorrow (BEST) Center
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Peter Crabtree, Peralta Community College District Office
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2017
* USD 3,500,000.00

This project is developing the Building Efficiency for a Sustainable Tomorrow
(BEST) National Center to support improvements in the field of building systems
technician education. With the large scale transformation underway in the
building industry, building systems technicians must be educated and prepared to
manage the increasingly complex building automation and energy management
systems now being installed or under development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Center is: 1) creating a national network of industry advisors and research
laboratories tasked with helping to define emerging industry skill requirements,
validate model courses and curricula, and advocate for the mission of the Center
to the larger community of industry stakeholders, 2) advancing the knowledge
base of community college educators by providing opportunities and resources in
the following priority areas: curriculum development, professional development,
career pathway development, and dissemination of research, and 3) strengthening
the national STEM pathway for educating building technicians and engineers
starting in high school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Educators are
advancing their knowledge and understanding of this multi-disciplinary field
through professional development workshops that present best practices in
building system technician education. Students are benefiting from enhanced
industry-validated curricula and well-honed instructional strategies, as well as
expanded program offerings and hands-on labs. The Center is creating links to
research from national laboratories and research institutions on its website to
inform curricular improvements. The project is leveraging the work of other
centers funded by the National Science Foundation, as well as Department of
Energy-funded research and development activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: The Center responds directly to research conducted by the Building
Intelligence Group that identified broad workforce trends and gaps in training
for building system technicians. The Center is providing professional
development and resources to improve classroom instruction and learning, as well
as disseminating information on research and new technologies developed by
national laboratories.