* 1204685
* Climate, Drought, and Agricultural Adaptations: An Investigation of Vulnerabilities and Responses to Water Stress Among Paddy Farmers in Sri Lanka
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Amanda Carrico, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 09/30/2017
* USD 3,722,560.00

Water scarcity is a growing concern in the U.S. and throughout the world,
affecting an estimated one third of the population on every continent. The
problem is particularly urgent in developing countries heavily reliant on
agriculture, which can account for as much as 85-90% of fresh water usage.
Effective water resource management has significant implications for food
security, health, and worldwide political stability. This is increasingly
important in the face of a growing population, dramatic shifts in land use, and
changing climatic conditions. Historically, the world?s farmers have relied on
traditional practices to manage water, but now find themselves challenged by new
conditions that require adaptation to these farming practices. Understanding the
complex array of factors?psychological, social, environmental, and
political?that facilitate and constrain effective adaptation requires an
integrated research agenda that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries.
This research draws upon the core disciplines of psychology, sociology,
hydrology, and engineering in order to investigate these issues among paddy
farmers within the Mahaweli River Watershed, Sri Lanka?a largely agricultural
region that is a microcosm of the sort of massive changes occurring throughout
the world in environmental, institutional, and social systems. These changes
include impacts of drought as well as an ongoing national resettlement plan to
populate and develop regions of the watershed. The research team will use a
multi-level, multi-method approach that incorporates longitudinal farmer
surveys, regional level drought indices (coupled with short- and long-term
drought forecast methods), key informant interviews, and archival analysis. The
research team will investigate how farmers adapt to changing water availability
and how these decisions are affected by psychological, social, institutional,
and environmental factors. The team will examine water availability and rice
yields in light of farmers? adaptive actions, changing rainfall and temperature
patterns, land use changes, and water allocation decisions. These multiple
streams of data will be integrated using agent-based modeling to generate a rich
set of future scenarios to characterize how changes to social and institutional
circumstances and in the natural environment may affect farmers' adaptive
actions and their effectiveness in managing vulnerability to water
scarcity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project will not only advance our
theoretical knowledge within and across disciplines; it will provide much needed
practical information about sustainable water resource management to farmers and
decision makers in a developing country where water scarcities have major
implications for food security. A recent report from the U.S. National
Intelligence Agency looking forward to the year 2040 concludes: ?Water problems
will hinder the ability of key countries to produce food and generate energy,
posing a risk to global food markets and hobbling economic growth.? This
research is directed towards averting the worst of such consequences by
furthering the knowledge of farmers, local community leaders, national
governmental leaders, and researchers about strategies to reduce water stresses
and facilitate adaptation. Additionally, the team has incorporated a major
educational aspect in the project to train the next generation of scholars in a
thoroughly interdisciplinary framework. As such, they will be mentored not only
in theory and methodology but also in how to communicate research to diverse
audiences, including policymakers and some of the world?s most vulnerable
populations.