* 1204223
* NEEM basal ice, assessing the attributes of a cold, deep, dark ecosystem
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Mark Skidmore, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 06/30/2017
* USD 339,790.00

Little is known about the diversity of microorganisms and range of habitable
environments that exist beneath the Greenland Ice Sheet. This project will
characterize geochemical and microbial (bacterial and viral) properties of basal
ice from a 2537 m deep ice core in North Eastern Greenland (NEEM). The ice core
project is led by the Center of Ice and Climate at the Niels Bohr Institute,
Denmark with funding support from NSF and 12 other partner nations. The 2.3 m
basal ice sequence contains 12 discrete debris-rich ice layers, with intervening
clean (debris-poor ice). The debris-rich layers reflect interaction with the
ice-sheet bed, and the incorporation of basal debris. The research has three
primary objectives: 1) Characterize the cell density and phylogenetic diversity
of the microbial community, 2) Determine likely biogeochemical weathering
processes occurring in the subglacial environment, and 3) Model the interaction
between these measured parameters. This work will integrate with results from
the Universite Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium, where data on the physical structure
of the ice and the entrapped gases, which may reflect biogenic activity, will be
analyzed. This research has broader implications for understanding the interface
between geochemistry and biology in light independent, cold ecosystems that are
supported by biogeochemical cycles that operate in near isolation for extended
(&gt;10,000 yrs) periods of time. These are systems that are thought to be
analogous to those beneath the Laurentide mid- latitude ice sheets and during
pervasive low-latitude glaciations in the Neoproterozoic, the so called
?Snowball Earth?.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will enhance
Infrastructure for research and education through a network of international
collaborators in the overall NEEM partnership. The research includes a new NSF
investigator and will provide training for a postdoctoral researcher and
undergraduate student who will benefit from the multidisciplinary and
international nature of the project. The PI intends to work as a mentor in the
program "Bridging Tribal Colleges to MSU", supervising summer research students
from Montana Tribal Colleges. He is also active as a lecturer in the Montana
Apprenticeship Program (MAP) at MSU, which aims to increase the number of Native
American and disadvantaged high school students who want to pursue careers in
STEM fields. Project members will engage in an ongoing partnership with teachers
and students on the Crow Reservation in south-central Montana. The Crow
Education Partnership, independently funded with small federal and private
grants, provides monthly science enrichment activities to fourth grade students
and their teachers in three schools on the Crow Reservation.