* 1204999
* Texas State Technical College Waco Development of an Advanced Technical Certificate in Advanced Vehicle Systems
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Michael Huneke, Texas State Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 05/31/2016
* USD 259,867.00

The need for automotive technicians who can service alternative-fuel vehicles is
increasing rapidly due to technological advance. Automotive manufacturers are
now offering diesel and compressed natural gas (CNG) vehicles. The training on
this type of vehicles in community and technical colleges, however, is lagging
behind the industry. Many new automotive graduates from these colleges hired by
dealerships and independent shops must be sent to extensive manufacturer
training to service diesel and other alternative-fuel vehicles. To change this
situation, Texas State Technical College Waco (TSTC), working with partners from
industry, other higher education institutions and high schools, is developing a
new Advanced Technical Certificate in Advanced Vehicle System, focusing on
light-duty diesel, CNG and hybrid vehicles. The project involves skill analysis,
curriculum development, lab equipment identification and acquisition, and
curriculum implementation and refinement. The curriculum developed will be
submitted to the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board for inclusion in the
state's Workforce Course Manual.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The course and laboratory
materials develop by the project can be adopted by other institutions, spurring
the training of automotive technicians in alternative-fuel technologies in two-
year schools nationwide, and addressing the unmet demand for this type of
automotive technicians. To facilitate this effort, the project will hold a
conference that will invite other community colleges to the TSTC Waco campus to
learn the curriculum.