* 1204070
* Collaborative Research: Interactions Between Air Temperature, Permafrost and Hydrology in the High Latitudes of Eurasia
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Richard Lammers, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 08/31/2016
* USD 539,896.00

This proposal builds off of work conducted under the Freshwater Integration
program and seeks to address two interrelated hypotheses aimed at improved
understanding of the Arctic system at various time and space scales. The first
hypothesis will explore the seasonal relationship between air temperature, river
ice thickness, and winter runoff, while the second will investigate the
contribution of thawing permafrost to river discharge. Research will focus on
several river basins and feeder streams within the Russian Arctic and sub-Arctic
where hydrometeorological measurements have been collected since 1950 and
climate data are available from a number of global data archives. These data
sets will be augmented by new field data collected by the PI team, focusing on
permafrost, isotopic, hydrochemical, and higher time and spatial resolution
hydrologic sampling. This suite of measurements will be used to test the
hypotheses using watershed scale models and the Geophysical Institute Permafrost
Lab model coupled to the Water Balance and Discharge Transformation Model
(WBMplus). Graduate students and an undergraduate will receive training in
fieldwork and modeling, and the grant will support an early career principal
investigator. Results and methodology will also be incorporated into courses
taught at the awardee institutions as well as through minority high school
outreach programs. During fieldwork, an ongoing collaboration with residents
near Igarka will be maintained and materials provided for their local permafrost
museum.