* 1204279
* Seattle's Hub for Industry-driven Nanotechnology Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,03/31/2018
* Peter Lortz, Seattle Community College District Office
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 03/31/2018
* USD 3,093,341.00

This project establishes the Pacific Northwest NSF ATE Regional Center --
Seattle's Hub for Industry-driven Nanotechnology Education (SHINE). It builds on
an ATE project that, since 2009, has developed extensive connections with
academia, national labs, and industry throughout Washington, Oregon and Idaho.
Taking the next step to formally expand SHINE's work into a Regional ATE Center
brings even greater benefit to the nano-rich Pacific Northwest region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The field of nanotechnology is growing
rapidly -- regionally, nationally, and worldwide -- and is becoming incorporated
into virtually all science and engineering fields. As a result, nanotechnology
is quickly becoming an integral part of our nation's economic future. A study
funded by the National Science Foundation estimates that six million
nanotechnology workers will be needed worldwide by 2020, with two million of
those jobs in the United States. Despite these trends, current exposure to
nanotechnology principles and concepts is largely absent across the K-12 and
undergraduate formal education system. It is critical that our middle and high
schools, as well as far more undergraduate serving institutions, become involved
with instructing tomorrow's workforce about this growing scientific field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a Regional Center, SHINE addresses this need by: 1)
engaging the public through hands-on informal Nanotechnology learning events; 2)
expanding access to nanotechnology within the formal educational system, through
both professional development for educators and direct work with students; 3)
increasing the effectiveness of North Seattle Community College's two-year
nanotechnology program to ensure a highly qualified and diverse Nanotech
workforce -- introducing advanced instrumentation into the lab and increasing
the program's diversity; and 4) coordinating closely with industry and education
stakeholders to establish a coherent nanotechnology career and education pathway
in the region -- including the establishment of multiple articulation agreements
and launching new introductory "NANO 101" courses at partner institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center serves as the leader of nanotechnology
collaboration in the region, providing industry, educators, researchers, youth
organizations, and the general public a point of contact and a resource for
connecting to other nanotechnology stakeholders. SHINE also serves as the
destination for interested students from across the region to enter into and
pursue formal undergraduate nanotechnology education -- providing an educational
pathway that exists nowhere else in the Pacific Northwest. SHINE's two-year
college program at North Seattle Community College continues to expand,
preparing graduates for immediate technician-level employment or for transfer to
a 4-year institution to pursue an advanced degree and serving as a model and a
resource for other nanotechnology programs in the region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: SHINE's extensive outreach programs,
particularly marketing to groups underrepresented in STEM, and the ambitious
impact targets that have been set, demonstrate a commitment to serving the
entire Northwest region. SHINE's professional development Train the NanoTrainer
program has a cascading effect, as participating educators bring nanotechnology
to their students for years to come. The curriculum modules that are used for
training (a combination of SHINE-developed and previously created units, drawing
from several NSF-funded sources) are being disseminated widely through active
participation at conferences and via the SHINE website. As a Regional Center,
SHINE further enhances the national infrastructure for nanotechnology education
by actively partnering with the National ATE Nanotechnology Center and several
other Regional Centers in other parts of the US. These collaborations support
the expansion of innovative educational strategies, such as providing remote
access to instrumentation and developing new instructional labs that integrate
research into training and learning.