* 1204085
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Paleoindian Technology in Beringia--A Technological and Morphological Analysis of the Northern Fluted-Point Complex
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Frank Goebel, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2015
* USD 19,644.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Ted Goebel, Heather Smith?s doctoral dissertation
research will investigate the technology, morphology, and context of Alaskan
fluted projectile points, focusing on the new assemblage from Serpentine Hot
Springs (BEN-192), a unique site in Beringia found to contain a fluted-point
assemblage in a buried and clearly datable context. Fluted points are widespread
in the Americas, but in the Beringian area of north and northwest Alaska
problematic and un-datable contexts have prevented interpretations of their
meaning, especially in the context of human dispersal across the Americas, and
we still know virtually nothing about their adaptive context in late-glacial
Arctic and Subarctic ecosystems. Thus far, their attribution to the early period
of Alaskan prehistory has been based predominantly on typology alone. The
proposed research attempts to resolve this problem by addressing the question:
What are the culture-historical and adaptive contexts of Alaskan fluted points?
Excavations at Serpentine Hot Springs in 2005 and 2009-2011 have recovered
fluted points from a stratigraphically sealed context in association with
features interpreted as fire-hearths and charcoal from these features
consistently produced dates averaging 10,200-10,000 radiocarbon years before
present (14C BP). Prior to this discovery, a clear understanding of the context
and significance of fluted points in Beringian archaeology and first Americans
research has been impossible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research goals
of this project are to 1) characterize the technology and morphology of fluted
projectile points recovered from Serpentine Hot Springs and other Alaskan sites,
2) characterize technological activities carried out at Serpentine Hot Springs
and other fluted point sites in Alaska, 3) interpret the technological
organization of the ?northern fluted-point complex?, especially in regards to
settlement and mobility, and 4) investigate the origins of Alaskan fluted
points. The proposed research will combine standard lithic analyses of non-
metric and metric variables with geometric morphometric analyses to obtain a
meaningful statistical expression of fluted-point technology and shape. In this
part of the analysis, Smith will draw on materials from 19 archaeological sites
in Alaska to establish technological and morphological relationships between the
fluted points. In the next component of the analysis, Smith will address the
technological organization implemented by Alaskan fluted-point makers, thereby
facilitating evaluation of northern Paleoindian behavior in terms of tool-stone
acquisition, transport, and mobility. Investigation of technological
organization will be based on analyses of complete lithic assemblages (including
debitage) obtained from Serpentine Hot Springs, Putu, and eight Batza TÃ©na
localities where potentially ?typologically clean? assemblages have been found.
To investigate the origins of fluted-point technology in Alaska and place
Alaskan fluted points in the context of the Paleoindian occupation of the
American continents, fluted-point collections from localities in Canada and the
continental United States will be comparatively analyzed in regards to
technology and morphology. Fluted-point variability and correlations in
morphology will be analyzed by a new form of shape-analysis which utilizes
geometric morphometrics and allows the entire geometry of the artifacts to be
preserved throughout analysis, serving to increase the power of statistical
expression. The proposed analyses will require travel to museums in Fairbanks
and Anchorage, Alaska; Washington DC; Laramie, WY; Edmonton and Calgary,
Alberta; Victoria, British Columbia; and Ottawa, Toronto, and London, Ontario to
study artifact collections curated at these
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding of the proposed research will enable
Ph.D. candidate H. Smith to conduct analyses necessary to place the Serpentine
Hot Springs assemblage and the Alaskan fluted-point complex into the greater
context of human adaptation during the Pleistocene-Holocene transition. Proposed
research objectives will result in generalizations that will advance our
understanding of prehistoric hunter-gatherer risk management in the Arctic, and
how Northern Paleoindians met the adaptive challenges imposed by an ecosystem
experiencing dramatic climate change at the end of the Pleistocene.