* 1204045
* Collaborative Research:  Testing the Northern Route for Younger Dryas Meltwater
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Lloyd Keigwin, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 06/30/2018
* USD 778,099.00

The PIs propose a three-year project to investigate the origin of the Younger
Dryas cooling. New evidence suggests that glacial Lake Agassiz released fresh
water to the Arctic through the Mackenzie River and they propose that this
signal should be detectable along the western margin of the Canadian Archipelago
in the oxygen isotope ratio in the shells of planktonic foraminifera. The
project involves a three-week expedition to survey the seafloor and subbottom
layers and collect sediment cores from the eastern Beaufort Sea, a region that
is remote and has not been well explored. Besides the sediment processing and
micropaleontology that are part of generating the isotope data that reflect sea
surface salinity, two complementary shore-based projects are proposed. The first
is to integrate the new geophysical data on the continental margin with the
climate history of the open sea, sediment transport, relative sea level change,
and terrestrial climate, as they have done previously for the Chukchi Sea. The
second is to compare the geochemical data with results from a high resolution
General Circulation Model that is configured to reveal the path and the mixing
of the melt water. Although the paleoceanographic data will be spatially
limited, model runs will show the low salinity distribution in the Arctic as
well as in the Nordic seas where the freshening may have affected deep ocean
overturning and caused the Younger Dryas cooling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Younger Dryas was a period of climatic cooling that began about 13,000 years ago
and lasted more than 1000 year. It reversed a period of climatic warming, even
though insolation continued to increase. This study will attempt to determine
the mechanism that allowed such a reversal in temperature trend to occur and,
thus, inform discussions of whether similar changes are probable in the future.