* 1204079
* WSC-Category 2 Collaborative: Robust decision-making for South Florida water resources by ecosystem service valuation, hydro-economic optimization, and conflict resolution modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2018
* Joseph Smoak, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 12/31/2018
* USD 168,582.00

Water management in south Florida is characterized by the need to balance
multiple objectives. Among the objectives are the maintenance of high
groundwater levels to limit seawater intrusion and flood control measures that
are also used to mitigate dry-season water shortages. In addition, south
Florida's current population of 6 million is projected to grow to 10 million
over the next 20 years, and urban water demand must be reliably managed. In this
exceptionally vulnerable region, sea level rise and salt water intrusion have
already impacted drinking water supplies and threaten the integrity of low-lying
and highly-valued built and natural environments as diverse as Miami Beach and
the Everglades. Long-term adaptive strategies are needed to ensure sustainable
water resources for expanding populations, agriculture, and wetlands that serve
multiple functions, including support of Florida's fishing industry. Development
of such strategies has been hampered by conflicting stakeholder interests and
technical, economic, and political challenges. This project will conduct highly
interdisciplinary research, utilizing the expertise of multiple institutions, to
investigate the hydrologic, economic, ecologic, and human behavioral dimensions
of sustainable water management and land use planning under various climate
change, economic, population, and sea level rise scenarios. The research will
employ hydro-economic optimization approaches based on robust decision making to
develop management strategies that ensure the resilience of water supplies for
the built and natural systems, while also accounting for the broad-sector value
of water use. Optimization criteria will incorporate the results of project
research linking water management, ecological function, and the economic value
of ecosystem services. New experimental approaches will be implemented to better
understand the impacts of scenario information type and uncertainty on both
selection of decision criteria and evaluation of model predictions among
individuals and groups of local stakeholders. These experiments are designed to
improve understanding of the roles of cognitive and perceptual biases in
decision-making when stakeholders examine hydro-economic projections coupled
with scenario forecasts. Comparative behavioral analyses of stakeholder
evaluations and institutional decision-making will provide unique insights into
how information type, information content, and cognitive biases combine to
influence risk perception, and how the perceived risks to individual and
collective well-being influence scenario selection. Finally, with agency and
stakeholder involvement, the project will collaboratively develop
recommendations for adaptive water management plans that foster long-term
support from the stakeholders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Low-lying coastal regions
subject to sea level rise, climate change, and diverse water demands, including
growing populations, will benefit from the development of innovative, pragmatic
approaches to optimizing the social-ecological benefits of water resources
allocation. The research will include novel approaches for dynamically
incorporating economics into stakeholder evaluations of adaptive land use and
water management strategies. Local, state, and federal agencies responsible for
managing south Florida's water resources will benefit from analyses of adaptive
schemes that explicitly incorporate uncertainty estimates of potential outcomes.
The multiple societies that exist in south Florida, whose options for managing
public water resources are limited by climatic, physical, and/or legal
constraints, require this type of integrated assessment to promote cooperative
decision-making while preparing for uncertain hydro-climatic conditions and
socioeconomic futures.