* 1204807
* Addressing Information Technology Workforce Needs in an Urban Setting
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2015
* Kevin Gyolai, Inver Hills Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 04/30/2015
* USD 199,975.00

This project is designed to address significant information technology (IT)
workforce needs by determining why so few underrepresented students are
enrolling in IT career programs at the college; to create, adapt, and deploy
tools to recruit a more diverse IT student body, and to retain and support those
students. It also provides teacher training and curriculum revisions and
leverages industry partnerships to create new opportunities for students. The
student body at the college is very diverse, being composed of 86%
underrepresented students. Conversely, IT programs at the college are much less
diverse than the general student population, in fact the programs are remarkable
for their lack of diversity in terms of ethnicity and gender. Because the
college has a history of recruiting, supporting, and graduating students from
underrepresented groups, once it is determined why so few students are entering
IT career programs, outreach efforts are being modified to recruit
underrepresented students into IT programs, and additional support mechanisms
are being developed to improve the chances of students of successfully
completing their program.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: A hallmark
of this project is the degree to which it builds on existing initiatives and
partnerships. From design to implementation, from evaluation to dissemination,
this project builds on the work of other ATE projects and centers. Significant
support from business and secondary school partners is creating a collaborative
project team. Industry partners are committed to providing resources to
facilitate effective and cost efficient communication; to sponsor and
participate in career awareness events; to provide access to modern
instrumentation and new technologies presently unavailable to many students; to
help integrate current industry standards and 21st century workplace
competencies into the curriculum; to provide speakers and facilitate information
sessions designed to engage underrepresented students; and to facilitate field
trips and industry tours. This project is improving student learning by
providing secondary school teacher training; leveraging business partnerships to
provide students with 21st century workplace experiences and cutting-edge
instrumentation; and by aligning curricula with industry standards. This project
is designed to be institutionalized upon completion of the proposed activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: At the core of this project is the
promotion of a diverse technical workforce capable of addressing significant IT
workforce needs. This project fosters and builds upon collaborative
relationships to achieve the goal of diversity, and the results of the project
are likely to be widely adaptable at other institutions. The project results are
being disseminated using a digital project portfolio that is accessible on the
World Wide Web.