* 1204851
* Renewable Energy Program
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Olga Valerio, El Paso County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2018
* USD 199,187.00

This project is designed to develop a program in renewable energy that targets
two-year college students and includes as options an Associate Degree in Applied
Science and a one-year Certificate of Completion. The program focuses primarily
on photovoltaic (PV) and solar thermal systems, but also includes an overview of
other renewable energy sources. The focus on solar systems is critical because
there is significant potential for solar energy development in the El Paso,
Texas region. The renewable energy program prepares students for entry-level
positions in the field of PV and Solar Thermal installation and maintenance. The
program also strengthens pathways for secondary school students by providing
high school faculty development and instructional resources. Activities include
curriculum development, two-year college faculty development, and student
recruitment.

The overall goal of the project is to increase the number of El Paso area
technicians who are well-prepared for entry-level positions in the emerging
field of renewable energy. The project has three objectives: 1: To develop a
state-approved one year certificate and two-year associate of applied science
degree in renewable energy. 2: To build the capacity of college and partnering
high school faculty to provide relevant and up-to-date education in the
renewable energy field. 3: To respond to local employer needs in the emerging
field of renewable energy by facilitating an active advisory committee of
composed of business, industry, and education leaders.

Intellectual Merit: The new program provides students with opportunities for
entry-level training in a field that is expected to grow and develop. The
courses within the program are also accessible to students and incumbent workers
in the electrical, construction, and plumbing fields. The program provides
marketable skills and training leading to an industry recognized, entry level
certificate as well as a certificate or degree from the college. The college is
assessing the success of the program, with the possibility of developing
additional advanced courses in the future. An industry advisory committee
assists in ensuring that the program remains current and relevant in terms of
new technology, consumer demands, and industry standards. Partnerships with
secondary schools build a pathway for students, including articulated credit.
The program offers hands on, practical experience for students who plan to work
in the field or continue on to additional education.

Broader Impacts: For security, sustainability and economic reasons, state,
federal, and municipal governments are assessing solar energy options.
Employment opportunities in the field are expanding, particularly as new
technologies are developed and consumer demand increases. This renewable energy
program provides the college with the opportunity to act as a catalyst for
economic growth in the region through the creation of new degree program and
training opportunities for residents. The program is increasing the number of
Hispanic students entering the renewable energy field because the college is a
Hispanic serving institution and over 85% of the students are Hispanic.