* 1204486
* Probing Exotic Nuclear Masses and Structure Relevant to the Heavy Element Nucleosynthesis
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Michael Famiano, Western Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 05/31/2016
* USD 98,033.00

Understanding the structure of atomic nuclei is important in understanding how
those nuclei are produced. As nearly 70% of nuclei heavier than iron and all of
the actinides were produced by the so-called r-process in what is presumed to be
very violent environments capable of producing extremely exotic nuclei, it is
important to understand not just the stable nuclei in nature, but the very
exotic ones produced in extreme stellar events. Current rare isotope beam
facilities are making progress towards producing some of these nuclei. The
current aim of this project is to understand the most fundamental property of
very exotic atomic nuclei - their mass. By understanding nuclear masses and mass
trends, it is possible to understand how nuclei in exotic environments interact
with others and how nuclear abundance changes in these
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear masses approaching the r-process path
will be measured with the Time of Flight (TOF) technique. In this technique, the
flight time for a mixed beam of nuclei will be measured between two points in a
fragment separator. Comparing the flight times of unknown nuclei to those of
known nuclei will help determine the masses of the unknown nuclei. Several
experiments are planned and approved at the Radioactive Ion Beam Factory at The
Institute of Physical and Chemical Research and at the National Superconducting
Cyclotron Laboratory. In addition to gaining a better understanding of one of
the most fundamental questions in science, this experiment will work to provide
a future for science and scientists in the United States. Scientists will be
trained at all levels, including the Ph.D. and undergraduate level as well as at
the high-school and elementary level. Direct training of Ph.D. students will
occur in multiple high-profile experiments. Further, multiple auxiliary outreach
activities to undergraduate and high-school students will be done in order to
excite and inform students about science.