* 1204609
* WSC-Category 1: Integrative Modeling of the Interactions, Connectivity and interdependence of Water Systems and Ecosystem Services in the Lower Mekong Basin
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,02/29/2016
* John Felkner, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/29/2016
* USD 149,972.00

This project establishes a framework necessary for understanding the
interactions, connectivity and interdependence of humans and a changing water
system in the lower Mekong River Basin of Southeast Asia. The cross-disciplinary
team of experts creates future scenarios of change, develops an innovative and
integrative modeling framework, and defines the data collection efforts needed
to evaluate how sustainability of the water system affects human welfare. This
question is how to promote human well-being in a region dependent on a changing
water system. The Mekong River and Tonle Sap Lake of Cambodia are connected
through a flood-pulse hydrology and river-floodplain connectivity upon which
humans are dependent for rice farming, fish production, and social lifeways.
Current rapid changes in land use, hydropower development, human activity, and
climate will all have significant impacts on the predictability of the flood-
pulse system and the availability of water in the future. This research connects
the natural and human system through the study of the ecosystem services
provided by the water system, which in turn support and sustain human life.
Through the assembled team, the research focuses on all dimensions of the
region?s ecosystem services including the provision, adaptation, valuation, and
response mechanisms. The results of this project will set the stage to measure
and explain critical interactions and impacts of a social-ecological system on
the brink of profound transformation driven by demographic shifts, rapid
economic growth, hydropower installations and climate change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops a framework to answer the central
research questions: (1) What is the set of likely future land-use and climate
scenarios for the region and how will they affect the hydrological system? (2)
What is the relationship between the hydrological system and the generation of
the ecosystem services necessary for sustainable agricultural production? (3)
How do human populations depend on the ecosystem services provided by the
hydrological system and respond to changes in the provision of these ecosystem
services? and, (4) What are the tradeoffs associated with alternative choices
for water sustainability? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will serve as a
precursor to a more significant NSF WSC Category 2 proposal, in which the data
and modeling framework will be implemented to assess the physical and economic
ecosystem service tradeoffs associated with alternative approaches to ensuring
water sustainability in the region. This research develops a set of plausible
future scenarios based on climate change, land use, and human activity in the
Lower Mekong Region. A cross-discplinary team of experts develops integrative
ecological-economic models to assess the consequences of changes on human well-
being. While ecosystem services provide a useful and innovative way of
understanding the linkages and feedback of natural systems and humans
populations, measuring and quantifying the value of these services ia
challenging. The models developed are adaptable to other ecosystem service
applications.