* 1204841
* WSC Category 3: Propogating Climate-Driven Changes in Hydrologic Processes and Ecosystem Functions across Extreme Biophysical and Anthropogenic Gradients
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Thomas Harmon, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,495,548.00

1204841&lt;br/&gt;Harmon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many arid and semi-arid regions
of the world, including much of Western U.S., water resources management plans
are predicated on the assumption that the snow pack holds the majority of the
water, gradually melting to replenish the reservoirs as their supplies are
metered out to satisfy human water and power demands, and environmental flow
mandates. Nowhere is this more evident than in the Sierra Nevada Mountains in
California, the remote and sparsely populated mountain range providing the water
and power for millions of people. While it is known that this mountain range's
steep gradients in elevation, soils and vegetation render it extremely sensitive
to climate change, the connection between the underlying hydrologic processes
and the water sustainability issues in these regions is not well understood.
This project will quantify the effect of a range of documented climate change
scenarios on snow melt, runoff, high elevation reservoir operation (hydropower,
flood control and recreation) and low elevation multi-purpose reservoir
operation (irrigation, flood control, environmental flows and recreation). The
San Joaquin River Basin will serve as the prototype for this study, the outcomes
of which will be transferrable to other snowpack-controlled river basins. The
scientific goal of the proposed project is to connect our emerging process-level
understanding of climatic influences on mountain hydrologic processes and
resulting changes to the stream response to the ecosystems services sustained by
water but dictated by human values and policies. The hypothesis is that changing
climate variability in the semi-arid western U.S., and the resulting shift
toward an earlier annual runoff in snow-dominated watersheds will create a
ripple effect, propagating down the mountain front to force human responses in
the form of changes to high elevation hydropower and lowland water supply
reservoir operations, and therefore changes to lowland aquatic and riparian
ecosystem functions. We will test this hypothesis using current hydrologic
process simulation models integrate existing data from the NSF Southern Sierra
Critical Zone Observatory, and from state (California Department of Water
Resources) and federal agencies (U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service). These simulation models will be driven by archival Global
Climate Model (GCM) outputs (temperature, precipitation) for the years 2010 -
2099.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will clarify the connection between
likely climate change scenarios, stream flows, reservoir storage and releases,
and groundwater storage and extractions for snow-dependent river basins.
Furthermore, through engagement with key river basin stakeholders, the project
will result in practical guidelines to how best to adapt policy to the changing
hydrologic conditions in order to sustain water supply, energy and aquatic
ecosystem needs in the future. The San Joaquin River basin was selected as the
subject of study because it embodies water and sustainability issues in the
semi-arid West given (1) its vulnerability to climatic variation due to its
reliance on snow pack and a network of reservoirs for hydropower, flood control,
and water supply; and (2) its massive lowland river salmon restoration effort,
which was initiated in Fall 2009.