* 1204747
* RUI: Phase transitions of a single polymer chain: Effects of solvent, confinement, and tethering
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Mark Taylor, Hiram College
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2016
* USD 116,163.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award made on an RUI proposal supports
computational and theoretical research and education that addresses
conformational phase transitions of single polymer molecules in response to
variations in environmental variables such as temperature, pressure, or solution
pH. This topic is of broad importance since both the bulk properties of polymer
containing materials and the functionality of biopolymers and many polymer-based
"smart" materials are directly determined by the underlying microscopic
conformation of individual polymer molecules. Many smart or biologically active
materials utilize polymer chains tethered to surfaces or nanoparticles. The
effects of tethering and, more generally, confinement on single-chain phase
transitions will also be investigated. This research continues and extends the
recent work by the PI with significant contributions from undergraduate
collaborators in the areas of solvent effects on polymer conformation and phase
transitions of isolated homopolymer chains.&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives of
this project are:&lt;br/&gt; (i) to elucidate the effects of local environment
on the conformational phase transitions of a single polymer chain as relevant,
for example, to the design and function of polymer based environmentally
responsive smart materials; &lt;br/&gt;(ii) to study single-polymer phase
transitions, in particular, the recently discovered homopolymer all-or-none
"folding" transition, in simple models in order to establish the underlying
physics of the universal aspects of protein folding; and&lt;br/&gt; (iii) to
develop conformation and free energy landscapes using a rigorous microcanonical
approach to study transition order, pathways, and kinetics of single-chain phase
transitions. &lt;br/&gt;This work will make use of both the solvation potential
approach, recently developed by the PI to reduce computational complexity in
modeling polymer-solvent systems, and advanced simulation techniques that allow
for direct computation of the density of states of classical many-body systems.
The latter methods provide complete thermodynamic information and can be used to
carry out subsequent multi-canonical simulations to determine structural
information. &lt;br/&gt;This research contributes to the understanding of
single-macromolecule behavior through the development of rigorous solvation
potentials, density of states simulation methods, and microcanonical analysis
techniques. It will contribute to efforts to develop rational design principles
for functional polymer-based and biomimetic. This research program has been
designed to allow for maximum student participation by dovetailing into the
physics curriculum at Hiram College. Computation and simulation methods taught
in the core courses establish a direct link between classroom learning and this
research program and provide students with the tools needed to make meaningful
contributions to this work. The undergraduate students who participate in this
research will benefit by learning state of the art computer simulation
techniques and will have opportunities to present at scientific meetings. Of the
fourteen students who have worked with the PI at Hiram, twelve are now, or will
be pursuing advanced study in physics, materials science, or engineering. This
research proposal intends to continue such student successes and the PI hopes
that these successes will help recruit more under-represented students into the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award made
on an RUI proposal supports computational and theoretical research and education
to study transformations in the size and shape assumed by long chain-like
molecules, polymers, as they respond to changes in their environment, such as
changes in temperature and pressure. The PI will use advanced computer
simulation techniques and models to advance understanding of this important
problem. Changes in the size and shape of the polymers in living systems are
often necessary to carry out functions at the biomolecular level to sustain
life. A better understanding of this process contributes to developing design
principles for smart materials that change their properties in response to
changes in their environment in way that is reversible. Smart materials have
many applications, including actuators, sensors, and a wide range of medical
devices. &lt;br/&gt;This research program has been designed to allow for maximum
student participation by dovetailing into the physics curriculum at Hiram
College. Computation and simulation methods taught in the core courses establish
a direct link between classroom learning and this research program and provide
students with the tools needed to make meaningful contributions to this work.
The undergraduate students who participate in this research will benefit by
learning state of the art computer simulation techniques and will have
opportunities to present at scientific meetings. Of the fourteen students who
have worked with the PI at Hiram, twelve are now, or will be pursuing advanced
study in physics, materials science, or engineering. This research proposal
intends to continue such student successes and the PI hopes that these successes
will help a recruit more under-represented students into the sciences.