* 1204002
* Growing Our Own: Agriscience Technician Training for Viticulture in the Desert Southwest
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* James Perey, Yavapai College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 05/31/2014
* USD 199,998.00

This project is designed to meet new demands for trained technicians to support
the new and growing wine industry in Yavapai County and throughout the Southwest
United States. As a result of the project, the first Associate of Applied
Science (AAS) in Viticulture and Enology degree program in Arizona is being
created. Three partner high schools are delivering viticulture courses onsite,
providing opportunities for high school students to earn up to 12 college
credits while still in high school. The learning environment is being
revitalized through the use of teaching laboratories that provide real world,
experiential education. Vineyards, including a one acre plot at the college and
three 1/3 acre plots at partner high schools, serve as teaching laboratories. A
Enology Laboratory is available to students to conduct wine testing and
experimentation. The success of the program is being determined by evaluating
progress toward meeting measurable objectives related to enrollment; retention;
student success (measured by student learning outcomes); and changes in
knowledge experienced by high school and post-secondary teachers after training.

Intellectual Merit: The project is advancing knowledge and understanding about
growing techniques that contribute to successful grape growing in the high
desert regions of the Southwest United States. This knowledge contributes to the
overall understanding of sustainable agriculture and natural resource
conservation specific to this ecosystem. Development of curriculum, designed to
utilize multiple modalities, provides quality teaching materials for use
throughout the region. Community college faculty and high school agriscience
instructors from around Arizona gain new knowledge about viticulture and enology
and industry practices that result in improved teaching practices across the
state. Internships and trainings that increase the technical knowledge and
skills of secondary and post-secondary agriscience teachers are also provided.

Broader Impacts: The project exposes high school students, through dual
enrollment, to college-level agricultural science classes because early exposure
to college-level courses is known to increase high school graduation and college
enrollment. The project thus creates a career pathway that is resulting in more
rural students becoming trained in agriscience technology. The curriculum,
enology laboratory, and on-campus vineyards provide the college and partner high
schools with resources that are useful across multiple disciplines in food and
agricultural sciences and thus enhance science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics education for many students. The Viticulture and Enology program is
responsive to the needs of a new, emerging regional industry in the region.
Students gain skills needed to successfully compete for employment, while
providing a well trained workforce to the industry. Furthermore, the project is
a foundational piece in the creation of the larger Southwest Wine Center, and
therefore, leverages the knowledge discovery, information-sharing, industry
collaboration, job creation, and economic growth for wine making in Arizona and
the entire Southwest region.