* 1204209
* HURI SURI Helping Future Biotechnologists in Rural Appalachia HURI-up with Undergraduate Research
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Ellen Lehning, Jamestown Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 08/31/2016
* USD 897,212.00

This project is developing a regional biotechnology workforce pipeline by
expanding and supporting biotechnology research experiences for Jamestown
Community College (JCC) undergraduates and disseminating these research
experiences and materials to area high school teachers and students.

Intellectual merit: To further develop the regional workforce pipeline, the
program prepares a cohort of high school biotechnology instructors with
authentic research experiences. These instructors teach a new interdisciplinary
first semester sub-cellular biology course at their schools which is infused
with these research experiences. High school students taking this course also
have the opportunity to do summer research at JCC. The project also provides JCC
biotech undergraduates with a greater array of biotechnology research
experiences on site, thus expanding the scope and depth of their authentic
learning. In addition to on site research, JCC biotechnology students also
participate in summer research internships at regional universities.

Broader impacts: This proposal impacts several hundred high school students by
providing training opportunities for area high school teachers and the
materials/instruments to develop a more contemporary and biotechnologically-
based curriculum at their schools. The effort is also responsive to the
recommendations for biology education reform called for in Vision and Change: A
Call To Action (NSF/AAAS). The project includes economic impact metrics as a
tool for evaluating the effect of the project and uses Tennessee Tech's CAT
instrument to capture gains in critical thinking skills.