* 1204797
* Skilled Students Get Jobs:  Recruiting Women and Engaging ALL Students
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Pamela Silvers, Asheville-Buncombe Technical Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 03/31/2016
* USD 199,896.00

This project is improving technician training and increasing the number of
highly skilled workers in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) priority areas. The goals of the project are to increase the number of
female students in nine programs and to implement the proven educational
strategy of problem-based learning for all students. The following nine programs
are being impacted: Civil Engineering Technology, Computer Engineering
Technology, Computer Information Technology, Electronics Engineering Technology,
Information Systems Security, Mechanical Engineering Technology, Networking
Technology, Surveying Technology, and Sustainability Technology. The college is
partnering with three school systems, industry partners, the YWCA (for community
outreach) and benefitting from the best practices of two established ATE
Centers: the South Carolina Advanced Technological Education (SCATE) National
Resource Center and CyberWatch.

Intellectual Merit: The project builds on effective practice as designed and
implemented by its two ATE partners. This initiative groups core activities into
three components: (1) recruiting female students; (2) retaining these students
by supporting gender equity strategies; and (3) providing relevance through
problem-based learning to all students, thereby connecting skills taught to the
workplace. Student learning is improving through the institutionalization of
problem-based learning adopted and adapted from SCATE and CyberWatch in first
year courses in the nine identified engineering and technology programs. The
comprehensive recruitment, support, and success strategies are being sustained
through professional development integrated with program activities. Project
development is based on the premise that problem-based learning, relationships,
and a network of support are critically important to recruitment and retention
of all students, particularly underrepresented populations such as female
students in technology and engineering programs. Industry input provides support
for adaptation of problems related to a variety of workplaces across the
spectrum of technology and engineering. Problems designed by CyberWatch and
SCATE are being utilized as well as problems available from other sources such
as those developed for the Sustainability Technology program at Wayne Community
College. Female recruitment and relationship building are being supported by an
Ambassador program modeled after SCATE, professional associations, and other
best practices. The membership of the college in the Achieving the Dream network
and the Strategic Plan of the college document an institutional commitment to
diversity, along with its capacity to institutionalize best practices.

Broader Impact: The project is the result of numerous conversations, meetings,
and relationships with industry. Growth during the economic downturn has
highlighted the need for more skilled workers and drives the project goal of
increasing the number and diversity of skilled technicians. Multifaceted
outreach, recruitment, and support efforts are resulting in increased enrollment
of female students in nine STEM programs. Faculty and administrative involvement
are having an impact on the more than 300 students enrolled in these programs.
Dissemination is through NC-NET (an online source for the 58 community colleges
in North Carolina), the college web site, presentations at national and state
conferences, and ATE partners.