* 1204672
* WSC Category 1 Water Sustainability in Coastal Environments: Exploratory Research for an Integrated Study of the Effect of Anticipated Sea Level Rise on Contaminated Site Risk
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Donald Sparks, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2014
* USD 145,000.00

This research seeks to understand the chemistry and hydrology of contaminant
transport within the context of anticipated sea level rise, the engineering
solutions available, and the way humans process the risks. The projected
interaction of sea level rise and contaminated sites is a poorly understood
problem, but a significant one, positioned at the interface of natural science
and social science. The scientific problem is complex, given factors such as the
chemical effects of salinity, pH, redox, the physical effects of changes in
hydraulic gradients, rising water tables, marsh drowning, new areas inundated by
storm surges, and the risk that currently-immobilized constituents may be
released. Economic choice experiments and laboratory experiments provide a way
to incorporate this complexity and to understand how humans may respond.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An exploratory team at the University of Delaware is
investigating how water sustainability needs are impacted by the joint impacts
of contaminated sites and anticipated sea level rise. Concerns about climate
change and sea level rise extend beyond traditional issues of human adaptation,
such as reinforcing buildings and roads, building water barriers, health impacts
of climate change, changing agricultural land use, and insurance issues.
Alterations in hydrology and chemistry of contaminated soils in urban areas,
industrial sites, and waste disposal sites, as the result of sea level rise,
could enhance release and mobility of contaminants, threatening drinking water
supplies, and food sources. The project analyzes how the joint risk of sea level
rise and contamination may affect the economic opportunities, ecosystems, water
quality and quality of life in the coming decades for coastal zone populations.
The research ultimately seeks to compare the benefits and costs of different
remediation alternatives, resulting in direct policy advice. The policy
implications of this research may include a different prioritization of
technological solutions for remediation, including options for abandonment,
containment, and human adaptation. This advice depends on the human processing
of perceived risks, and the distributional patterns of received benefits and
costs across different populations. Understanding how the public responds to
risk, including research on responses when the risk is communicated in different
ways, will provide insights toward improving risk management.