* 1204550
* 360-degree Manufacturing and Applied Engineering ATE Regional Center of Excellence
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2017
* Karen White, Bemidji State University
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 05/31/2017
* USD 2,948,511.00

This ATE Regional Center of Excellence is based on a solid foundation of past
work and successful multi-institution collaboration. The Center builds on proven
programs, curriculum, and partnerships, and takes them to the next level. The
Center's guiding vision is a 21st Century education system that prepares
individuals to participate fully in rewarding careers in manufacturing and which
completely meets the needs of the region's manufacturing employers. A single
goal is proposed: to increase the quantity, quality, and diversity of
technicians in the field of manufacturing. To accomplish the goal, 360° proposes
three objectives: 1) to enhance the pipeline that prepares students for rigorous
manufacturing technician-level programs and entices them to pursue manufacturing
careers while implementing strategies to target under-represented student
groups; 2) to refine industry-driven curriculum that is relevant to today's and
tomorrow's manufacturing industry; and 3) to assess student learning with both
an internal and external focus: an internal focus to drive ongoing program
improvement, and an external focus to provide accountability for all
stakeholders and evidence of student achievement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed activities include two creative and potentially transformative
concepts, one designed to engage girls in STEM learning and one exploring the
potential of smart devices to deliver modularized curriculum. The comprehensive
approach proposed by 360° addresses several areas that will result in improved
student learning in technician education programs, including professional
development for faculty, integrating 21st Century technology, and strategically
engaging employers to drive curriculum refinement. The Center advances discovery
and understanding through assessment of student learning outcomes and a careful
evaluation of what makes each program effective in preparing students for
manufacturing careers. Dissemination of findings will have immediate impact for
Minnesota, be expanded to North Dakota in years 3 and 4, and ultimately benefit
manufacturing education on a national scale. Four activities focus on engaging
underrepresented groups (American Indians, girls, veterans, and rural students)
in order to increase diversity in the workforce. The infrastructure for networks
and partnerships is enhanced through development of the 360° Community of
Practice, building on existing relationships and expanding to include additional
public and private partners. Center goals and activities are a response to real
and immediate needs in Minnesota's workforce.