* 1204849
* Mathematics Transitions in STEM Education
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Rodney Null, James A. Rhodes State College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2016
* USD 602,284.00

This project involves high school, two-year college, business and industry, and
4-year university educator partners in developing a mathematics course for high
school seniors with the overarching goal of improving student readiness for
technical degree programs. Ongoing activities include intensive math teacher
professional development workshops, and seminars and learning communities to
insure implementation of the course. Partner high schools are committed to
incorporating this course into their offerings and actively recruiting
appropriate students for it. The course aligns with Common Core State Standards1
and Ohio's Mathematical Expectations for College Readiness and features a focus
on actively engaging students in gathering, representing, analyzing, and
interpreting data through activities that emphasize application of mathematics
in STEM fields. The project learns from, builds upon, and expands upon a similar
approach, the Skills Gap program, supported some years ago by the state of Ohio.

Intellectual Merit: Technologies, including graphing calculators, sensors,
interfaces, and computer software, are extending students' abilities to gather
and analyze data. The course is collaboratively designed by a group of STEM
faculty, resource teachers, and first cohort teachers (to include former "Skills
Gap" teachers) with input from business and industry. The high school teachers
involved are participating in intensive and sustained professional development,
including a two-week summer institute prior to implementation and ongoing
monthly workshops during implementation. Teachers are learning: mathematical
concepts by applying mathematics in STEM contexts; pedagogical strategies that
enhance critical thinking and problem solving skills; effective use of
technologies in teaching mathematics; and an array of assessment strategies
including performance-based assessments. Anticipated outcomes include: improved
high school student and teacher understanding of mathematical applications in
technical fields; enhanced high school mathematics teacher pedagogical practice;
recruitment of students into technical programs; and decreased numbers of
students requiring remediation in college mathematics.

Broader Impact: A professional learning community of participating teachers and
project faculty is being formed and teacher awareness of STEM technical careers
and resources available for improving STEM teaching and learning is being
enhanced. It is anticipated that at least 24 high schools with 40-48 teachers
will participate in the project serving at least 1,200 students during the
funding period. Overall results are being disseminated through secondary and
two-year college mathematics professional associations the National Council of
Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM), the American Mathematical Association of Two-
Year Colleges (AMATYC), and the Ohio state affiliate of AMATYC (OhioMATYC).