* 1204627
* Connecting Tribal and Pacific Rim Colleges to Improve Indigenous Environmental Technology Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Kirk Laflin, Partnership for Environmental Technology Education
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 08/31/2016
* USD 885,789.00

The National Partnership for Environmental Technology Education (PETE) is
assisting Tribal and Pacific Rim Colleges in improving their Environmental
Technology programs by providing educational resources and professional
development to build an informed and up-to-date environmental 'green' workforce.
Under the guidance of a Tribal and Pacific Rim College Steering Committee the
project provides 1) one-on-one technical assistance to Tribal and Pacific Rim
Colleges, 2) an Indigenous Environmental Fellows Institute each summer for
Tribal and Pacific Rim College faculty, as well as a limited number of high
schools serving indigenous populations 3) mini-grants to assist with the
implementation of curricular projects resulting from the Institutes, and 4)
webinars highlighting Fellows' successes. Project outcomes are available to all
35 Tribal Colleges and 3 institutions in the Pacific Rim (U.S. Territories).
This project is increasing the STEM skill sets of Tribal and Pacific Rim
students by improving STEM faculty skills and enhancing college programs. The
project also encourages high school graduates and non-traditional indigenous
students to enroll in environmental technology and related natural resource
programs to better serve the needs of their local communities. Project
activities are evaluated through a culturally sensitive, logic model driven
approach. Results are disseminated through an interactive website.