* 1204050
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2015
* Bess Koffman, Koffman                 Bess           G
* Fellowship Award
* Peter West
* 05/31/2015
* USD 139,116.00

This is a post-doctoral fellowship award that will support an early-career
scientist to work on a project entitled: "Evaluating New Zealand as a source of
dust to W. Antarctica during the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM)".

Atmospheric dust aerosols are a source of iron (Fe) to the Southern Ocean, where
micronutrient Fe limits biological production. It is hypothesized that during
ice age climates, higher levels of aerosol Fe impacted marine primary
production, and thus the global carbon and nitrogen cycles, substantially more
than at present. Iron in relatively unweathered dust (such as that from New
Zealand) is more soluble and biologically available than that from weathered
sediments (such as from Australia). Therefore, a significant New Zealand dust
input during glacial times implies a greater role for Fe fertilization of the
Southern Ocean's Pacific sector. This project will test the hypothesis that
young soils from New Zealand were a significant source of dust to the Southern
Ocean and hence West Antarctica during the Last Glacial Maximum. The PI will
characterize the New Zealand dust source by collecting samples from well-dated
glaciogenic and other aeolian source sediments and analyze them for major and
trace element chemistry and strontium, neodymium, lead, and helium isotopic
ratios. She will make corollary measurements on samples of glacial-age ice from
the Allan Hills (Victoria Land) and the Siple Dome A and Byrd 1968 deep ice
cores (West Antarctica) to assess dust provenance in these previously unstudied
regions of Antarctica. She also will use a fully coupled global climate model to
evaluate the likelihood of dust transport from New Zealand to different regions
of Antarctica through time, and the relative climatic importance of New Zealand
vs. Australia in terms of iron-fertilization potential of dust deposited in the
Pacific sector of the Southern Ocean. The PI will promote broader impacts for
science and society by producing and disseminating an outreach video and by
working directly in a socioeconomically and racially diverse New York City
middle school classroom, where she will teach an earth sciences unit linking
concepts from her research to students' own experiences.