* 1204533
* National CyberWatch: Cybersecurity Education Solutions for the Nation
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Diana Burley, Prince George's Community College
* Continuing Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2017
* USD 5,669,609.00

CyberWatch has been funded as an Advanced Technological Education (ATE) Regional
Center of Excellence since 2005 (NSF Award Nos. 0501828 and 0902747) and has
expanded its membership to 94 colleges in 29 states. With this award, the center
transitions to an even broader scope as an ATE National Center of
Excellence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of CyberWatch is "to advance
cybersecurity education by leading collaborative efforts to strengthen the
national cybersecurity workforce." The center is building a culture of
collaboration among colleges and universities to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* promote
the growth of cybersecurity education programs nationally, especially in
community colleges;&lt;br/&gt;* build program and faculty capacity by sharing
replicable models of excellence;&lt;br/&gt;* promote the cybersecurity
profession through a national dissemination program;&lt;br/&gt;* strengthen
student capacity and expand pathways to cybersecurity careers; and&lt;br/&gt;*
support research on cybersecurity education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By promoting
"models of excellence," CyberWatch is expanding high-quality cybersecurity
programs at community colleges around the nation. The center is mentoring
colleges to achieve the Center of Academic Excellence in Information Assurance
Education - 2 Year (CAE2Y) designation; increasing students' awareness of
cybersecurity careers and their participation in cybersecurity competitions at
the K-12 and college levels; growing the number of faculty able to teach
cybersecurity topics; assisting with curriculum development at all levels;
expanding the knowledge base of what works (and what does not) in cybersecurity
education at all levels; and continuing effective dissemination mechanisms,
including the center's Web sites, newsletters, reports, conference
presentations, and workshops and institutes, all of which advertise the center's
services to a broad community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a national center,
CyberWatch is leading the effort to bring cybersecurity education at community
colleges to the forefront of the national dialogue, thereby helping employers
across the nation to meet a critical workforce need.