* 1204220
* Collaborative Research: Quantification of Dominant Heat Fluxes in Streams and Rivers in Arctic Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2018
* Bethany Neilson, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 06/30/2018
* USD 469,410.00

Understanding the impacts of climate change on freshwater ecosystems is highly
dependent on quantifying the associated changes in instream temperatures.
However, this can be complicated because these temperatures are related to both
changing meteorology (e.g., air temperature and precipitation) and hydrology
(e.g., instream flows and lateral inflows). The ability to predict climate
related changes on instream thermal regimes in Arctic streams is limited by the
minimal understanding of key processes and the availability of data to quantify
heat fluxes. The investigators hypothesize that the dominant heat fluxes within
Arctic streams are similar to those in temperate climates but that the relative
magnitude of the heat fluxes differ, and that quantification of lateral inflows
is key in predicting water temperatures. To test this hypothesis, they would
address three research questions regarding 1) the changing importance of key
heat fluxes throughout the warm season; 2) the importance of lateral inflows to
understanding instream temperature regimes; and 3) the sensitivity of instream
temperatures to climate change drivers. To answer the first two questions, they
would: quantify heat fluxes using data collection and modeling efforts in two
representative arctic river types (alluvial and peat lined, beaded) near Toolik
Lake, Alaska; adapt instream temperature models based on prior temperate zone
hydrologic research to determine which heat fluxes are necessary to predict the
spatial and temporal variability of Arctic instream temperatures; and use
differential gauging at the reach and basin scales, along with distributed
instream temperatures and other measures, to quantify hillslope-stream
connectivity and lateral inflows. Given these results, they would address
question 3 by conducting sensitivity analyses of anticipated climatic
variability to identify the key hydrologic and meteorological drivers of
instream temperature regimes. Ultimately, they would develop an Arctic-specific
temperature model that provides predictive capabilities of instream
temperatures. In the course of this research, the investigators would develop
related curriculum exercises in close collaboration with high school science
teachers in both Utah and Alaska, and subsequently make these available
nationally. Graduate and undergraduate students would participate in the field
and analytical work, and the investigators would share their results with local
communities in Alaska who depend on aquatic resources for food.