* 1204172
* Collaborative Research: Continuous Records of Greenhouse Gases and Aerosol Deposition During the Holocene: Testing the Fidelity of New Methods for Reconstructing Atmospheric Change
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Edward Brook, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2016
* USD 266,627.00

The primary goals of the project are to exploit new measurement techniques to
evaluate the fidelity of methane, carbon monoxide, and nitrous oxide gas
measurements in ice cores as records of atmospheric concentrations and change
and to develop a first, high-resolution Northern Hemisphere record of
atmospheric methane and carbon monoxide during the past 1400 years free of site-
or ice-core-specific artifacts. To understand the influences of burial rate and
history, ice impurities, as well as drilling and analytical techniques on ice
core gas concentrations, the proposed project will further refine and improve
new methods for continuous gas measurements and use these improved methods to
analyze gases and aerosols in ice core samples from three widely distributed
sites in northern Greenland: Tunu, D4, and NGRIP. All are located in the cold,
dry snow zone, but each has a different annual accumulation rate and is
influenced by different aerosol sources and transport pathways. Two sites
previously were used for firn gas studies which will provide needed controls for
firn and gas-entrapment modeling. Archived core samples are available for D4 and
NGRIP, but a new core from the Tunu site is required. The proposed measurements
will utilize the Desert Research Institute's (DRI's) continuous-flow analysis
with trace elements system capable of quantifying dust, sea salt, biomass
burning, and volcanic aerosols. This system was recently expanded to include
continuous gas measurements being developed and refined by Oregon State
University (OSU), DRI, and other international collaborators under an NSF
Partnerships in International Research and Education (PIRE) grant primarily
focused on student participation and international collaborations rather than
research. The proposed project will extend past K-12 and other outreach
strategies, including coordination and development of activities with outreach
specialists at the Ice Drilling Program Office. Broad outreach will be achieved
with the global, radiative, and ice sheet modeling communities, NSTA-related
efforts, and public lectures.