* 1204850
* Emergent Use of Agriscience Biotechnology
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Natavia Middleton, Technical College of the Lowcountry
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 07/31/2015
* USD 199,200.00

The purpose of this project is to design and implement career pathways in
biotechnology, specifically in agricultural science research technology. This
includes the development of: 1) a biotechnology certificate program, which
contains courses in agricultural science, with dual enrollment options; and 2)
community information seminars/workshops on biotechnology. The primary target
audiences include technical college students, high school students, individuals
working in the biotechnology field, and residents of the region, including
nearby communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Biotechnology is a
rapidly advancing field, with new discoveries and applications that are changing
the face of such diverse fields as agriculture, environmental remediation,
forensics, and health care. The biosciences serve as the tools for many
improvements to daily life often taken for granted. The college, through its
Workforce and Community Development unit, conducted a review and analysis of
existing agricultural science biotechnology training programs. Using this
information, this model program in agricultural biotechnology has an emphasis on
preparing students for employment in a biotechnology field and/or to continue
their science education. The plans to accomplish this goal include mentoring and
advisement, group study activities, and other academic interventions to increase
the level of preparation of students in the critical classes for their majors.
In addition, the project provides career counseling and internships that enhance
academic experience and computer expertise of students in order to prepare them
for the next step in their professional careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The college serves over 12,000 students each year in credit and non-
credit education programs and offers degrees, diplomas, and certificates in some
of the fastest growing career fields as it strives to deliver a competent
workforce for current and future Lowcountry employers. A large percentage of the
native population is currently under-employed and works at low wage service
jobs, primarily in seasonal, tourism related enterprises. The resort climate is
enticing both aging retirees and mobile executives to the region at exponential
rates. These new residents comprise an economic sector that demands advanced
biotechnology services in fields such as agriculture, forensics, pharmaceutics,
biomedical and environmental fields. Several biotechnology firms as well as
clinical, environmental, and forensics labs are operating within a one hundred
mile radius of the college. The program is having a positive impact on student
retention and graduation in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) related disciplines. The evaluation of the program is based on the
percentage of students who graduate and transfer to a four-year college with a
STEM related major; percentage of students who graduate and find employment in
the biotechnology field; increased enrollment in STEM disciplines; and the
number of high school students who enroll in STEM programs at the college.