* 1204796
* WSC-Category 1: From natural wetland to murky water: Cross-disciplinary analysis of a drowning urbanized coast
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Andrew Englande, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2015
* USD 149,841.00

Climate driven sea-level rise and an intensified hydrological cycle are
threatening water resources in the New Orleans metropolitan area and surrounding
Mississippi River Delta. Variable river discharge and sea level rise can promote
cycles of degradation by increasing flooding potential and salinity in regional
waterways. Reversing the onset or progression of degradation will involve
managing freshwater supply (including reintroduction of freshwater and sediment
into wetlands), enabling the sequestration of nutrients that can potentially
restore highly valued habitat, and removal of toxins that challenge human and
ecosystem health. Science and engineering alone will not be sufficient to
implement effective management plans. Well-defined policy and legal frameworks
will be essential for progressive management interventions. Similarly, engaging
local stakeholders to enhance awareness of concerns about water sustainability
will be necessary to ensure ecological and community resiliency under future
climate conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purposes of this incubation
project are to develop a strong organizational framework, to enhance existing
research capacity and infrastructure, and to obtain critical baseline data that
will set the stage for the development of a comprehensive understanding of water
quality and management issues in the Mississippi River Delta region. A
demonstration project illustrates integrative coastal water management in the
study area. This project focuses on management of water quality in an urban-
influenced wetland hydrologic system. The research team assesses government
jurisdiction and property rights related to data on historical and current water
and environmental conditions. The research provides a baseline understanding of
water quality issues at the study site. The study also use focus groups
consisting of local stakeholders to collect data on the historical context and
perceptions of environmental change and to inform the development of tenable
policy solutions. These efforts involve a working group composed of experts and
community partners. The goals of the working group are to enhance water
resources data management to promote institutional management and community
awareness in the proposed study area, and to identify key challenges and
priority research areas that are most likely to offer practical solutions for
water sustainability in vulnerable coastal environments.