* 1204248
* Ethane measurements in Greenland ice cores: Developing a preindustrial record
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Murat Aydin, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 07/31/2015
* USD 297,917.00

Ethane is one of the most abundant hydrocarbon gases in the atmosphere with
emissions from production and use of fossil fuels, from biomass burning, and
from a variety of geologic sources. All ethane sources also emit methane, the
second most important greenhouse gas in the atmosphere. However, ethane does not
share the biological source of methane, making it a useful proxy for specific
methane sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will analyze of paleo-
atmospheric ethane (C2H6), using a wet-extraction technique that has been used
to measure ethane in Antarctic ice cores, using ice core samples from Summit,
Greenland and producing the first northern hemisphere ethane record. The results
will enable answers to questions about the importance of geological emissions of
methane to the preindustrial atmosphere, and about the timing and magnitude of
changes in biomass burning emissions during the late Holocene. In conjunction
with measurements on Antarctic ice cores, the data from this project will help
establish the north-south interhemispheric gradient of ethane in the
preindustrial atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes support for
a PhD student and undergraduate researchers in the Department of Earth System
Science at the University of California, Irvine. The results will contribute to
a PhD dissertation and senior theses of senior undergraduate students. This
project will also create summer research opportunities for undergraduates from
non- research active universities through the REU site program in
Biogeochemistry and Climate Change. The PI and the co-PI will participate in on-
and off-campus activities directed towards educating high-school science
teachers about climate change and its impacts, including a presentation at the
2011 regional meeting of the National Science Teachers Association. The results
of this work will be disseminated via peer-review publications and will
contribute to policy-relevant activities such as the IPCC Climate Assessment.
Data resulting from this project will be archived in a national data repository.