* 1204948
* Mechanically-Adaptable Nanocomposites
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* David Schiraldi, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2017
* USD 394,929.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Drawing inspiration from the sea cucumber dermis as a biomodel, researchers at
CWRU have recently introduced the concept of stimuli-responsive nanocomposites
where the mechanical properties of the materials are altered by controlling the
interactions between the rigid filler components. Using cellulose nanocrystals
(CNCs), which contain hydroxyl groups on their surface, as the rigid filler in a
polymer matrix high modulus nanocomposite films are obtained when the films are
dry and strong interactions can occur between the filler components. However,
upon exposure to water, which disrupts the filler-filler interactions, a
dramatic reduction in modulus is observed in these films. This proposal is
focused on exploration of the fundamentals of this nanocomposite switching
mechanism with the goal of obtaining a better understanding of how different
chemistries of the CNC surface can impact the switching capability of the
nanocomposites and the reinforcement characteristics in different polymer
matrices. Building on this fundamental knowledge and using chemistry from the
literature developed in the CWRU group, a series of CNCs that contain
carboxylate, amine, polymeric or metal binding units on their surface will be
prepared and studied both as dispersions and in their nanocomposite form. In
addition, with the aim of developing a better understanding of how the different
CNC surface chemistries impact the properties of these nanocomposites, a key
goal of this project is to expand and develop this new class of mechanically-
adaptable materials. The PI's group will study nanocomposites that respond in
different ways (e.g. stiff to soft or soft to stiff) to different stimuli (i.e,
pH, metal ion, temperature or mechanical impact) as well as materials that are
also multi-responsive (i.e. show different responses to different stimuli).

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Researchers at CWRU are using the sea cucumber dermis as bioinspiration to
develop a new class of stimuli-responsive or adaptive materials. The materials
are nanocomposites comprised of a cellulose nanofiber scaffold embedded with a
polymer matrix. This reinforcing scaffold can be disassembled by switching off
the interactions between the biorenewable cellulose nanofibers which results in
a dramatic softening of the material. The proposed research will yield
blueprints for a class of advanced, mechanically-adaptive materials with a
substantial application potential ranging from new materials for cortical
implants to adaptive protective clothing, and active vibration dampening
systems. The research is complemented with educational elements that amalgamate
research and education and provide stimulating experiences at both the
undergraduate and graduate levels, implementing outreach to high school and
elementary school students as well as directly with the general public.