* 1204466
* WORKSHOP:   Process Tracing, Counterfactual Analysis, and Active Citation
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Colin Elman, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2014
* USD 24,950.00

With regards to intellectual merit, a large segment of the American
International Relations sub-field approaches international security through its
engagement with World War I. This case serves as the foundation for an
extraordinary number of key debates, involving multiple research programs and
levels of analysis. This project will demonstrate new approaches to qualitative
and multi-method research, which promises more rigorous and replicable
scholarship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of the key debates which use World War I
predate Political Science's recent attention to Data Access and Research
Tranparency (DA-RT). Two basic principles underlie the new movement: First,
analytical transparency is a prerequisite for research to be considered
scientifically credible and legitimate. Second, data becomes more useful when it
is made available to others, either in the context of validating prior claims or
to undertake new research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hitherto DA-RT was regarded as
the exclusive bailiwick of quantitative approaches. These principles have
recently been extended to qualitative and multi-method research, through two
related developments. First, the availability of better specificed accounts of
both process tracking and counterfactual analysis allow scholars to be explicit
about the analytical techniques they used. Second, new infrastructure has been
created for the institutionalized sharing of qualititative data. In addition,
new standards are being developed for active citations, hyperlinks to digitized
primary data which are probative for the credibility of hypothesised causal
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will bring together experts from
three relevant epistemic communities: scholars of World War I, qualitative
methodologists with expertise in process tracing and counterfactual analysis,
and qualitative data archivists working on new active citation practices. They
will collectively develop a plan to access and link the original source
documentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With regards to broader impacts, the World
War I project will be a highly visible demonstration of the efficacy of the
Qualitative Data Repository. The project will vividly present the payoff from a
synthesis of better specified analytical techniques, institutionalized data
sharing, and new standards for research transparency. The substance of the
project is likely to be of interest to all scholars of international security,
as well as a broder scholarly community and the genderal public as the war's
centenerary approaches.