* 1204082
* Collaborative Research:  The Distributed Biological Observatory (DBO)-A Change Detection Array in the Pacific Arctic Region
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Jacqueline Grebmeier, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Frank R. Rack
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,970,710.00

Several regionally critical marine sites in the Pacific Arctic sector that have
very high biomass and are focused foraging points for apex predators, have been
reoccupied during multiple international cruises. The data documenting the
importance of these ecosystem "hotspots" provide a growing marine time-series
from the northern Bering Sea to Barrow Canyon at the boundary of the Chukchi and
Beaufort seas. Results from these studies show spatial changes in carbon
production and export to the sediments as indicated by infaunal community
composition and biomass, shifts in sediment grain size on a S-to-N latitudinal
gradient, and range extensions for lower trophic levels and further northward
migration of higher trophic organisms, such as gray whales. There is also direct
evidence of negative impacts on ice dependent species, such as walruses and
polar bears. To more systematically track the broad biological response to sea
ice retreat and associated environmental change, an international consortium of
scientists are developing a coordinated Distributed Biological Observatory (DBO)
that includes selected biological measurements at multiple trophic levels. These
measurements are being made simulataneously with hydrographic surveys and
satellite observations. The DBO currently focuses on five regional biological
"hotspot" locations along a latitudinal gradient. The spatially explicit DBO
network is being organized through the Pacific Arctic Group (PAG), a consensus-
driven, international collaboration sanctioned by the International Arctic
Science Committee. This project will be a U.S. contribution to the DBO effort in
the Pacific Sector, and the scientific needs to be met are consistent with
research needs identified in the US National Ocean Policy planning effort, and
the NOAA strategic plan. The implemented project will serve as a contribution to
the US-led Arctic Observing Network and will improve international cooperative
efforts for evaluating ecosystem impacts from high latitude climate change.
Identifying and collecting key prey-predator biological data in the context of
high priority physical and chemical measurements will allow for integration of
these data into scientific community analyses and ecosystem modeling efforts.
Outreach to local communities and media will ensure that both those immediately
impacted and the broader public will be made aware of changes in this sensitive
part of the Arctic.