* 1204864
* Investigation of Mechanical Deformation in Small-Scale Metallic Systems: Interfaces and Boundaries in Nano-pillars
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Julia Greer, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 08/31/2016
* USD 378,999.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;It has been shown that in single crystals yield
(and fracture) strengths increase in a power law fashion with sample size
reduction once micron scale is reached, and therefore can no longer be inferred
from bulk response or from literature. While these studies provide a powerful
foundation for the fundamental deformation processes operating at small scales,
they are a far reach from representing real materials used in structural
applications, whose microstructure is often complex, containing boundaries and
interfaces. Both homogeneous (i.e. grain and twin boundaries) and heterogeneous
(i.e. phase and precipitate-matrix boundaries) interfaces in size-limited
features are crucial elements in structural reliability of most modern
materials. They are also of particular importance to damage initiation.
Addressing these issues represents key thrust of this proposed research, where
experimental and computational methods will be applied to obtain insight into
mechanical behavior and microstructural evolution in small-scale metallic
systems, whose deformation is governed by intricate interactions of defects with
interfaces as well as with free surfaces. This proposal presents a unified plan
combining unique nano-scale sample fabrication techniques with state-of-the-art
in-situ mechanical testing capability, and site-specific TEM microscopy, further
supported by computational efforts. The objective of this project is to develop
a physical understanding of deformation mechanisms operating in small-scale
(sub-micron) nano-pillars containing known interfaces and their ensuing
mechanical properties. Attention will be focused on studying the following
interfaces in individual nano-pillars: (1) multiple grain boundaries spanning
the pillar volume (nanocrystalline Cu); (2) periodic in-grown twin boundaries in
Cu (nano-twinned Cu); and (3) a combination of nano-grains and nano-twins in Cu
(nanocrystalline nano-twinned Cu). Proposed study promises to also shed light on
the relative role of intrinsic vs. extrinsic length scales on deformation
mechanisms in metals, which will have a transformative impact in development of
materials with unprecedented mechanical properties through architectural
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Useful properties
of structural materials are generally governed by their bulk microstructure. For
centuries, improvements in structural materials relied heavily on processing,
which in turn, dictated resulting microstructure and properties. As materials
sciences are entering a revolutionary era, where specific material properties
are attained through not only material but also architecture control of its
constituents, often with sub-micron dimensions. In order to utilize these new
principles, whose properties are dictated by combination of material
microstructure and structure's architecture (rather than by bulk properties
only) into structural applications, it is imperative to quantify the processes
occurring at the interfaces upon mechanical loading. This proposal presents a
unified plan combining unique nano-scale sample fabrication techniques with
state-of-the-art in-situ mechanical testing capability, and microscopy, further
supported by computational efforts. The objective of this project is to develop
a physical understanding of deformation mechanisms operating in small-scale
(sub-micron) metallic nano-pillars with controlled atomic arrangements and their
ensuing mechanical properties. Gained knowledge promises to be essential for the
development and improvement of structural materials, while training graduate and
undergraduate students in an exciting interdisciplinary field that combines
materials phenomena with integrated theoretical and experimental studies will
help train a new generation of scientists.