* 1204993
* Design of impedance matched infrared antennas using optical vector near-field mapping
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/23/2011,09/30/2015
* Glenn Boreman, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 09/30/2015
* USD 390,000.00

Objective: We seek to increase sensitivity of antenna-coupled infrared detectors
by an order of magnitude. We will gain understanding of relevant design
parameters, and subsequently design impedance-matched antenna-sensor
combinations. We utilize our newly developed high-spatial-resolution, three-
dimensional probe techniques to measure electric fields in the vicinity of the
infrared antennas. This enables us, for the first time, to determine the
infrared-frequency impedance as a function of position. Combined with an
iterative design-fabrication-test approach, this will enable development of
infrared impedance-matching components. Intellectual merit: We scale up the
concept of a radiofrequency network analyzer by nine orders of magnitude in
frequency. This proven advance yields experimental tools needed to extend the
performance of antenna-coupled sensors by a similar scale in frequency, making
the entire field of passive low- 5 frequency electronics operational in the
infrared range. Infrared antennas have been proposed for a wide range of
applications, including nanoscale chemical and photon sensors, nearfield
microscopy, and optical rectennas for energy-harvesting. Such devices would
transform the field of optics, enabling sensing devices of nano-scale dimensions
with order-of-magnitude enhancement in sensitivity, responsivity, and
reliability compared to conventional optical techniques. Broader impact: The
proposed research greatly extends the frequency range of classical electronics,
while serving as the foundation for a dynamic and engaging learning environment
at each of the PIs? institutions. All three PIs have an established track record
of mentorship of underrepresented students, and all three participate in
programs for science and engineering outreach to K-12 students and research
participation of undergraduate students.