* 1204918
* Midwest Regional Center for Nanotechnology Education (Nano-Link) Renewal
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Stephen Campbell, Dakota County Technical College
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2016
* USD 2,255,429.00

PROJECT SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;The Midwest Regional Center for Nanotechnology
Education (Nano-Link) builds upon the success of Nano-Link's first three years.
Nano-Link has had broad and significant impacts across the Upper Midwest. During
the next 3 years the center is providing resources and support to additional
colleges along the Midwest corridor from North Dakota to Michigan as they
develop nanoscience and nanotechnology programs and courses. Participation is
being expanded from the current six community colleges and the University of
Minnesota to a total of 16 community colleges at varying levels of effort and
support, along with the addition of Michigan State University as an affiliate
four-year institution. Nano-Link's sharing of curriculum, resources and services
with multiple colleges is helping to prepare skilled technicians so that there
is increased nanoscale science and technology and economic growth in the region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nano-Link has also expanded its industry network from the
original 30 Minnesota companies to 88 companies located throughout the Upper
Midwest. This number continues to grow as Nano-Link helps additional colleges
build strong industry networks to support their programs. This effort provides
strong industry-led input for validating educational objectives, supporting nano
education programs, providing internships and hiring graduates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MISSION. Nano-Link builds public awareness and
institutional capacity for nanotechnology education programs that prepare
skilled nanoscience technicians to work in the emerging fields that drive the
economy across the Midwest Region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GOALS. During the
renewal period, Nano-Link is focusing on the following five goals: &lt;br/&gt;1.
Strengthening industry participation to ensure an industry-relevant curriculum
producing nano-savvy students, workforce-ready graduates and companies ready to
hire them. &lt;br/&gt;2. Developing nanotechnology modules for multiple uses
across multiple organizations. &lt;br/&gt;3. Growing nano programs through
recruitment and outreach improvement with a special emphasis on veterans and
Native American communities. &lt;br/&gt;4. Continuing to improve nano programs
in order to maximize student retention and success. &lt;br/&gt;5. Delivering
professional development to high school and college faculty that prepares them
to effectively educate their students in nanotechnology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;THE INTELLECTUAL MERIT of this project is based on
continuing to expand and improve a multidisciplinary nanoscience technician
education curriculum in an emerging field of science and engineering, which can
greatly impact our nation's competitiveness and future job growth in many
industries. Nano-Link is also further expanding its coordinated partnerships
among regional educational institutions and industries that enable these
colleges to offer quality nanoscience educational programs and courses. Building
on the success of this effort, important elements of this curriculum are being
integrated into the technician education curriculum of other ATE Centers. Nano-
Link's ongoing partnership with the University of Minnesota and its National
Center for Nanotechnology Instrumentation ensures that Nano-Link has access to
state-of-the-art laboratory instrumentation and insight into the most current
aspects of nanotechnology research and nanotechnology applications. Nano-Link's
close collaborations with industry partners ensure that training meets current
and anticipated industry needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;THE BROADER IMPACT of this
project is based on the coordinated replication/adaptation of a
multidisciplinary Nanoscience Technology program for technician education at
community and technical colleges throughout the region as well as expansion of
nano curriculum modules to other NSF ATE Centers and their affiliated students
and instructors. Nano-Link's high school and college STEM instructor outreach
activities directly impact thousands of students in the Upper Midwest. The
focused effort to train veterans and Native American students through
culturally-appropriate outreach can benefit these under-represented groups.
Nano-Link is dedicated to providing high quality educational programs preparing
nanoscience technicians to meet the emerging needs of industry for the benefit
of society.