* 1204087
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing Arctic Climate Extremes from the Pliocene to the Present: the view from Lake El'gygytgyn, western Beringia
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2019
* Julie Brigham-Grette, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,750,564.00

The regional response of the high Arctic to past climate events is little known
beyond the time period covered by the Greenland ice cores. However, in Spring
2009, a 3.6 million year long sediment record was successfully recovered from
Lake El'gygytgyn, a 12km diameter meteor crater lake located 100km north of the
Arctic Circle in Chukotka, NE Russia. This grant will continue studies of the
paleoclimate record from the lake cores. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analysis of the
sedimentary record will greatly extend the known climate history. The team will
integrate data analysis with climate modeling to test four hypotheses regarding
the relationship between high Arctic climate and climate of other regions.
First, no terrestrial Arctic record yet covers the mid-Brunhes transition in
sufficient detail to determine whether the cooler interglacial periods observed
in the first several 100ky cycles in the Antarctic are also found in the Arctic.
Second, the amplitude of 40ky -duration glacial/interglacial cycles in the
terrestrial Arctic during early Pleistocene is not known. Third, terrestrial
Arctic temperatures during the Late Pliocene, a period of elevated atmospheric
pCO2, are also unknown. Fourth, the team will investigate Arctic temperature
response to cooling during Marine Isotope Stage 2. These results will help
determine the sensitivity of the Arctic to atmospheric CO2 levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will provide the scientific community with
information about the magnitude of climate changes in the Arctic during the
100ky glacial cycles, the 40ky glacial cycles, and from prior to the initiation
of Northern hemisphere glaciations. These data will allow direct comparison to
the EPICA ice cores, long Asian loess, speleothem, and lake records, and
comparable marine records and Global Climate [computer] Models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both the public and policy makers remain confused about
issues relating to climate change. This work should help clarify the background
of natural variations in Arctic climate, so that the modern changes can be seen
in context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four PhD students and one post-doctoral fellow
will receive science and mentoring support. In addition, the team will train
STEM teachers by bringing five western Massachusetts teachers per summer to
UMass for two weeks to gain hands-on laboratory and field experience and jointly
develop curricula that address core elements of the Massachusetts Department of
Education science standards. Because lakes and ponds are common across parts of
the US, a portion of the teacher training will focus on lake/pond sediments with
regard to the environmental and climate change they can document in their
communities. This will be accomplished in collaboration with the middle school
Earth science teacher who was at Lake El'gygytgyn in 2009 as the PolarTREC
teacher.