* 1204751
* FLATE: Florida's Advanced Technological Education Center of Excellence
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2012,06/30/2020
* Richard Gilbert, Hillsborough Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2020
* USD 3,768,681.00

The Florida Advanced Technological Education (FLATE) Center is a statewide ATE
Regional Center for Advanced Technological Education that supports manufacturing
and its related technology sectors. This project includes three goals as an
extension and expansion of FLATE's efforts to: implement a statewide unified
education system for manufacturing so that manufacturing education is a
convergent curriculum that optimizes technician preparation; provide an
effective outreach platform for high school, community college, industry, and
legislature access, providing information about the requirement for and impact
of manufacturing education in Florida; and present professional development
opportunities for STEM educators to develop, refine, and certify their knowledge
within manufacturing and its enabling
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: FLATE's focus is on three
important areas: (i) Curriculum: The Associate of Science (A.S.) degree in
Engineering Technology has integrated the national MSSC-CPT certification and
the Manufacturing Skills Standards Council Certified Production Technician
credential. This represents the first statewide articulation for a national
industry credential. (ii) Professional Development: The Engineering Technology
Forum is an exemplary model for collaborative professional development. The
Forum meets at different Florida State and Community Colleges with a flexible
agenda that meets a variety of needs within the College system. (iii) Outreach:
The Made in Florida campaign is FLATE's award-winning dissemination platform
that uses as its public information window www.madeinflorida.org . Made in
Florida is a comprehensive combination of industry tours, videos, STEM
student/teacher summer camps, career pathways, recognition awards, student-
focused web site, outreach/dissemination events, FLATE FOCUS (a monthly
newsletter), and statewide advertorials that are all partially supported by
Florida industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: FLATE makes a
significant impact on the broader aspects of technical education in Florida. It
has developed a method for filtering course, certificate, and degree program
content that the Florida Department of Education has delegated to FLATE to apply
to new Engineering Technology- based program submissions. FLATE has demonstrated
an effective way for community colleges to work directly with Workforce Florida
- supported Banner Centers in order to optimize technical workforce education
and training efforts statewide. It has included the Manufacturers Association of
Florida in an awareness campaign that is instrumental in elevating manufacturing
careers as necessary for Florida's economic well being. It has also created a
pathway to the ET A.S. Degree program that allows high school students to earn
15 credit hours toward the A.S. Degree.