* 1204958
* The Advanced Technology Environmental and Energy Center
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Ellen Bluth, Eastern Iowa Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,599,137.00

The Advanced Technology Environmental Education Center (ATEEC) provides
resources, support and professional development for educators; curriculum and
educational materials for grades 10-14; and environmental and sustainable energy
best program practices, articulated 2+2+2 programs, and other ATE center
environmental and sustainable energy curricula. The goal of the ATEEC Resource
Center is to partner with business, industry, governmental agencies,
professional organizations and academic institutions to provide a resource
center of exemplary educational materials, curricula and pedagogical practices
for the purpose of educating technicians in environmental and sustainable energy
technology. The Center has the following objectives: 1) provide support and
mentoring for institutions that wish to start or improve educational programs in
environmental science and sustainable energy technologies; 2) provide services
to ATE projects; 3) establish and support additional industry, business and
academic partnerships; 4) promote technician careers and visibility in
environmental and sustainable energy technology; 5) address technician
knowledge, skills and competencies needed for the evolving, converging and
emerging technical workplace; and 6) screen, validate, update and broadly
distribute exemplary materials, curricula and pedagogical practices adapted or
designed by ATE centers and projects and other sources. The strategies, events,
conferences, forums, Institutes, web seminars and other activities lead to an
integrated approach to enhance the content of and pedagogical approaches to STEM
programs and curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ATEEC Resource Center is
important for the nation's economy as green jobs need workers proficient in
math, science and technology for the rapidly changing areas of environmental and
energy technology. ATEEC works with business and industry, educators and
government agencies to disseminate exemplary educational materials, curricula
and resources in the areas of environmental and energy technology to high school
and community college educators and students as well as technicians across the
country. ATEEC?s structure lends itself to efficient and rapid dissemination and
is built upon a model of institutional collaboration and networking.