* 1204096
* Collaborative Research:  Arctic Sensitivity to Climate Perturbations and a Millenial Perspective on Current Warming Derived from Shrinking Ice Caps
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2018
* Gifford Miller, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 759,235.00

The goal of this proposal is to provide a millennial context for current warming
and to better constrain the nature of abrupt climate changes over the past 5000
years in the North Atlantic sector of the Arctic. This goal will be addressed
with the powerful datasets derived from radiocarbon-dated vegetation preserved
beneath ice caps for centuries to millennia, but now being exposed annually by
current ice-margin retreat across northeastern Canada and West Greenland. These
chronologies define the pattern and timing of abrupt summer coolings in the
recent past and place current warming in a millennial context. 14C dating of
vegetation will be complemented by measuring in situ 14C inventories in recently
exposed rock surfaces, providing essential temporal constraints on the duration
of ice-covered and ice-free conditions throughout the Holocene. Combined, these
two datasets will provide the most secure evidence for the character of current
summer warming by explicitly dating when the region was last as warm as present.
Comparing our climate reconstructions with on-going studies in NW Europe will
help to separate the roles of unforced variability from hemispherically
symmetric forcing as causes for abrupt climate change. Research activities under
this award will be made accessible to indigenous peoples by translating the
goals and eventual results into Inuktitut, through posters that describe the
research, and by offering public lectures in Iqaluit, the capital of Nunavut,
and at Qikiqtarjuaq, where INSTAAR has long had a presence. This research
program will train a PhD and MSc student, and provides opportunities for
undergraduate students to become involved with research, building on successful
traditions from previous years.