* 1204371
* RUI: Parameter Estimation, Data Analysis, and Detector Characterization for LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Nelson Christensen, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2016
* USD 185,530.00

The research program at Carleton has a history of applying novel statistical
strategies for parameter estimation and the analysis of data from LIGO. The
Carleton team and its collaborators have made significant progress in developing
methods for binary inspiral gravitational wave event detection. The group's on-
going research is in the development of programs for even more complex binary
inspiral signals, including the plunge, and the ringing of the newly formed
black hole as well as supernova produced signals. When detection occurs,
parameter estimation will provide the path toward astrophysics, and the
Carleton-developed routines will be critical in that task. Additionally, the
Carleton group searches for sources of noise that produce deleterious effects.
Carleton develops vetoes for binary inspiral-like events produced by local
environmental or detector disturbances; the group also assists the European
Virgo detector in their burst and binary inspiral veto development, and will
continue to do so with Advanced Virgo.

Carleton is a leader in producing future scientists. This project will provide
research opportunities to students with interests in physics and statistics, and
help to train them to become the next generation of scientists. Carleton
students are eager to participate in exciting research, and their interest in
gravitational wave astronomy is large. The computational methods developed by
the PI and collaborators have had significant influence in other fields, with
applications in cosmic microwave background analyses, noisy chaotic systems, and
proposed space-based gravitational wave detectors. Carleton faculty, including
the PI, are also active in scientific outreach. High school students and
teachers are regularly exposed to the wonder and significance of LIGO's
research, and this outreach creates much excitement for science.