* 1204959
* Designing Futures With Games: Game-Framed Mathematics and Science as a Pathway to Multimedia Technology Careers
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Rees Shad, CUNY Hostos Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie August
* 12/31/2016
* USD 610,135.00

The Game-Framed Mathematics & Science (G-FMS) initiative supports existing
digital media curricula at Eugenio Mar√≠a de Hostos Community College by
reimagining how fundamental concepts in mathematics and science can be engaging
to digital learners. Current remedial and college level mathematics and science
curricula are being redesigned by framing the subjects within game design,
providing a foundation for programming-centric courses and providing the skills
for students to pursue careers in game design as well as interactive media. A
collaborative group of professors from mathematics, physics, the natural
sciences, design, and education are part of the team redesigning courses based
on this game-framed pedagogy resulting in six new courses in mathematics,
biology, environmental science, and physics.

Broader impacts include an implementation of the G-FMS curricula in a Summer
Games Institute for secondary school students and through professional
development workshops for college and secondary school educators interested in
mirroring this pedagogical approach. Assessment goals are to improve scores on
the COMPASS Mathematics placement exam, to increase student engagement in STEM
courses, to increase student engagement with programming concepts, to create
pathways from high schools to game design and STEM programs, and to provide
student game design research opportunities. The evaluation plan utilizes
surveys, interviews, and tools for student reflection. Dissemination is
accomplished through faculty workshops, a dedicated website, presentations at a
variety of game education conferences, and peer-reviewed publications.