* 1204553
* Cyber Pro: Professional Development Pathways for Students and Faculty in Cybersecurity
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2017
* Danis Heighton, Clark State Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 02/28/2017
* USD 603,143.00

In this project, community college students are gaining important experience and
business skills and faculty are gaining technical knowledge and skills through a
blended approach to internships and externships, combining virtual and hands-on
learning experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is also focusing on
attracting more students, especially female and minority students, to studies
and careers in cybersecurity. A new articulation process between the community
college and a Historically Black College and University (HBCU) allows university
computer science students to take courses at the community college to gain
cybersecurity skills and allows community college students to transfer to
complete a bachelor's degree. A partnership with a K-12 school system that has a
large minority population allows high school students to enroll in community
college courses in cybersecurity. The resulting career pathway engages students
from diverse backgrounds to enter employment in the cybersecurity field. The
project is also developing a cohort approach to assist post-9/11 veterans and
dislocated workers in pursuing rapid credentialing to enter cybersecurity
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although cybersecurity technicians need technical
skills, they also need to be able to serve as the human interface between the
computing system and its business users, including managers and executives who
must implement cybersecurity policies. The project is addressing this need by
creating new curricula that give students appropriate business skills.
Cybersecurity curricula are also being revised and expanded to incorporate the
emerging security needs of both standard PC-based systems and high performance
computing (HPC) clusters.