* 1204924
* Graphene Heteromaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Matthias Batzill, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 04/30/2017
* USD 630,000.00

Technical Description: Two-dimensional nanomaterials have potential for novel
electronics. However the materials science of fabricating and merging of
different two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials into a device has not yet been
established. This project aims at understanding fundamental materials science
problems of 2D-nanomaterial interfaces using atomic-scale surface science
characterization techniques. The research consists of three thrust areas: (i)
Investigation and tuning of metal- graphene interfaces: Electrical contacts with
graphene are important for any device. New strategies are devised on how to
disperse metal-atoms on the surface of graphene by utilizing two-dimensional
metal-organic frameworks supported on graphene. (ii) Developing methods for
synthesizing heterostructures of 2D materials and characterizing their
properties: To achieve heterolayers of hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) on
graphene on a wafer-sized scale vapor growth of h-BN on a metal support is
combined with graphene formation by carbon segregation from the metal bulk.
(iii) Synthesizing and characterizing novel 2D man-made nanomaterials with no
structural analogy in bulk materials: Most 2D nanomaterials are based on van-
der-Waals bulk materials that can be exfoliated into individual atomic
(molecular) sheets. In this project the possibility of synthesizing entirely new
materials that do not have any bulk counterparts is
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: This project addresses
fundamental materials science issues of graphene and related two-dimensional
materials. Growth of various two-dimensional materials and characterization
their interfaces are carried out using surface science techniques. Research
results from this project will be included in the curriculum of courses on
Materials Physics/Surface Science and Solid State Physics taught by the PI. In
addition, this project offers graduate projects for two PhD students and
research experience for undergraduate students. It also facilitates the
continuation of a recently implemented cooperation between researchers at the
University of South Florida and the Center for Functional Nanomaterials at the
Brookhaven National Laboratory.