* 1204478
* WSC- Category 3: Collaborative Research:Water Sustainability under Near -term Climate Change:A cross-regional analysis incorporating socio-ecological feedbacks and adaptations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Kelli Larson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2017
* USD 505,823.00

1204368/1204396/1204478&lt;br/&gt;Sankarasubraman Arumugam/ John Kominoski/ John
Sabo&lt;br/&gt;North Carolina State University/University of Georgia Research
Foundation Inc./Arizona State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water resource
availability varies across the Sunbelt of the United States with a sharp East-
West transition at 105 degrees W. Arid regions west of the 105th Meridian
produce less runoff compared to humid regions in the East that produce greater
than 40 cm of mean annual runoff. Consequently, reservoirs in the West are over-
year systems holding multiple years of inflows, whereas reservoirs in the East
are within-year storage systems with the need to refill the system in the
beginning of spring. Accordingly, water policies also differ substantially with
western states pursuing ("prior appropriation") and the eastern states following
("riparian rights") for allocation. These contrasting strategies also impact
freshwater biodiversity with the ratio of non-native to native fish species
being nearly 6 times higher in the West compared to the East. In spite of these
cross-regional differences, both regions face two common stressors: (a)
uncertainty in available freshwater arising from global climate change and (b)
increased human demand due to population growth and consumption. Consequently,
there is an ever-increasing need for an integrated assessment of freshwater
sustainability under these two stressors over the planning horizon (10-30
years). The main objective of this study is to understand and quantify the
potential impacts of near-term climate change and population growth on
freshwater sustainability - defined here as integrating daily to annual flows
required to minimize human vulnerability and maximize ecosystem needs (including
native biodiversity) for freshwater - by explicitly incorporating the feedbacks
from human-environmental systems on water supply and demand in various target
basins spanning Arizona to North Carolina. Using retro-analyses involving AR5
multimodel climate change hindcasts, we will revisit how freshwater
sustainability could have been better achieved over the past five decades across
the Sunbelt. To couple the hydroclimatic and hydro-ecological system dynamics
with the management of freshwater infrastructure systems, a two-level agent-
based modeling framework will explicitly simulate adaptive behaviors and
feedbacks between policy and consumers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
interdisciplinary project will involve collaboration among three universities,
North Carolina State University (NCSU), Arizona State University (ASU), and
University of Georgia (UGA). Findings from the AR5 retro-analyses will evaluate
and recommend societal options (i.e., supply augmentation vs. demand reduction)
for promoting future (2015-2034) freshwater sustainability across the Sunbelt.
Cross-regional synthesis of policies and media sources for the targeted basins
will identify de-centralized adaptive strategies that have been employed
independently and collectively to maintain flows, increase supplies, or reduce
demands. Utilizing the near-term hydroclimatic projections, PIs will quantify
how current policies on reservoir operations and groundwater extraction could
impact the reliability of future water supplies for cities and also alter the
key attributes of hydrographs that are critical for maintaining freshwater
biodiversity. In doing so, the project will also investigate the degree to which
regions have pursued "hard path" (i.e., supply augmentation) vs. "soft path"
(i.e., demand reduction) strategies by explicitly modeling potential societal
interventions for freshwater sustainability. The educational goal of the project
is to conduct an online distributed seminar in which Honors, MS and PhD students
from three Universities with interdisciplinary backgrounds will produce a
policy-oriented white paper based on the key findings. Based on the white paper,
the project team will distribute a suite of podcasts on freshwater
sustainability and climate change to middle and high school science programs
from the targeted basin states as well as to key water policy institutions
across the region. Podcasts, developed data, tools and publications will also be
disseminated through the main project portal at NCSU, and additionally through
the National Climate Assessment and ASU's Central Arizona - Phoenix LTER
websites.