* 1204243
* P2C2: Estimating Climate Sensitivity from Temperature Reconstructions of the Last Glacial Maximum
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Andreas Schmittner, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2017
* USD 345,345.00

This is a project to use paleoclimate reconstructions of the Last Glacial
Maximum (LGM: 21,000 years ago) and a variety of climate models to evaluate
equilibrium climate sensitivity. Schmittner-Boesch published an influential
paper in 2011 suggesting that the geological evidence implied an equilibrium
climate sensitivity to a doubling of atmospheric CO2 of 1.4 to 2.8 C, lower than
the IPCC4 likely range of 2 to 4.5 C and that the geological data ruled out very
high sensitivities to doubling of CO2. However there were several issues left
unresolved. For instance, several different paleoclimate reconstructions of the
LGM produce different average reductions in global temperatures, which have a
big effect of the sensitivity estimates. In addition, the range of error on the
paleoclimate reconstructions is large and the effects of this error on the
climate sensitivity need to be better quantified. Finally the initial study was
performed with a "reduce-complexity" climate model. It was not clear the extent
to which the result was affected by choice of model.

This project will further evaluate these issues by expanding the paleoclimate
reconstructions used in the study and incorporating the output from fully
coupled climate model simulations of the LGM. Several new reconstructions of the
LGM have been published and are now available for analysis. With access to the
new CMIP5/PMIP3 models - with specific LGM boundary conditions/reconstructions -
it is now possible to perform the analysis of equilibrium climate sensitivity in
a more rigorous way by constraining the reduced-complexity model with output
from the CMIP5/PMIP3 model results.

This project will support a climate modeler from Oregon State University, who
will collaborate with a statistician from the Woodrow Wilson School of Public
and International Affairs at Princeton University. Mentoring and training of a
postdoctoral researcher is included in the project.