* 1204974
* The NBC2: Growing a Regional and National Bioeconomy, One Locale at a Time
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Thomas Burkett, Montgomery County Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2016
* USD 2,848,146.00

Biomanufacturing is one of the few manufacturing industries that continues to
expand in spite of downturns in the national and global economy.
Biopharmaceuticals and biofuels are among the bioproducts manufactured in
cellular factories in this new, advanced technology, STEM-rich industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project continues the center activities in order to
continue to encourage the creation of additional biomanufacturing programs
throughout the nation to support a growing biopharmaceutical, biofuels,
regenerative medicine, and bioproducts industry, that is, the bioeconomy. In
addition, it expands the NBC2 curricular materials, adding additional biofuels
and new stem cell hands-on laboratories, virtual industrial biomanufacturing
production modules in partnership with the world's largest contract
biomanufacturer, and an online lecture series to be used to accompany hands-on
laboratories in biomanufacturing courses. The project also is experimenting with
flexible packaging of NBC2 curricular modules to allow customization of courses
for various audiences (high school, community college, university, student
graduates and incumbent workers) and time frames. It is building a "Course in a
Box" for many modules in order to provide access to the materials and supplies
needed to teach each module. Public understanding of biomanufacturing career
paths is enhanced through the expansion of a career website at
www.biomanufacturingcareers.org. The NBC2 is working to offer a National
Association of Manufacturing-endorsed biomanufacturing technician certification.
The project is documenting and publicizing details about career paths of
students using web-based data analysis that tracks students and shows trends in
industry. The Center expects to apply for non-profit status to sustain the
center after NSF ATE funding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
the project includes: 1) generation of a complete suite of curriculum products
using different pedagogical approaches to teach biopharmaceutical, biofuels and
other crossover biomanufacturing fields, including hands-on laboratories,
textbooks, online lectures with online ancillary support. In addition, the
project is developing virtual biomanufacturing equipment and processes to teach,
assess and practice troubleshooting; 2) availability of these products in many
different formats, including traditional print or online for use by diverse
populations of students; 3) a career path that includes high school, community
college, biomanufacturing experience, and a career in biomanufacturing; and 4)
use of a web-based data analysis tools to track student career paths and show
trends in industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposal
include: 1) creation of a national network of self-sustaining local
infrastructures for biomanufacturing education and training, and the workforce
to support a growing bioeconomy; 2) institutionalization of biomanufacturing
education and training courses and programs; 3) continued development of new
instructional materials to grow and enhance current offerings; 4) a
biomanufacturing certification exam endorsed by the National Association of
Manufacturers; 5) data collected on biomanufacturing career paths and the
bioeconomy; and 6) formation of a non-profit entity to sell products and
services which in time will support NBC2 functions of growing partners,
mentoring programs, promoting biomanufacturing career paths, updating curricular
offerings, and providing professional development opportunities for students,
faculty, teachers and technicians.