* 1204774
* WSC-Category 3:  Sustainable Large-Scale Deployment of Perennial Biomass Energy Crops
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Michael Hanemann, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,484,952.00

Confronting concerns associated with domestic energy security and large-scale
anthropogenic climate change are principal factors for continued pursuit of
renewable energy in the United States. Yet, detrimental indirect and inadvertent
consequences related to both climate and food security for first generation
biofuels, illustrate a non-sustainable approach to current bioenergy production.
Expansion of perennial biomass energy crops such as switchgrass and miscanthus
on U.S. degraded and abandoned farmland may prove to be a viable alternative.
However, land-use change associated with this expansion may have additional,
direct effects on natural water resources that requires assessment prior to
large-scale surface alteration to ensure long-term environmental sustainability.
This project will integrate physical (i.e., coupled hydro-climatic modeling,
using WRF 3.4 coupled to two different land surface models), agricultural (i.e.,
crop modeling, using EPIC and CENTURY crop models), and socioeconomic (i.e.,
economic modeling, using FASOMGHG and BEPAM models) elements to evaluate system
resilience associated with expansion of perennial bioenergy crops on U.S.
degraded and abandoned farmland. Geographically explicit maps depicting
sustainable regional "hot-spots" of perennial biomass energy expansion will be
developed. The research will quantify impacts on the local hydrologic cycle,
including effects on soil and groundwater resources (e.g., change in water table
depth), and associated climatic consequences to determine if expansion is
feasible and sustainable over decadal timescales. Assessment of photosynthetic
production of bioenergy crops will be undertaken and resulting modeled yields
will be translated to quantify the fraction of U.S. liquid fuel consumption that
could be offset. The research will also evaluate economic profitability of
growing perennial biomass energy crops in identified "hot-spot" areas. Potential
designs for extension of agricultural programs, such as the commodity reserve
program, to promote growth of perennial biomass energy crops in identified
regions, will also be examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By exploring bioenergy
expansion through an integrated lens that incorporates physical, agricultural,
and economic elements, this project will guide local to national level agencies
making decisions regarding the feasibility of biomass-derived energy. The
modeling tools will enable water and resource managers as well as farmers to
recognize impacts and trade-offs of large-scale deployment of perennial biomass
energy crops to make more informed decisions for water resource management.
Thus, the project will promote decision-maker participation and expand
opportunities for citizen engagement. The project will also enable
participation, expand opportunities, and assist in the mentoring of
underrepresented groups through a unique educational collaboration with a not-
for-profit (K-12) public charter school.