* 1204204
* Data-Model Synthesis: Gulf of Alaska Sea-Surface Paleotemperature, Freshwater Input, and the Dynamics of Deglacial Climate Variability
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Alan Mix, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 06/30/2016
* USD 530,000.00

The high-latitude North Pacific is a key region for understanding past changes
in the ocean-climate system, yes it remains understudied and undersampled
compared to similarly important regions of the global oceans. Attempts to model
the North Pacific region at the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) have produced
divergent results, and currently no comprehensive paleoceanographic records
exist to verify model output.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address this problem, this
study will investigate North Pacific sea surface temperature and upper ocean
changes at the LGM using a combined multi-proxy and multi-model synthesis
approach. The project, led by faculty members at Oregon State University in
collaboration with researchers in Portugal, will leverage sediment cores from
previous field campaigns to obtain proxy data. The use of multiple proxies
(oxygen isotopes, foraminiferal and diatom assemblages, Mg/Ca from planktonic
foraminifera, clumped isotope analysis, and alkenone paleothermometry) will help
to resolve inconsistencies and avoid biases produced by single-proxy
reconstructions. Multi-proxy data will be compared with a synthesis of multiple
models to establish constraints on the behavior of the North Pacific at the LGM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will produce a better understanding of North
Pacific ocean-climate dynamics that are relevant to regional policy concerns
(e.g., Alaskan glacier melt, changes affecting North Pacific fisheries). The
project includes workforce development and mentoring at a wide range of levels,
including post-doctoral associates in Portugal, a PhD student at OSU, an OSU
undergraduate student from an underrepresented minority group, and high school
students through the OSU Saturday Academy and NSF's Research Apprenticeships for
High School Students program. OSU faculty members will work with National Park
Service representatives to incorporate project results into outreach materials
for three Alaskan National Parks and the NPS Climate Change Response program.