* 1204800
* Southeastern Advanced Cybersecurity Education Consortium (ACE)
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Mark Pollitt, Daytona State College
* Continuing Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,834,931.00

CE) Consortium, composed of ten colleges from Florida, Georgia, and South and
North Carolina, whose goals include serving as a leader for cyberforensics
education and workforce development in the Southeastern region. The consortium
is being established to further cybersecurity broadly. The current project
involves the development of distance-delivered, hands-on cyberforensics courses,
with core knowledge, skills, and competencies based on multiple sources,
including those developed by the Department of Defense Cyber Crime Center, NIST,
and existing ATE Centers. Each course includes dozens of streaming video
lectures -- providing for anytime, anywhere education -- slides, quizzes, and
hands-on assignments implemented through virtualization technologies. The
courses range from a 2000-level foundational course to several advanced
4000-level courses in operating and file systems, incident response, and network
forensics. The courses are being disseminated to interested colleges to address
the evolving, converging, and emerging technical workplace and new technologies.

New information technologies that affect consumer and job markets are created
on an almost daily basis. The "unforeseen consequences" of these new
technologies creates an ongoing need for cyberforensics and cybersecurity
professionals. As such, it is crucial for new community college graduates to
become familiar with these technologies, ethics and related laws, as well as
obtain demonstrable hands-on experience with the technologies. This consortium
is contacting schools including Seminole State College and Valencia College and
is exploring collaborations with additional Navy cybersecurity organizations.