* 1204169
* Quantifying nitrite and peroxynitrite formation from the photolysis of nitrate in/on ice
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Cort Anastasio, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 349,683.00

Nitrate is a ubiquitous contaminant in polar snow whose concentrations in ice
cores serve as a history of nitrogen oxide pollution in the atmosphere. It was
once thought that nitrate deposited in snow was essentially inert, but a decade
ago researchers in Greenland discovered that snow nitrate is broken down by
sunlight to form products such as nitrogen oxides and nitrous acid. These
species are emitted from the snow into the atmosphere, where they can
significantly change atmospheric composition and chemistry. For example,
nitrogen oxides from snow can lead to the formation of ozone in the lowest
layers of the atmosphere, while nitrous acid is an important source of hydroxyl
radical, a key oxidant that determines the lifetimes of atmospheric pollutants.
There is significant uncertainty about the efficiency with which nitrate
photodecomposition forms two of its products, nitrite and peroxynitrite.
Studying the formation of these products is important because they are major
sources of important atmospheric gases in polar regions.

The goal of the proposed work is to quantify the formation of nitrite and
peroxynitrite from illumination of nitrate in/on ice so that the budgets of
reactive nitrogen and oxidants in the Arctic can be better constrained. The
investigators would accomplish this goal by: (1) Measuring the efficiencies for
nitrite and peroxynitrite formation during nitrate illumination in ice; (2)
Characterizing the impacts of organic molecules, which are ubiquitous
constituents in snow, on nitrite and peroxynitrite formation; (3) Examining
whether yields of nitrite and peroxynitrite vary if nitrate is present in
different locations in/on the ice; and (4) Using the results to calculate rates
of nitrite and peroxynitrite formation from nitrate photolysis in Arctic snow.
Overall, these results should significantly improve understanding of the
chemistry of nitrogen oxides, ozone, and hydroxyl radical in the Arctic snowpack
and should help clarify the impacts of nitrate reactions on the overlying
atmospheric boundary layer. The work would be carried out using wellÂ­defined
laboratory ice samples, a variety of analytical techniques, and simple numerical
modeling to determine the impact of the results on the chemistry in the Arctic
snowpack and atmosphere. Two graduate students and several undergraduate
students will be trained and mentored through the proposed research.