* 1204251
* (C4) Community Colleges Confronting the Conundrum): A job market transformation model for renewable energy technician training
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Timothy Wilhelm, Kankakee Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2016
* USD 855,000.00

1204251---Wilhelm Public Abstract

Kankakee Community College (KCC) in Illinois, in collaboration with the Midwest
Renewable Energy Association (MREA), is developing a renewable energy job market
transformation model for community colleges to incorporate into their renewable
energy technician programs. The project is simultaneously helping to improve the
training of renewable energy technicians while also working with employers to
expand the renewable energy job market in the Midwest. The primary project goals
are: (a) to improve undergraduate technology education with a focus on training
of community college faculty in solar photovoltaic technology and teaching
skills, (b) to establish a renewable energy job transformation model for
community colleges to incorporate into their existing renewable energy programs,
and (c) to enhance the infrastructure and support for renewable energy
technician training at community colleges by linking faculty in an online
community of practice.

This forward-thinking, three-year project is creating a technician-training
model to be replicated at six other community colleges in Indiana, Iowa,
Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio, and Wisconsin. Through faculty professional
development and curriculum dissemination and adaptation, this project addresses
predicted, increased, regional demand for renewable energy technicians to
install, maintain, and repair renewable energy equipment and systems. The
project is designed to increase faculty technical knowledge about solar
photovoltaics, enhance teaching skills about renewable energy, train local
electrical practitioners about solar photovoltaics installation, maintenance and
repair, and increase the number of certified solar site assessors to enhance
solar installations. The project promotes renewable energy job growth through
collaborations with renewable energy businesses, employers, homeowners, and MREA
so that students graduating from these community college renewable energy
programs will have immediate opportunities for employment.

This integrated renewable energy technician training and job market
transformation model is unique in addressing both the demand and supply side
components of renewable energy technician training and job growth. The project
will produce a replication handbook to guide other community colleges in the
Midwest and across the nation in creating or strengthening similar AAS degree
and certificate programs and in integrating these programs with regional job
market transformation models. The resulting community of practice will further
strengthen these efforts by supporting faculty to share effective practices in
recruiting, training and supporting the success of students as renewable energy
technicians, and by sharing knowledge about effective practices in engaging
renewable energy employers as partners in the creation of additional renewable
energy jobs.