* 1204953
* ICT Center: Knowledge Community
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Gordon Snyder, Springfield Technical Community College
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 08/31/2014
* USD 308,846.00

The National Information and Communications Technologies (NICT) Resource Center
has developed an ICT Community of Practice (CoP) that impacts four distinct, yet
intertwined, audiences: community college faculty and administration, community
college students, industry representatives, and ICT-focused ATE centers and
projects. The Center differs from other ATE centers in that it focuses on
institutional processes of ATE centers and projects that result in
sustainability of programs and long-term impacts on technician education. Past
work has emphasized three major types of activities: 1) building community by
working with other centers and projects; 2) empowering others by using social
media and emerging technologies to generate discussion and share resources; and
3) connecting centers and industry to leverage knowledge within the community
and beyond. In this extension, the Center continues these activities, but also
focuses on collecting evidence that developing CoPs and working with other
centers and projects positively impacts the quality of technician education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evaluation plan details questions that directly track
how process-oriented resource-sharing "the essence of CoPs" improves
organizational efficiencies and leads to lasting changes in: 1) the management
of the centers and projects; 2) the way that centers and projects interact with
each other, with other community colleges and industry to sustain the objectives
of the ATE program; and 3) the way that they interact with their students. The
evaluation of this transitional year also focuses on: 1) identifying the changes
that occurred in the behavior and operations of ATE centers and projects after
seeking guidance from the ICT Center and the CoP; 2) tracking how these changes
lead to improvements in technician education; and 3) identifying how the
improvements impacted students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strength of the ATE
program is that it is a community and not just a series of projects. The
community is established and nurtured by having a few projects and centers that
mainly work with other projects and centers. This proposal studies the extent to
which communities of practice can lead to outcomes that improve scientific and
technical education at associate degree-granting institutions.