* 1204787
* WSC-CATEGORY 2 COLLABORATIVE: WATER QUALITY AND SUPPLY IMPACTS FROM CLIMATE-INDUCED INSECT TREE MORTALITY AND RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN THE ROCKY MOUNTAIN WEST
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Reed Maxwell, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 2,322,144.00

It is estimated that over 4 million acres of forests in Colorado and Wyoming are
dying due to the ongoing mountain pine beetle (MPB) infestation. The visual
impact of dying and dead forests is stunning, but the invisible changes to the
water cycle in vital watersheds in the Rocky Mountain west, including the Platte
and Colorado River headwaters, may be a longer-lasting legacy of the MPB. The
objective of this work is to determine potential water resource changes
resulting from the MPB epidemic by defining and quantifying feedbacks between
changes in climate, forested ecosystems altered by MPB impacts, biogeochemical
processes and resource management practices. Beetle-killed trees will alter
hydrologic and biogeochemical processes that govern water quantity and quality
in forested headwater catchments. When coupled with natural resources management
practices, these changes can potentially affect the ability to fulfill
downstream water user demands and challenge ecological and human health needs.
This project will directly address the social and physical science factors that
govern water resource availability and quality under ecological and climate
change. Concern about beetle-killed forest and watershed management is driving
municipalities to implement water rate increases, and there is confusion about
how to most effectively improve watershed health as it relates to this
issue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our interdisciplinary research team will merge field
observations, laboratory experiments, integrated hydrologic models, and high-
performance computing to increase our understanding and predictive capabilities
for a critical problem facing society: changes to water availability and quality
from an unprecedented change to our forests. This work will be complimented by
place-based collaborative learning for impacted communities and workshops with
water treatment municipalities. These workshops will be two-way and will serve
to both understand concerns and experiences with MPB impacts as well as
communicate results. Integration of stakeholder perceptions and management
responses will further inform and enrich our scientific analysis of water supply
and contribute to the uniqueness of our research vision. In addition to
stakeholder outreach and scenario planning, modules will be developed that
convey key water resource issues to K-12 teachers and students as well as
provide training, research and educational opportunities for undergraduate,
graduate students and postdoctoral scholars. Not only will this work provide an
improved scientific basis for managing watershed ecosystems in the Platte and
Colorado River basins, thus helping to ensure safe and reliable water resources
to more than 30 million residential users and 1.8 million acres of irrigated
agriculture, it will also improve our scientific and social understanding of the
water supply and quantity challenges for MPB-impacted areas across the Rocky
Mountain West.