* 1205069
* Integrated Geospatial Education and Technology Training: Remote Sensing (iGETT: Remote Sensing)
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2012,12/31/2017
* Ann Johnson, National Council For Geographic Education
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 12/31/2017
* USD 788,654.00

Space-based observations of the Earth that yield digital data have increased
dramatically in recent years and are relevant to a wide range of national and
international issues. Advances in data availability and processing software are
enabling analysis and application of such observations by Remote Sensing
Technicians, an occupational code approved by the U.S. Department of Labor in
2009.

The Integrated Geospatial Education and Technology Training: Remote Sensing
(iGETT-RS) project represents a collaboration among the National Council for
Geographic Education, the NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, the U.S. Geological
Survey Remote Sensing Program, the Environmental Systems Research Institute, and
ITT Visual Information Solutions. The project is preparing 36 geospatial
educators to develop integrated geographic information systems (GIS) and remote
sensing courses, curricula and programs at 32 two-year colleges, two high
schools and two universities. During summer institutes and the academic year,
faculty are participating in a community of practice to learn remote-sensing
science, integrate remote sensing and GIS, and develop teaching skills and
programs across diverse STEM disciplines and at diverse institutions. Peer-
tested teaching resources are being widely disseminated to other institutions
through a project website, further broadening the impact of the project. Project
outcomes include industry-relevant training to meet the growing national need
for remote-sensing technicians, as well as workforce needs in other high-growth
geospatial industries.