* 1205734
* PREM - Computational Research and Education for Emergent Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,08/31/2019
* Nai Phuan Ong, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 08/31/2019
* USD 2,640,000.00

PREM - Computational Research and Education for Emergent
Materials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Partnership in
Research and Education in Materials (PREM) expands and strengthens a long-term
partnership between W. M. Keck Computational Materials Theory Center (CMTC) at
California State University Northridge and Princeton Center for Complex
Materials (PCCM). The overarching vision of the PREM is to establish a joint
research powerhouse on computational materials science and to increase
recruitment, retention and degree attainment by members of underrepresented
groups in materials research. Building upon past successes, the rationale for
the Center's expansion lies in its demonstrated ability to bring together unique
talents and capabilities across disciplines to solve complex problems in
emergent materials, to enhance the stature of materials research, and to impact
broadly education and outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PREM strives to solve
fundamental problems in emergent materials that have vital scientific and
technological importance as well as economical and societal impacts. A
multidisciplinary team with coordinated and complementary skills in theory,
computation and experiment is assembled into three interdisciplinary research
areas: (1) Interfacial charge transfer and separation in excitonic
photovoltaics. A first-principles based theoretical framework will be developed
to address fundamental problems at the organic/organic and organic/inorganic
interfaces (2) Quantum phenomena in topological materials. The intriguing
competitions between electron interaction, nontrivial band structure and random
disorder in topological insulators will be explored, and (3) Spintronics in
multifunctional devices. The electronic structure and spin transport in
multifunctional nano-systems will be examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PREM is
committed to enhancing broad participation of underrepresented groups in
materials research and education. The Center will expand and strengthen its
educational and outreach programs by focusing on recruitment, retention and
degree attainment and develop infrastructure for the broader community through
the following thrusts: (1) Multipronged recruiting strategies to attract
minority students; (2) Summer programs for research training of undergraduates
and high school teachers at Princeton PCCM; (3) Organization of summer Materials
Science Camps for high school teachers; (4) Research training and education for
undergraduates, graduates and postdoctoral fellows at CMTC; (5)
Industrial/national laboratories outreach for student training and internships,
and (6) Curriculum development. The integration of teaching and research will
assist students in making informed career choices, and improve their ability to
participate in post-graduate education.