* 1205957
* Collaborative Research: Contributions to HALO, the Helium and Lead Observatory
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Alec Habig, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 04/30/2017
* USD 59,844.00

This award will enable collaborative work by Duke University and the University
of Minnesota Duluth's neutrino research groups on the Helium and Lead
Observatory (HALO). This is a new experiment designed to detect neutrinos
originating in a core-collapse supernova within our own galaxy. The deaths of
massive stars which cause these cataclysmic events occur every few decades
somewhere in the MilkyWay and emit 99% of their energy in the form of a short
burst of neutrinos. Existing detectors are primarily sensitive to electron
antineutrinos. Use of lead for its target nuclei allows HALO to be sensitive to
electron neutrinos, as well as to all flavor components of the burst flux via
neutral current interactions. The effort for this funding cycle will center on
upgrading HALO with redundant, fast-failover data acquisition systems. This
award will provide modest hardware and personnel contributions to this effort.

Broader impacts of this award include the excellent experimental training for
students and postdoctoral researchers. They have been very successful in
involving students and postdocs in the past. This project offers a range of
experiences, from simulation through detector construction, with operations and
data analysis to commence soon. HALO will also be a contributor to SNEWS
(SuperNova Early Warning System), which has an intrinsic outreach component.