* 1205952
* A Search for Gravitational Radiation at LIGO:  Oregon Experimental Relativity Group
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2012,08/31/2014
* James Brau, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2014
* USD 345,000.00

The Oregon group will continue its vigorous efforts aimed at discovery of
gravitational waves (GW) within the LIGO Scientific Collaboration (LSC). The
program will be pursued in the two areas where Oregon has developed significant
expertise and compiled a successful record of accomplishment. The first is
detector characterization and detection optimization: As the initial LIGO
(iLIGO) era winds down and the Advanced LIGO (aLIGO) era ramps up, the lessons
learned will be applied to the aLIGO instrument and the aLIGO science program.
Specifically, we will understand the coupling mechanisms for environmental noise
to the LIGO interferometer by way of measurement (analyzing data from monitoring
instrumentation) and the development of software to better identify subtle
mechanisms which gave rise to troublesome noise transients in iLIGO. The second
is data analysis, especially in developing searches for GW transients associated
with astrophysical triggers, such as gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) or supernovae. An
important motivation for developing and refining these searches will be to learn
how best to combine other astronomical observations with those from LIGO,
something we helped pioneer with triggered GRB searches in iLIGO. Furthering
this development is widely seen to be crucial for the full realization of the
scientific potential of Advanced LIGO. We intend to pursue this by refining
searches involving gamma-ray observations (associated with GRBs) and developing
searches involving neutrino observations (associated with core-collapse
supernovae).

With the commissioning of Advanced LIGO, we are preparing for an era of
discovery with the new astronomical medium of gravitational waves. Historically,
each fundamental new means for observing the universe has resulted in the
emergence not only of new science, but new ways the public perceives the world.
We expect this to also be the case with gravitational waves. Our work will help
ensure that our observational instrument, Advanced LIGO, works to its full
potential, and that the new window on nature is exploited scientifically to the
greatest extent possible. So beyond the scientific advancement resulting from
publication of new methods and observations, we anticipate the possibility of
significant human enlightenment regarding the nature of the universe to result.
A new scientific discipline of gravitational- wave astronomy has emerged, and
the education and advancement of the technical workforce must keep pace. The
participation of graduate students, postdoctoral associates, and undergraduate
students is a crucial element of the project. As an additional, direct benefit
to society, we will also continue to work with high school teachers to bring
this research to their students, and to engage the public via speaking
engagements.