* 1205803
* Unconventional Quantum Phase Transitions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Thomas Vojta, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2016
* USD 379,897.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical and computational research and
education to advance understanding of quantum phase transitions and broaden it
beyond the Landau-Ginzburg-Wilson paradigm.

The PI will explore several classes of unconventional quantum phase transitions,
focusing on four separate but related areas.

1. Strong-disorder quantum phase transitions: Motivated by experiments on
nitrogen-vanadium, cerium-palladium-rhodium, and strontium-calcium ruthenate
compounds, the PI aims to develop a theory of rare region effects at itinerant
ferromagnetic quantum phase transitions. He will also study the influence of
randomness on first-order quantum phase transitions as well as the effects of
disorder correlations.

2. Novel phases and transitions in layered systems: The PI will investigate the
unusual phases and transitions emerging in randomly and quasi-periodically
layered superconductors and superfluids that can be produced in ultracold gases
or nano-structured materials.

3. Dynamics and transport at quantum critical points: The PI will study the
conductance of superconducting molybdenum germanium and niobium nanowires at the
superconductor-metal quantum phase transition. He will also investigate
electronic transport in ferromagnetic Griffiths phases.

4 Berry phases in impurity problems and percolation transitions: The PI plans to
analyze the effects of Berry phases on the quantum-to-classical mapping of
impurity quantum phase transitions as well as their effects on percolation
transitions of rotors and spins.

A combination of analytical techniques and computer simulation will be used to
carry out the research.

This award also supports efforts to establish a series of "Nobel Prize talks" to
be given each fall after the prizes in physics, chemistry and physiology or
medicine have been announced. The talks in this series will be coordinated
between the Missouri S&T departments of physics, chemistry and biological
sciences. They will give elementary introductions into the science behind the
prize. These talks will expand the successful series of talks on the physics
prize that the PI has organized since 2007. The proposed work will also enhance
the research and education infrastructure at Missouri S&T, as the Pegasus
computer cluster designed and built and built by the PI becomes a hub of
computational research in the Physics Department.

NON- TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical and computational research and education with
the aim to advance understanding of a type of phase transition that occurs in
materials at the absolute zero of temperature called a quantum phase transition.
Unlike familiar phase transitions, for example the transformation of water to
steam, which are driven by thermal fluctuations, quantum phase transitions are
driven by quantum mechanical fluctuations, a consequence of the Heisenberg
uncertainty principle. Quantum phase transitions are important because their
influence can extend to temperatures, possibly as high as room temperature and
beyond, and profoundly change the behavior of electrons in materials. This has
consequences on the way electrons organize themselves into states of matter,
such as magnetism and superconductivity, and other exotic states that have been
predicted to occur in materials where electrons interact strongly with each
other. The perhaps less familiar state of superconductivity has the unusual
feature of being able to conduct electricity without losing energy to
dissipation. This leads to potential applications in power transmission. Known
superconducting materials only exhibit superconductivity at frigid temperatures,
some as high as temperatures where atmospheric gases like oxygen and nitrogen
are liquids. A better understanding of quantum critical phenomena may help
discover materials that exhibit superconductivity at much higher temperatures.
The rigorous description of quantum phase transitions lies outside the standard
theory of phase transitions. This research has potential to open new areas in
the study of phase transitions. Quantum phase transitions may also have
important consequences for efforts to develop quantum computers which are based
on the manipulation of quantum mechanical states, and nanoscale technologies
involving elements that are some tens of thousands of times smaller than the
diameter of a human hair.

This award also supports efforts to establish a series of "Nobel Prize talks" to
be given each fall after the prizes in physics, chemistry and physiology or
medicine have been announced. The talks in this series will be coordinated
between the Missouri S&T departments of physics, chemistry and biological
sciences. They will give elementary introductions into the science behind the
prize. These talks will expand the successful series of talks on the physics
prize that the PI has organized since 2007. The proposed work will also enhance
the research and education infrastructure at Missouri S&T, as the Pegasus
computer cluster designed and built and built by the PI becomes a hub of
computational research in the Physics Department.