* 1205835
* Moving Toward Gravitational Wave Detection in Advanced LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Peter Saulson, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2015
* USD 900,000.00

Saulson's research group at Syracuse has been working for two decades to help
develop the LIGO gravitational wave detector and to contribute to the search for
gravitational waves with the observations that it has made. In the coming three
years, the group will develop a new technique to uncover the causes of excess
(non-Gaussian) disturbances, or 'glitches',in LIGO's data. They will develop a
data-mining system to look for the connection between times subject to
disturbances and the values of a wide array of control and monitoring signals.
This will allow the exploration of the possibility that saturation of error
signals in control systems causes extra sensitivity to environmental
disturbances, as well as other mechanisms that can cause time-varying couplings
between control channels and the gravitational wave output. Success in this
project will allow more confident detections of gravitational wave signals, and
will ease the path to future sharing of LIGO data with the public. The Syracuse
group will also work to improve Advanced LIGO's search for gravitational waves
from the coalescence of a neutron star binary. A specially-focused pipeline will
be developed to take full advantage of all of the special features of this
signal. This will improve Advanced LIGO's ability to detect signals from this
key science target.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When we have succeeded in detecting
gravitational waves, we will be able to explore the universe in a completely new
way. It will enable us to make unprecedented observations of black holes, and in
particular to check whether they behave as predicted by Einstein's General
Theory of Relativity. Development of gravitational wave detection techniques has
led to advances in U.S. technological capability in lasers, vacuum systems, and
precision mechanics, among others. Saulson's group at Syracuse is engaged in
formal and informal education at many levels, including undergraduate and
graduate training and outreach to the general public. The group also
participates in research on the sociology of science, in conjunction with Prof.
Harry Collins of Cardiff University.