* 1205738
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Effects of Aztec Conquest on Provincial Commoner Households at Calixtlahuaca, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2014
* Michael Smith, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2014
* USD 20,000.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Michael Smith, Ms Angela Huster will collect data for
her doctoral dissertation. She will analyze archaeological ceramics from the
site of Calixtlahuaca (1100-1430 CE) to evaluate provincial peoples' responses
to being conquered and made part of the Aztec Empire. Calixtlahuaca was an
important regional capital that was conquered by the Aztec Empire in the 1470s,
and this project compares the time periods before the founding of the Aztec
Empire, during the beginning of the empire but before Calixtlahuca's conquest,
and after the Aztec conquest of the site. Comparative work on empires shows that
when a power conquers an area, it has to follow up with negations with multiple
local factions to establish lasting control over the region. Because an empire
wants a stable, taxable population, conquered populations retain some degree of
leverage in this process of establishing the terms of their rule. Both the
empire and the province are likely to use multiple, often contradictory
strategies to improve their position. Provincial actions can support imperial
interests, undercut them, or be effectively neutral. This project tests the
conditions under which conquered peoples are likely to adopt particular types of
responses. The knowledge which emerges from this project has the potential to
inform on multi-ethnic states which exist today in many regions of the world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project looks at responses in the form of changes in
trade patterns and household activities likely related to ethnic identity. It
uses three complementary methods of analyzing ceramics - type classification,
attribute analysis, and Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis (INAA) - to map
out trade patterns for each time periods. The patterns will be used to look at
how the Aztec conquest changed what and with whom people were trading, what they
were making, and general degree of well being. The project also looks at changes
in both ritual items including figurines and incense burners, and as well as
food serving vessels to see how these spheres of behavior were affected by Aztec
contact. In addition providing information of the Aztec Empire, the project
results will be useful for comparative work at a variety of levels, including
investigations of imperial rule, comparisons between regions of the Aztec
Empire, comparisons between sites within the Toluca Valley, and correlations
between early Spanish written records and archaeological evidence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project include promoting
interaction between American and Mexican scholars, providing training for both
graduate and undergraduate students, and presenting project findings to both
scholarly and public audiences. Ms Huster will do her field analysis at the
Colegio Mexiquense in Toluca, Mexico, where she will consult with Mexican
historians. The project will involve undergraduate volunteers in Mexico and
Arizona, providing students with hands-on training in ceramics analysis,
statistics, and database management. Findings will be presented through entries
to the existing Calixtlahuaca Archaeological Project blog, community
presentations in Mexico and the United States, conference presentations, and
journal publications. The raw data from the project will be made publically
available through The Digital Archaeological Repository. In addition, the INAA
data collected will become part of a widely used University of Missouri ceramics
reference database thus strengthening its regional coverage.