* 1205554
* Atomic Ensembles Entangled by Light for Measurements Below the Standard Quantum Limit
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Vladan Vuletic, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

Entangled states of atomic ensembles have the potential to overcome various
limits in quantum measurements, including the so-called standard quantum limit
associated with measurements on a collection of independent particles. To
realize entanglement in a many-body system, internal states of cold, trapped
atoms that are strongly coupled to laser light inside an optical resonator will
be used. The photons inside the cavity act as messengers between distant atoms,
and can be used to induce effective state-dependent long-range atom-atom
interactions. These interactions, in turn, can be utilized to redistribute
quantum noise so as to enhance the signal-to-noise ratio of atomic clocks and
atom interferometers ("spin squeezing"). In this project we implement a modified
spin squeezing method that allows one to disentangle the outgoing light from the
atoms while maintaining the light-mediated atom-atom interaction. This new
method provides not only much stronger spin squeezing than previously possible,
it also enables the generation of non-Gaussian entangled states and even
Schroedinger cat states in mesoscopic atomic ensembles. Furthermore, using the
strong interaction between an atom and a mode of the optical resonator, we hope
to demonstrate a variety of novel quantum optical devices, including a single-
photon all-optical switch, a dispersive photon-number-state filter, and a
deterministic quantum gate between two photons.

A major frontier of physics is the control of quantum mechanical many-body
systems. Such control will enable novel devices for storing and processing
quantum information, improve fundamental precision measurements, and enhance and
deepen our understanding of key concepts of many-body quantum physics. Of
particular interest is the quantum control of precision systems such as atomic
clocks. Atomic clocks are the most accurate devices ever made by mankind, and
have many important technological applications, including the Global Positioning
System and telecommunication networks. This research program could significantly
improve the precision of optical-transition atomic clocks beyond current limits,
and enable many new technologies linked to the ability to precisely keep time.
The project will train graduate students and undergraduate students. Exceptional
high-school students will be integrated into the research effort. Efforts are
made to include underrepresented minority students.