* 1205020
* Pipelines and Pipets: Biotechnician Training and Undergraduate Research
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Gilles Bolduc, Massasoit Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 04/30/2016
* USD 199,943.00

This project is establishing a new biotechnology degree option and a new
biotechnology certificate to respond to life science, allied health and
biotechnology industry needs for more highly skilled, entry level laboratory
technicians and is working closely with industry partners and industry
associations to develop these programs. The new biotechnology degree option and
biotechnology certificate are designed to incorporate relevant, real world
applications of laboratory techniques that are required skills for
biotechnicians. The courses being developed have sufficient rigor to also offer
transfer credit to a four-year program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Early undergraduate research has been shown to improve retention and academic
success in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
and workforce competitiveness; however, the community college students this
project targets are often at a disadvantage in gaining these experiences due to
lack of institutional capacity or financial and time constraints common among
students at community colleges. To overcome this gap, the college is infusing
courses developed in support of this project, along with existing science and
mathematics curriculum, with inquiry-based learning methodologies and research
like laboratory exercises that promote success in biotechnology studies and
other STEM disciplines. The college is also creating new opportunities for
students to engage in workplace internships and on campus summer research that
provide more intensive experiences and build practical skills. Professional
development for faculty enhances teaching capacity to integrate inquiry based
learning into science and mathematics curriculum. Acquisition of industry
standard equipment provides the laboratory configuration necessary to deliver
the biotechnology programs and develop industry required competencies in
students. New courses developed in support of these programs and revitalized
curricula throughout the Division of Science and Mathematics are grounded in
research-like experiences that provide a means to engage students in learning in
a way that helps them to be academically successful and teaches them the
scientific inquiry skills needed for a truly comprehensive technical training.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This undergraduate research program is a
model for other community colleges that are similarly challenged to provide
research driven education to biotechnology and STEM students. To ensure the
broader impact of the project, the college has developed a thorough
dissemination plan to inform stakeholders at the local, regional, and national
level on outcomes related to this initiative. Regional and state distribution
channels include membership in consortia of community colleges and state
universities that have the established goals of sharing experiences and
promoting best practices between institutions and among colleagues. As the
recipient of a model program endorsement from the Massachusetts Governor's STEM
Advisory Council for its work in improving retention, graduation, and transfer
rates among science majors, the college has the established credentials and
support from appropriate authorities to ensure that findings from this project
are both heard and heeded by institutions across the Commonwealth. On a national
level, the plan is to promote the findings through accessible channels such as
the annual NSF ATE conference and ATE Central, as well as seek opportunities to
present findings through presentations and posters at academic conferences.