* 1205110
* Expanding Geospatial Technician Education Through Virginia's Community Colleges (GTEVCC)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Chris Carter, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 09/30/2017
* USD 899,870.00

This multifaceted project, with core partners including Virginia community
colleges, the Virginia Space Grant Consortium, and the Virginia Geospatial
Extension Program, is supporting the preparation of a regional workforce skilled
in geospatial technologies (GST), which enhance the collection, analysis, and
interpretation of spatial data. Activities include 1) collaborative development
of GST courses, pathways and curricula aligned with the Department of Labor's
Geospatial Technology Competency Model, 2) GST program enhancement through
intensive faculty professional development and mentoring, 3) creation of courses
in advanced GST available to community college students throughout the state,
and 4) development of mobile GST applications for education. Partnering
community colleges are implementing strategies to increase student enrollment
and diversity in GST programs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a growing demand for
spatial analysis applications and solutions, fueled by the increasing
availability of spatial data and software tools for their analysis. GST is a
rapidly expanding industry that cuts across nearly every discipline and sector
of the U.S. economy. The project is directly addressing these advanced
technological workforce needs in the Virginia region. Moreover, the updated and
innovative GST courses, pathways, and professional development are advancing the
field and serving as models for others. Project materials and resources are
being shared statewide and nationally through Virginia Community College System
and the GeoTech Center web portals.