* 1205512
* Detection of Gravitational Waves: Data Analysis, Detector Characterization, and Instrument Science for Advanced LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* David Tanner, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2016
* USD 1,860,000.00

Data analysis and instrument science research for advanced gravitational-wave
detectors will be carried out. Coherent searches for gravitational-wave bursts
with networks of detectors will be developed and implemented. Special attention
is given to intermediate-mass binary black hole mergers and to binary systems
with highly eccentric orbits. Online burst searches, which enable joint
gravitational-wave and electromagnetic observations, will be developed.
Stochastic intermediate data will be generated for stochastic searches, such as
those analyzing long duration transients. In instrument science, work on thermal
adaptive mode-matching, devices for beam-jitter suppression, and improved
wavefront sensing will be carried out. Looking further into the future, studies
of cryogenic materials and devices, including silicon for test masses, will take
place.

The UF LIGO group gives students and postdoctoral scientists the opportunity to
develop scientific skills from a diverse set of disciplines spanning lasers and
optics, electronics and feedback control systems, vacuum and cryogenics,
computational methods, data analysis algorithm development, and large-scale
detector commissioning and operation. The University of Florida LIGO group
places high value on the education of undergraduate students and each year has
involved undergraduates in research. In addition, the group has a strong
tradition of mentoring students and postdocs in the UF LIGO laboratory; many of
these students have gone on to further education and careers in gravitational
wave science. These efforts will continue. This work will positively impact the
national and international scientific infrastructure through UF LIGO direct
participation in research and operations at the LIGO Observatories. Finally, the
proposed research has impacts that go beyond gravitational wave science. High-
power optical devices developed in this project have commercial applications to
the laser and optics industries.