* 1205302
* UTEP/UCSB PREM: Molecular and Interfacial Phase Design for Improved Photovoltaics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2019
* Dorothy Pak, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 05/31/2019
* USD 3,962,399.00

UTEP-UCSB PREM: Fundamental Molecular and Interfacial Design for Next Generation
Photovoltaic Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
synergistic interdisciplinary research approach to the advancement of the basic
understanding of the molecular and interfacial structures essential for
efficient solar energy conversion will be conducted. In this project, an
innovative, student-centered, inter-campus program called "UTEP-UCSB PREM" will
be created to manage the scholarly activities of the participating students.
Prof. L. Echegoyen from UTEP and Prof. C. Hawker from UCSB lead this
institutional partnership in which eight UTEP and eight UCSB scientists and
engineers (chemistry, materials, physics, and electrical and mechanical
engineering) and one from Sandia National Laboratories form collaborative
research teams that focus on the following key fundamental aspects of solar
energy photovoltaic research: (1) theoretical calculations to predict mechanisms
and guide the design of new active compounds, (2) development of high-yield
novel systems with tunable properties for next-generation solar cells, (3)
crystal engineering to establish structure-function relationships for improved
cell efficiencies, (4) semiconductor nanocrystal growth simulations to predict
function, and (5) development of new interfacial transparent materials with
well-characterized composition and structure, to establish structure-function
relationships and guide the design of next-generation interfaces for solar
cells. The world-class instrument facilities at the UCSB MRL will enable and
catalyze the exploration of the basic science of solar cells and provide unique
opportunities for cross-fertilization of ideas, mentoring, and multidisciplinary
training. The collaborative teams will hold research-focus group meetings via
real-time video teleconferencing and hold an annual symposium hosted by each
institution, revolving yearly. This will foster a high-level of research
intensity and a well-orchestrated student-centered organizational environment.
Ultimately, this research partnership will increase our understanding of the
fundamental mechanism of solar cells and pave the way for the next generation of
decentralized energy production in the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP) is a major research university located in
the Southwest region of the United States and has a student body composed of 78%
Hispanic-Americans and 55% women out of which a large portion are low-income
first-generation college students. The proposed UTEP-UCSB PREM partnership will
promote and enhance the participation and advanced degree attainment of over 20
Ph.D. and over 30 B.S. students, most of whom will be from underrepresented
minority groups. Students will develop expertise in the broad areas of green
energy and sustainability while acquiring a strong set of multi-disciplinary
skills in fundamental research. The participating students will carry out this
research at both academic institutions and will be mentored by faculty from
several disciplines. Mentoring of junior and mid-career faculty will also be
fostered. This PREM program will allow UTEP to significantly accelerate its
emergence as a focal center for materials research and develop a long-lasting
collaborative partnership with UCSB's MRL. The research results under the UTEP-
UCSB PREM partnership will be disseminated in peer-reviewed journals and
conferences, and to the public at large via a dedicated web portal and frequent
presentations at local K-12 schools.