* 1205671
* A Program of Medium Energy Nuclear Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Naomi Makins, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Hicks
* 08/31/2015
* USD 7,554,991.00

Understanding the structure of hadrons and nuclei remains a compelling thrust in
nuclear physics. Although it is a relatively straightforward generalization of
quantum electrodynamics, the underlying theory of strong interactions, quantum
chromodynamics (QCD), is difficult to solve, especially in the context of
structure. Although lattice QCD has made important progress, observations are
clearly still important to make the theory's phenomena come to life. The
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champagne program focuses on the spin and
flavor structure of the nucleon in a variety of experiments at high energies
where key elements of the microscopic role of quarks, anti-quarks and gluons are
poorly understood. The PHENIX polarized pp program, while continuing to measure
the contribution of gluons to the nucleon spin, will enter a new phase of
measuring the contributions of antiquarks, taking advantage of an Illinois-led
muon trigger upgrade. The SEAQUEST experiment at Fermilab will follow on the
very successful E866 measurement of the intriguing asymmetry of up and down
anti-quarks in the nucleon with more precise data over a broader kinematic
range. The Illinois group has recently joined the fixed target COMPASS
experiment at CERN, where they will make a major contribution to an apparatus
upgrade that will take the next step in characterizing the transverse spin
structure of the nucleon. Together, these efforts - with substantial Illinois
contributions - promise significant advances in the understanding of QCD. Beyond
the current standard model of particle physics must lie new phenomena, only the
shadows of which are currently visible. The Illinois group contributes to these
investigations through low-energy experiments designed to follow the leads
provided by certain non-standard-model phenomena. In the neutrino sector, where
even the existence of non-zero masses was a surprise not contemplated in the
standard model, the Illinois group is working on the Daya Bay experiment.
Currently taking its first data, Daya Bay will make the world's most sensitive
determination of the mixing of the first and third neutrino generations,
theta_(13). In the standard model, the violation of the combined charge-
conjugation and parity (CP) symmetry is added 'by hand' and is not well-
understood. A new measurement of the neutron's electric dipole moment (EDM),
which violates CP, aims at a 100-fold improvement compared with the present
limit. These measurements are important on their own merits, but may also shed
light on the observed asymmetry of matter and anti-matter in the universe. The
existence of this asymmetry is thought to require more CP violation than is
currently known, and may arise from interactions that would generate an EDM in
the neutron, and or in the neutrino sector where it would manifest in CP-
violating mixing between the first and third generations.

The Illinois group has reached beyond its laboratories to make significant
contributions to education and outreach and will continue to do so. Research
projects contribute substantially to the education of a large number of
postdoctoral research associates, graduate, and undergraduate students. The
faculty are also involved in innovative curricular and outreach efforts.
Examples include introduction of research equipment and measurement protocols
into advanced modern physics laboratories, establishment of a graduate option in
energy and sustainability engineering, inventing new inter-disciplinary
math/engineering teaching protocols targeted directly at retention, continued
support of a Saturday lecture program aimed primarily at high school students,
and a major contribution to the Physics of Baseball, a topic having wide public
interest. Our group and Department expect to continue to support strongly the
participation of underrepresented groups, for example, acting as host for the
Conference for Undergraduate Women in Physics in 2008.