* 1205757
* Collaborative Research: CI-ADDO-NEW: Ocean-TUNE: A Community Ocean Testbed for Underwater Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Mario Gerla, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 05/31/2017
* USD 431,400.00

There is growing global importance of ocean exploration and monitoring as the
oceans play a major role in climate regulation, nutrient production, resource
retrieval and transportation, etc. Building and deploying a real-time underwater
networked sensing infrastructure is thus needed for desired levels of monitoring
and data collection. Despite a wave of research efforts in the area of
underwater wireless networks, the lack of a community testbed has so far
hampered further advances, as there is no common platform to evaluate and
compare various communication and networking algorithms and protocols.
Furthermore very few studies can afford to consider real system features due to
the high cost of system deployment and maintenance.

This project involves the design and deployment of an open underwater testbed
suite, accessible to the public at four sites in Connecticut, California, Texas,
and Washington States. The testbed will include flexible choices of surface
nodes, bottom nodes, and mobile nodes with reconfigurable modems. It will enable
the vision of remote controlled and continuous networked node deployments
running tests of communication, networking, sensing, and data streaming. In
addition, the testbed will enable oceanographers to study scientific research
questions, while using the testbed as a prototype for larger real-time
monitoring deployments elsewhere. The testbed will also directly impact
undergraduate research and student diversity by involving undergraduate students
through REU programs, impacting curriculum development by enabling field
courses, and engaging K-12 students and teachers, particularly in underserved
communities.