* 1205861
* Superfluid Optomechanics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Jack Harris, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2016
* USD 470,000.00

The field of optomechanics has progressed rapidly in the past few years from
proof-of-principle demonstrations of coupling between optical and mechanical
systems to the observation of quantum effects in a handful of these devices.
During the same period, connections between optomechanical systems and other AMO
systems such as ultracold atoms and diamond NV centers have emerged as promising
routes towards controlling quantum information in hybrid systems. In this
project, we are working to extend both of these efforts by realizing a new type
of optomechanical system capable of reaching the quantum regime while also
playing host to cold molecules strongly coupled to an optical cavity. The
devices we are building will also be substantially more robust and compact than
existing optomechanical devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, we
are using high finesse optical cavities filled with superfluid helium. The
cavities are formed between a pair of optical fibers. Precision-machined glass
ferrules are being used to align the fibers and to contain the superfluid. The
mechanical element will be the vibrational modes of the superfluid helium
filling the space between the two fibers. This design eliminates all mechanical
alignments, and should result in a very stable device. Numerical estimates
suggest that this device will provide access to a range of quantum phenomena,
including observations of the zero-point motion of the superfluid modes, the
generation of squeezed light, and measurements of the quantum back action of an
optical displacement measurement. In addition, we are exploring the
optomechanical properties of superfluid-vacuum interfaces by filling the cavity
only partially with superfluid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superfluid helium can play
host to a variety of atom-like systems (such as metastable helium dimer
moledules and electron bubbles) that can interact with both the optical cavity
and the sound waves in the helium. Combining optomechanics with such atom-like
systems would greatly enhance the versatility of these devices. We are using
these superfluid optomechanical devices to study the quantum limits of
measurements, and to produce ultrastable light for use in instruments operating
at the quantum limit of sensitivity. This work is also providing valuable
training for graduate students in laser optics, cryogenics, low-noise
measurements, signal processing, data analysis, and quantum optics. This
training will allow them to pursue basic and applied research in a wide variety
of settings.