* 1205351
* Classical and Modern Schubert Calculus
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Anders Buch, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2015
* USD 154,936.00

Many problems in enumerative geometry can be reduced to a computation in the
cohomology ring of a flag manifold X = G/P. The structure constants of this ring
are ruled by deep and beautiful combinatorics, and their study falls in the
intersection of several mathematical disciplines. For example, when X is a
Grassmann variety, these structure constants are the Littlewood-Richardson
coefficients that also describe tensor products of representations of GL(n),
products of symmetric polynomials, and play a role in numerous other areas
ranging from linear algebra to statistics and complexity theory in computer
science. The celebrated Littlewood-Richardson rule expresses any Littlewood-
Richardson coefficient as the number of certain combinatorial objects called
tableaux. A more general combinatorial formula, conjectured by Allen Knutson,
states that the structure constants of a two-step flag variety are equal to the
number triangular puzzles with specified integer labels on the sides. The
investigator hopes to prove this conjecture. Earlier work of the investigator
has established that the structure constants of two-step flag varieties
specialize to the Gromov-Witten invariants of Grassmannians, and therefore count
the number of rational curves of a fixed degree that meet three Schubert
varieties in general position. The Gromov-Witten invariants also determine the
structure of the(small) quantum cohomology ring, whose definition is inspired by
physics and has relations to mirror symmetry. A proof of Knutson's conjecture
will therefore establish the most precise description of this ring as a fact.
The investigator will also study other questions concerning the K-theory and
quantum K-theory of flag manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A typical question in
classical algebraic geometry is to identify the complete list of geometric
figures of some type that satisfy a list of conditions. While it can be
difficult or impossible to identify the individual figures, it is in many cases
possible to say how many there are. Enumerative geometry is the study of such
counting problems as well as methods to solve them. Powerful techniques have
been developed that can translate an enumerative geometric problem into an
algebraic problem, so that the number of solution figures is the result of a
computation. However, the combinatorial aspects of an enumerative problem are in
most cases best understood in the presence of a formula that makes it clear that
the number of solutions is non-negative. For example, such positive formulas are
much more useful for proving general statements about which enumerative problems
have any solutions at all. Surprisingly, positive formulas are significantly
more difficult to discover and prove than non-positive formulas. In return the
positive formulas tend to surround themselves with deep combinatorial structures
and methods that provide even more insight into the geometric problem than the
formulas themselves. The investigator will attempt to prove a number of positive
formulas of this type. He also plans to write a computer program capable of
computing the solutions of a large family of enumerative problems. Examples of
this type are important for making progress in the field, and are at the same
time very useful for students or others who would like to learn the subject.
Finally, the investigator will continue to engage graduate and undergraduate
students in his research.