* 1205715
* Statistics and dynamics in topological states of matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Dmitri Feldman, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 311,290.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports research on the theory of topological quantum materials and
related educational activities. The properties of quantum correlated systems are
strikingly different from conventional matter. One of the most dramatic examples
is the fractional charge and statistics in the fractional quantum Hall effect.
Charge fractionalization is by now convincingly proven by experiment. At the
same time, a direct experimental observation of the fractional statistics of
anyons poses a major challenge. This challenge has recently attracted much
attention because of a possibility of non-Abelian anyonic statistics at some
quantum Hall filling factors. Possible applications as well as intrinsic
interest of non-Abelian anyons have stimulated attempts to find such particles
in nature.

The first thrust of this project is motivated by current experiments in this
direction and will address transport signatures of theoretically proposed
fractional quantum Hall states which can be used for their detection. Latest
experiments provide evidence in support of an unpolarized or partially polarized
state at the filling factor 5/2. Possible unpolarized and partially polarized
states will be investigated.

The second thrust focuses on the derivation of far-from-equilibrium fluctuation-
dissipation theorems in chiral systems and their implications for deducing the
structure of quantum Hall states from transport properties.

The third thrust recognizes that Quantum Hall liquids are representatives of a
much broader class of topological insulators. Homogeneous topological insulators
have recently received great attention. Less is known about quenched disorder
effects. The third thrust addresses metal-insulator transitions in topological
insulators with a focus on electronic transport. The PI will also investigate
rectification in nanostructures based on topological insulators. The methods
will include bosonization, the Keldysh technique, the algebraic theory of
anyons, conformal field theory and other analytical and numerical tools.

This award supports several educational activities. Most of the budget will be
directed for graduate student support. The PI will also involve undergraduates
in his research. Graduate and undergraduate research on novel materials will
contribute to the scientific education of the US workforce. The PI will
incorporate new developments in university courses. He will participate in
outreach beyond the academic community on various levels.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award provides support for research on the theory of topological quantum
materials and related educational activities. Modern technology allows confining
semiconductors on the nanoscale in one or two dimensions. The states of matter
formed by electrons in these confined systems cannot be described as one- and
two-dimensional analogs of electronic matter in three-dimensional
semiconductors. The understanding of those novel states and the transformations
among them is a key problem in condensed matter physics. The fractional quantum
Hall effect provides a striking example. In quantum Hall systems electrons
behave as though they were split into several pieces, called anyons, whose
charge is a fraction of the electron charge and whose properties are
dramatically different from all other known particles. These exotic properties
may open a road to a practical implementation of quantum computing. Many
questions about anyons in quantum Hall systems remain open. In some important
situations it is not known what happens when several are rearranged anyons. The
PI will investigate this issue in two-dimensional systems in the first thrust of
the research.

Quantum Hall liquids are representatives of a much broader class of materials
called topological insulators. Like ordinary insulators, for example rubber,
topological insulators do not conduct electricity though the interior of the
material. Unlike ordinary insulators, topological insulators are able to conduct
electricity on their edges or boundaries through the formation of a new state of
matter. Among the known topological insulators are compounds made of the
elements bismuth and selenium, and bismuth and tellurium. The PI will
investigate the effects of impurities and imperfections characteristic of real
topological insulator materials on the electronic properties of topological
insulators. In particular, the PI will address a possibility to build one of the
most important elements of electric circuits, a diode, from topological
materials.

This award supports several educational activities. Most of the budget will be
directed for graduate student support. The PI will also involve undergraduates
in his research. Graduate and undergraduate research on novel materials will
contribute to the scientific education of the US workforce. The PI will
incorporate new developments in university courses. He will participate in
outreach beyond the academic community on various levels.