* 1205546
* A complete sufficient dimension folding theory with novel methods
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Xiangrong Yin, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2015
* USD 110,000.00

This proposal is aimed at developing a general formulation and the related
methods for sufficient dimension folding where predictors are matrix-/array-
valued, and where a specific functional (or parameter) of the conditional
distribution is of interest. The past two decades have seen vigorous development
of the sufficient dimension reduction methods for vector-valued predictors, and
have accrued a striking record of their successful applications. However, many
data are matrix-/array-valued, sufficient dimension reduction for vector-valued
predictors applying to such data will lose its sufficiency and structure,
resulting difficulties in interpretation, and to a large extent these methods
treat the conditional distribution as the object of interest, without
discriminating between parameter of interest and nuisance parameter. The
investigator proposes a new paradigm for sufficient dimension folding for
matrix-/array-valued predictors that focuses on a functional of the conditional
distribution, which can be any one in a very wide class that covers most of
applications. In addition, the investigator proposes to develop a coherent
collection of associated techniques for estimation, computation, and asymptotic
inference. Recently, high throughput technologies that produce massive amount of
complex and high-dimensional data are increasingly prevalent in such diverse
areas as business, government administration, environmental studies, machine
learning, and bioinformatics. These provide considerable momentum in the
Statistics community to develop new theories and methodologies, that are capable
of discovering critical evidence from high-dimensional, complex structural and
massive data. Sufficient Dimension Folding is a new area of statistical research
that arose amidst, and has been propelled by, these new demands. The
investigator proposes to formulate the theories and methodologies of sufficient
dimension folding so that they can be specifically tailored to target to be
estimated. This new paradigm not only synthesizes, broadens, and deepens the
recent advances in sufficient dimension folding, but brings the understanding of
sufficient dimension folding on a par with classical statistical inference
theory, by following the tradition of sufficiency, efficiency, information,
parameter of interests, and nuisance parameters, which are the key ideas that
had helped to propel classical inference to its maturity.