* 1205311
* Towards a Chip-Based Architecture for the Production and Study of Ultracold Molecular Ions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Eric Hudson, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2013
* USD 25,000.00

This project seeks to develop techniques, amenable to microfabricated deployment
(i.e. microchips), for manipulating and producing charged molecules at
temperatures less than 1/1000 K. The ability to produce a sample of molecular
ions at these temperatures should facilitate a number of scientific advances,
including the study and possible control of chemistry in the quantum regime; a
better understanding of charge transport; new probes of quantum matter; insights
into the formation of interstellar clouds; and precision measurement of
molecular transitions and structure for test of fundamental physics. Further, if
these methods can be implemented in a microfabricated architecture, they may
enable significant advances towards important technologies, such as chemistry-
lab-on-a-chip devices envisioned for portable, high-throughput chemical sensing
and the implementation of a robust, scalable quantum computation
device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this work extends beyond the
obvious effects of the new science and technology that may result, as currently
four PhD students are being trained for careers in science and technology on
this project. Further, this project involves a significant undergraduate
research component aimed to increase and maintain enrollment of underrepresented
groups in science and technology majors. An additional goal of the project is to
leverage the fact that the involved techniques, such as lasers, are captivating
to young students to facilitate outreach to and recruitment into STEM majors of
local underrepresented groups.