* 1205084
* Digitization PEN: Addressing Colorado Lichens and Bryophytes as Sensitive Indicators of Environmental Quality and Change
* BIO,EF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Timothy Hogan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 06/30/2015
* USD 139,439.00

This award joins the ongoing Thematic Collections Network project on "North
American Lichens and Bryophytes: Sensitive Indicators of Environmental Quality
and Change". The primary goal of this project is to image label data from the
100,000 North American bryophyte (mosses) and lichen specimens held at the
University of Colorado Herbarium (COLO). The main scientific questions to be
addressed from these efforts are: (1) How are changes in distribution patterns
of lichens and bryophytes over time correlated with man-made environmental
changes? (2) Can mapping of specimens document such changes, and can these
organisms be used as bioindicators to focus our attention on steps needed to
maintain a healthy environment? Natural history museums and herbaria serve as
storehouses for plant and animal specimens collected over generations of
scientific investigation. Collections are the basis for our understanding of
life's diversity in all its abundance and variation across nature. The
collections from Colorado will add information about high altitude lichens and
bryophytes and will fill a gap for the original network.

With uncertainty surrounding future impacts from human climate disruption, the
value of efforts such as these will only grow over time. Future scientists and
policy makers will be indebted to those who expedite access to the objective
records of voucher specimens documenting the presence of particular species at a
particular place at a particular time. COLO views this proposal not only as a
commitment to fill a significant gap in the national project's goal to digitize
the bulk of North American collection in US herbaria, but also as an opportunity
to advance efforts within museums and herbaria to train and support the next
generation of curatorial professionals, offering opportunities for several
undergraduate students as interns. Volunteers from the public community will be
trained, and the museum will develop exhibits as a part of public outreach. This
award is made as part of the National Resource for Digitization of Biological
Collections through the Advancing Digitization of Biological Collections program
and all data resulting from this award will be available through the national
resource (iDigBio.org).