* 1205746
* II-NEW: An Infrastructure to Support Advanced Computational Stereoscopic Cinematography and System
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Wu-chi Feng, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 06/30/2015
* USD 123,986.00

This project supports the research focused on computational stereoscopic imaging
for enhanced visualization at Portland State University. Stereoscopic 3D enabled
devices are becoming more ubiquitous, providing their users with a more
immersive experience. However, there exists a gap between the increasing demand
of stereoscopic content and the limited capability of stereoscopic content
production. Stereoscopic content needs to be carefully produced to avoid 3D
fatigue. This project enables research to bridge this gap by establishing a
stereoscopic imaging, displaying, and system infrastructure to support the
research on computational stereoscopic photography and cinematography,
stereoscopic systems support, and next-generation multi-lens stereoscopic
imaging. This infrastructure consists of a comprehensive spectrum of
stereoscopic imaging equipment and a range of stereoscopic displays. The
stereoscopic imaging equipment includes both the state-of-the-art commercial
cameras and the development of a platform to mimic next-generation multi-lens
imaging devices. A particularly important component of this project is to
develop a large, diverse set of conventional stereoscopic videos and multi-lens
stereoscopic imaging data that will be shared with the community to promote
computational research on stereoscopic 3D. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
helps to better understand the relation between capture, compression, and
display, and to facilitate the production of high-quality stereoscopic content
to reduce the side effects such as 3D fatigue and headaches that people have
from viewing low-quality stereoscopic content. The research results are
disseminated through conference and journal publication and the research data,
particularly the stereoscopic video library, is shared online.