* 1205129
* Creating a Pathway for High School Minorities to Community College STEM Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* stephen Mason, Denmark Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/2015
* USD 200,000.00

This project is creating a pathway for high school minorities to science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) programs with a primary focus on
engineering, technology and mathematics. The program provides Technology Gateway
and Project Lead the Way programs to prepare at least 127 minority high school
juniors and seniors participants for an associate degree and/or bachelor degree
in a STEM discipline, which subsequently increases their opportunity to obtain
employment in a STEM or STEM-related field. The program also features
mentorships, career readiness training, internships, and enrichment activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The goals of the program are to:
&lt;br/&gt;1. Ensure that high school minority juniors and seniors acquire
knowledge and skills in engineering, technology and mathematics to prepare them
for two-year and four-year post-secondary education through Technology Gateway
and Project Lead the Way programs. &lt;br/&gt;2. Provide professional
development opportunities for faculty and staff that increase their knowledge
and skills in engineering, technology and mathematics and prepare them to teach
Technology Gateway and Project Lead the Way courses. &lt;br/&gt;3. Deliver
career readiness knowledge and skills to high school students that prepare them
for the workforce through field experiences and internships.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project plan is to increase its current high school
enrollments in Technology Gateway and Project Lead the Way courses by 50%,
enroll at least 60% of the high school graduates in one of the STEM associate
degree programs at the college, graduate at least 80% of the students who enroll
in a STEM associate degree program, and ensure that at least 80% who complete an
associate degree either transfer to a four year institution or obtain employment
in a STEM or STEM related field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
program focuses on underrepresented and minority high school juniors and seniors
in rural counties that face many socio-economic challenges such as high school
drop outs, unemployment, and low income. The educational infrastructure at the
college is impacted by providing STEM pathways that offer training, hands-on
experience, and learning opportunities to prepare students in secondary
education for post-secondary education. The project improves the overall college
infrastructure in STEM fields through sustaining partnerships with businesses
and industries that provide workforce readiness (field experiences and
internships) for students and increases the economy of the service area of the
college.