* 1205695
* II-New: Infrastructure to Support Integrated Research and Education in Socially Intelligent Computing at Missouri S&T
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Sriram Chellappan, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2016
* USD 281,680.00

The PI's efforts to conduct original and practical research in socially
intelligent computing - an emerging and important paradigm centered on
integrating people and computers to create new forms of collaboration,
communication, and intelligence previously unachievable by humans or computers
alone - have been hindered, in scope, scale and quality, by the lack of a
dedicated and realistic infrastructure. This proposal requests funds to set up
such an infrastructure at the PI's institution, which will support integrated
research and education. The infrastructure requested includes high-end
computational and storage servers, desktop machines, laptops, smart phones,
sensors, cameras, software and accessories for collecting, processing and
extracting knowledge from large scale data arising from the daily interactions
of society with the Internet and with mobile phones. The overall goal is to
utilize the knowledge gained from social computing data to create a spectrum of
practical services and applications benefitting society. In particular, three
research projects that emphasize the close integrations of society with
technology are identified in the proposal: a) Detection of depressive disorders
in college settings by mining Internet usage data; b) Human "fingerprinting" by
mining Internet and smart phone usage; and c) Tracking humans in the social
world by fusing heterogeneous sensor data.

Intellectual Merit The planned research activities are well described and will
likely significantly advance the state of the art in socially intelligent
computing. The PI has pioneered the mining of real Internet data to detect
depressive behavior in college students. His prior research has identified
critical Internet usage features that show strong statistical differences
between students with and without depressive symptoms. He next plans to design,
using computational intelligence techniques, classifiers which can proactively
detect depressive behavior in college students with high accuracy while being
transparent and preserving privacy. He is also exploring the feasibility of
mining Internet usage patterns to fingerprint humans, with applications to
Internet forensics and mitigation of insider attacks. Similar techniques will be
applied to mine sensor data from smart phones in order to fingerprint mobility
patterns and to lay the foundation for a variety of pervasive services. While
conventional tracking algorithms leverage either a network of cameras or
physical sensory data or electronic signals, the PI plans to pursue an
integrated approach that fuses multiple orthogonal data source and which
incorporates novel feature extraction and pattern recognition techniques for
human tracking in both outdoor and indoor environments.

Broader Impact This project has applications in diverse areas including mental
health screening, insider attack and fraud prevention, phone and vehicle theft
detection, participatory sensing etc. Research outcomes will be shared
periodically with diverse stakeholders in psychology, law enforcement,
forensics, business, etc. The courses taught by the PI and his team in
networking, security and computer vision will be enhanced with content deriving
from this project, and the infrastructure will help students learn by practical
experience. Research findings, learning materials and team experiences will be
disseminated periodically to a wide audience (including educators and students
in HBCUs and K-12) via conferences and the Web.