* 1205559
* Rydberg-Atom Physics in Ponderomotive Traps and Atomic Imaging Devices
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Georg Raithel, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2016
* USD 510,000.00

In the project entitled "Rydberg-atom physics in ponderomotive traps and atomic
imaging devices" optical-lattice dipole traps for Rydberg atoms are developed,
improved and applied in research. These optical traps have trap-induced level
shifts that are much smaller than those in static-field traps. They are
therefore well suited for high-precision spectroscopy and quantum information
processing applications that are currently of high interest. The lattices
exhibit a rich variety of adiabatic trapping potentials, which are studied via
laser spectroscopy. The effect of lattice-induced photo-ionization on the
trapped Rydberg atoms is measured. A spectroscopic method is developed that is
based on microwave modulation of the optical-lattice beams. The method allows
the research team to drive high-order multipole transitions without the
application of large fields, which would cause level shifts, and with high
spatial resolution. The research team develops three-dimensional optical
lattices for microwave spectroscopy of optically trapped circular-state Rydberg
atoms. The work has the prospect of yielding a high-precision measurement of the
Rydberg constant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the second component of the work, a
tip imaging probe (TIP) is employed to perform spatial-domain measurements of
correlations in many-body Rydberg systems. In these systems, several de-
localized Rydberg excitations are coherently shared between a large number of
cold atoms in a highly entangled quantum state. The TIP system reads out the
positions of individual Rydberg excitations in the sample via ion imaging. New
measurements with the TIP setup allow the researchers to separate blockade-
induced effects and effects due to Coulomb ion repulsion in the measured
signals. The TIP experiment is applied to prepare and detect Rydberg atom
crystals excited by adiabatic passage in randomly distributed samples of ground-
state atoms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trapping individual atoms continues to be a
major theme in atomic, molecular and optical physics. In a so-called "optical
lattice," several intersecting laser beams are used to form a periodic grid of
trap sites to trap atoms. An optical lattice is much like an egg carton holding
eggs at periodic locations (where an egg is the atom's analogue). In this
project a Michigan research team develops such optical lattices for Rydberg
atoms. A Rydberg atom is a giant atom with one very loosely bound electron that
travels, on average, quite far away from the atom's center. The research
community believes that, in the long term, Rydberg atoms in laser traps can be
helpful in the development of powerful quantum computers, which can treat
mathematical problems that ordinary computers cannot solve. The optical Rydberg
atom traps the Michigan team develops also have the potential of yielding
information on fundamental constants, such as the Rydberg constant. Measurements
of such constants are of great value because they serve as tests of our current
understanding of the composition of matter and the inner workings of nature. In
the project, graduate and undergraduate students are trained in research,
research presentation, and in peer instruction. The project as a whole has a
broader impact on society in that students at all levels become prepared to
assume important tasks in science, industry and education. The project is
accompanied by outreach components that aim to encourage high-school students to
consider careers in science or engineering, such as the Michigan Physics
Olympiad.