* 1205254
* Planck Scale Holographic Noise Search Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2019
* Herold Gustafson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 03/31/2019
* USD 368,939.00

The Holometer experiment at Fermilab is designed to study a conjectured effect
called "holographic noise" that may arise from new Planck scale physics: the
measured positions of bodies may wander randomly from the geodesics of classical
relativity, in measurement-dependent directions by about a Planck length per
Planck time. The experiment will search for this holographic jitter in the
relation of mass energy and space time by looking for correlated phase noise
between two neighboring interferometers to provide convincing evidence for or
against the hypothesized effect. A positive result would be a major step forward
in understanding the emergence of space-time and mass-energy from a unified
theory of gravity, space-time and quantum mechanics. A negative result will
impact the macroscopic interpretation of unified
theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will enable the PI to collaborate in
the search for Holographic Planck Scale Noise. The experiment, under
construction and testing at Fermilab, will search for the correlation of the two
noise signals from two nearby simple Michelson Interferometers. This correlated
noise should depend on the relative displacement and orientation of the two
interferometers, thus making incisive tests possible. This experiment will be
the first targeted specifically to measure this fundamental minimum interval of
space-time. It could make the first direct measurement of a universal noise in
space-time caused by that fundamental Planck scale
graininess.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Apart from the possibly very
significant impact on physics and the way space-time is viewed, even a negative
result would provide strong graduate physics training and an excellent career
launching experience. This experiment is a good hands-on physics project, with
multiple opportunities for real mentor contact, and with the experimental
reality of debugging, diagnosing and making measurements; the PI has a strong
personal outreach program to undergraduates and has mentored undergraduates in
summer research projects for more than 10 years.