* 1205585
* Support of LIGO Data Analysis Activities at the University of Texas at Brownsville
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2015
* Joseph Romano, The University of Texas at Brownsville
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2015
* USD 450,000.00

Gravitational-wave (GW) searches using LIGO's landmark fifth and sixth science
runs have led to major observational results, including astrophysical
constraints that have begun to surpass those from electromagnetic or particle
observations. Preparations for the start of the advanced detector era are now
eagerly underway, with LIGO, Virgo and GEO600 in a transition period and new
interferometers under construction. These advanced detectors, expected to come
on-line starting around 2015, will be ~10 times more sensitive, searching a
volume of the Universe ~1000 times larger than at present, virtually
guaranteeing the first detection of GWs. This award supports research in areas
that are relevant to LIGO data analysis during this transition period, and that
will build the foundation for techniques required in the advanced detector era:
(i) searches for a cosmological or astrophysical GW background, (ii) statistical
searches for GWs from gamma-ray bursts, (iii) developing new methods to search
for GWs from supernovae, and (iv) detector characterization.

The first project will improve our sensitivity to GW backgrounds using the most
recent data from both the LIGO and Virgo detectors. The second will develop
methods to optimally use the information contained in the electromagnetic or
particle signature of an astrophysical event (such as gamma-ray data from NASA
missions like Swift and Fermi) in GW searches. The third will explore methods to
enhance the sensitivity of searches involving GWs from weak sources like
supernovae, and the fourth will look into the detector data to characterize low-
frequency non-stationary noise and track possible instrumental artefacts as
well. The graduate students supported by this grant will receive direct training
in GW data analysis, thus adding to the growing community of researchers in this
field. Since the University of Texas at Brownsville (UTB) is an Hispanic serving
institution, the research activities will expose students who are traditionally
under-represented in the areas of science and technology to forefront scientific
research. On-going major outreach programs at UTB will be able to leverage this
research, creating awareness among high-school students about exciting
scientific projects such as LIGO.