* 1205571
* Collaborative Research: Correlated Superfluids and Insulators of Ultracold Fermionic Atomic Gases
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Predrag Nikolic, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 06/30/2016
* USD 150,000.00

This award supports the collaboration between researchers P. Nikolic at George
Mason University and M. Rigol at Georgetown University. Ultracold atoms are a
novel physical system whose properties can be dominated by a correlated behavior
of many interacting particles. The theoretical discovery and characterization of
correlated quantum states that may be difficult to obtain in any other system is
the fundamental purpose of this project. The main focus are unconventional
paired insulators and superfluids stabilized by nearly resonant interactions in
optical lattices. Using simple microscopic models that are theoretically
tractable and routinely realized in ultracold atom laboratories, this research
will advance the many-body quantum theory in the atomic physics context, and
analyze the emergence of correlations commonly found in complicated solid state
materials. Our understanding of high temperature superconductivity is expected
to benefit from the inter-disciplinary nature of this research, while the
results will have potential applications to quantum engineering and high-
precision measurements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A broad outreach effort included
in this project will benefit from the location of George Mason and Georgetown
Universities in the metropolitan Washington DC area. Opportunities such as
science fairs and public lectures will be used to attract high school and
undergraduate students from Northern Virginia to pursue higher education and
careers in science and engineering, as well as participate in the funded
research projects. Through the investigators? external affiliations, this
project will also expose the students working on it to collaborative
opportunities at the National Institute of Standards and Technology, and the
Johns Hopkins University. This grant will further facilitate the building of
advanced research programs in atomic and condensed matter theory at George Mason
and Georgetown universities, and tight collaboration between the two groups.
Graduate students at both universities will receive training in high performance
computing, and will gain experience performing highly parallel calculations in
high performance computing centers within the US.