* 1205304
* Particle Growth Mechanisms During Ambient New Particle Formation
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Murray Johnston, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2014
* USD 190,689.00

New particle formation (NPF) in the atmosphere has been observed all over the
globe, from remote boreal forests in Finland to polluted megacities such as
Mexico City. Although it is pervasive, NPF is not that well understood owing in
large part to its chemical complexity, which encompasses everything from gas
phase species, to molecular clusters, to "bulk" nanoparticulate matter. This
project will employ a unique Nano Aerosol Mass Spectrometer (NAMS) to measure
the elemental composition of individual size-selected particles (10-30 nm size
range) during two multi-investigator field campaigns, one in Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania in 2012 and another at the Department of Energy's Atmospheric
Radiation Measurement (ARM) program Southern Great Plains site in northern
Oklahoma in 2013. The results will allow particle growth by sulfate vs. organics
and other inorganic species during NPF to be quantified. Measured growth rates
will be compared to predicted growth rates based on gas phase concentrations and
used to assist development of models for particle growth. The NAMS will also
provide key information to help determine how much cationic nitrogen exists in
nanoparticles beyond that needed to neutralize inorganic acids. The results will
give a more quantitative measure of the impact of amines on particle growth. In
addition, the NAMS will quantify how changes in ambient particle composition
correlate with changes in hygroscopicity/volatility. The results will provide an
independent assessment of how well indirect measurements of chemical composition
based on laboratory studies of hygroscopicity/volatility give an indication of
the true ambient composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific impacts will
derive from better understanding of NPF and their linakge to cloud condensation
nucleus (CCN) concentrations which, in turn, have important impacts on
precipitation patterns and Earth's energy balance. Educational broader impacts
will include promotion of teaching and learning through the support of two
graduate students. Outreach efforts will include engaging the broader community
via an annual "Coast Day" event during which the principal investigator will
present some aspects of the work.