* 1205608
* Partnership for Reduced Dimensional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,03/31/2018
* Gary Harris, Howard University
* Continuing Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 03/31/2018
* USD 2,654,944.00

Reseachers from Howard University seek to partner with Cornell University's
Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) to form a Partnership
for Research and Education in Materials (PREM) called the Partnership for
Reduced Dimensional Materials (PRDM). The PRDM brings together institutions that
share NSF's vision of a nation, which through creativity provides global
leadership, integrated research and education while expanding both and
broadening participation. Howard University, Prince George's Community College
(PGCC), Gallaudet University and the Cornell Center for Materials Research
(CCMR) have come together to share in this vision. The PRDM involves seven
investigators at Howard, two investigators at Prince George's Community College
(PGCC), two investigators at Gallaudet University and two investigators at
Cornell University to leverage the world class research facilities and proven
outreach programs at Howard and Cornell Universities.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: PRDM research will benefit from and support CCMR
research on atomic membranes, spin devices and complex electronic materials.
PRDM will also leverage CCMR access to other Cornell centers where there are
pre-existing collaborations between Howard PRDM participants and Cornell
centers, such as the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS) and the
Cornell Nanofabrication Facility (CNF). Areas of research at Howard will include
growth of thin films, atomic membranes and nanowires, theoretical calculations
of atomic reorganization forming atomic membranes and the interaction of the
membranes with atoms and molecules. Other areas are self-assembly of nanowire
arrays, synthesis of new precursors for deposition of complex nitrides and oxide
and transport properties in nanowires. These are all subjects of current
research and development interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: We will
continue our previous partnership's success, providing a distributable model for
introducing students from disparate and under-represented communities to cutting
edge research and launching them towards materials science and engineering
careers. The program emphasizes continuity of training, first at Howard, then at
the CCMR MRSEC and assumes that students will stay involved during the academic
year. This is a well-integrated team that combines sophisticated approaches for
cutting edge research and has demonstrated success in recruiting and training
African-Americans and other underrepresented groups in materials research. In
the PRDM, Prince George's Community College faculty will continue to create new
materials science courses and on line materials science educational resources.
PGCC and Gallaudet students will continue to actively participate in research at
Howard and at our new MRSEC partner, Cornell, in the summer and during short
research visits during the academic year.