* 1205912
* Support for Gordon Research Conference on Photonuclear Reactions. Conferece to be held in Holderness, NH August 5-10, 2012
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Ronald Gilman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Gail Dodge
* 06/30/2013
* USD 6,376.00

This award provides partial support of the 2012 Gordon Research Conference on
Photonuclear Reactions, which will be held at the Holderness School in
Holderness, NH from August 5 - 10, 2012. The Gordon Conference serves as a forum
for the presentation of the newest ideas and results in the field, and plays an
important role in driving forward theoretical and experimental work on
electromagnetic reactions in nuclear physics. Ronald Gilman of Rutgers
University, the PI of this proposal, is vice-chair of the meeting. The money
will be used to support domestic travel costs and registration fees of junior
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance of this award is in
the training of junior scientists. The participation of junior scientists is a
focus of the Gordon Research Conferences organization, with the intent of having
the junior scientists interact extensively and develop a network of scientific
collaborators, while also developing the breadth and depth of their physics
knowledge, leading to greater career achievements. The Gordon Photonuclear
Reactions Conferences have been notable for the large attendance of junior
scientists. For the 2010 Conference, 41% of attendees were graduate students,
and 13% were postdocs. It is very noteworthy that 25% of attendees were women,
far in excess of the percentage of women in the field.