* 1205878
* Student Research Network in the Physics of Living Systems: Georgia Tech Node
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,03/31/2018
* Harold Kim, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 03/31/2018
* USD 1,211,748.00

In this project, the PIs at Georgia Tech (GT) will join the existing Physics of
Living Systems Student Research Network. Growth of the GT program will: 1) bring
research topics in underrepresented areas to the PoLS SRN, 2) integrate PoLS at
GT into the broader bio-related community at GT, in turn creating a hub in the
Southeast of the US for PoLS, 3) create sustained interaction with faculty at
world-leading institutions while lubricating opportunities for national and
international collaborations, 4) create new PoLS experimental, modeling and
theoretical tools, 5) create new PoLS curriculum, 6) train students and postdocs
who can advance PoLS at GT and become the next generation of PoLS researchers.
The co-PIs on this proposal include four scientists from the Biophysics Group in
the School of Physics (SoP), one from Mechanical Engineering, and a senior
member of the SoP. They are joined by approximately 20 faculty within and
outside the SoP who have research interests that fall within the scope of PoLS.
These represent areas within the College of Sciences and the College of
Engineering at Georgia Tech. In the last five years, the SoP at Georgia Tech has
begun to develop a program in biophysics with the goal to become a world leader
in this area, and also help develop technologies that can advance both basic
science and human health. The core Biophysics Group in the SoP (consisting of
four primary faculty and four adjunct faculty) seeks to understand how physics
can inform questions of structure, function and dynamics in biological systems,
and to study fundamental physics questions posed by biological systems. As a
goal for future growth and leadership, the group intends to build on the
successes and strengths of the nonlinear science and soft matter communities at
GT. A second goal is to integrate their program with the already world-class
engineering programs (specifically bioengineering) at GT.