* 1205357
* Studies of Exotic Nuclei with the MoNA LISA Neutron Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Joseph Finck, Central Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 09/30/2018
* USD 69,876.00

A faculty member and his undergraduates at Central Michigan University were
collaborators in the construction, assembly, and testing of the one million
dollar Modular Neutron Array (MoNA) which was completed in 2004. Subsequently,
the collaboration received a $1.3 Million NSF grant to construct the Large
multi-Institutional Scintillator Array (LISA). The MoNA LISA neutron detector
tandem is used with the Sweeper magnet at the National Superconducting Cyclotron
Laboratory (NSCL). The main purpose of MoNA LISA is to extract masses of
neutron-unbound nuclei and excitation energies of unbound states. The physics to
be addressed is that of light, very neutron-rich nuclei located in the direct
vicinity of the drip line or even beyond. This is the domain of very weakly
bound nucleonic matter where fascinating new phenomena have already been
observed, such as halos or drastic changes in shell structure. The MoNA LISA and
Sweeper detection system is ideally suited to explore the intrinsic structure of
near drip line nuclei by studying the properties of their ground and low excited
states. It will also provide information about low-lying resonances located just
above the particle emission threshold in nuclei at the drip line and beyond.
Finally, the detectors are designed in such a way that they can readily measure
neutrons in coincidence so that correlations between emitted neutrons can be
investigatedin detail as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MoNA collaboration is in
a unique situation that is quite different from any other collaboration or
research group proposing experiments at the NSCL. Specifically it first allowed
professors from predominantly undergraduate institutions and their undergraduate
students to participate in the construction of a top-level research instrument.
The group has answered the challenge to transform from construction to
production. We have built a unique analysis scheme that allows the undergraduate
programs to be involved in the running, reduction, and analysis of MoNA
experiments. As a result, 112 undergraduates have had the opportunity to
participate in cutting-edge nuclear physics experiments. Additionally, Central
Michigan University has aggressively worked to expose high school students and
their teachers to experimental nuclear physics, and has even brought MoNA to
Michigan state legislators and their staffs.