* 1205987
* RUI: Searching for WIMP Dark Matter With Superheated Liquids
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Ilan Levine, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 05/31/2016
* USD 371,413.00

Intellectual Merit: One of the great mysteries in astrophysics is the nature of
dark matter, which is currently only detected indirectly through its effects on
the structuring of galaxies, clusters of galaxies and larger scale structures in
the universe. Generic extensions of the standard model of subatomic particles
predict the existence of Weakly Interacting Massive Particles (WIMPS), which are
excellent candidates for the dark matter. These are expected to interact with
ordinary matter rarely and thus be extremely difficult to detect. The COUPP and
PICASSO groups are developing new large dark matter detectors derived from the
well-known bubble chamber technique. Charged particles traversing the
superheated fluid in bubble chambers deposit heat, which creates small bubbles
of gas. The bubbles can be photographed before pressurization revealing the
paths of these particles. Other non-dark matter triggers can also lead to
runaway boiling. These have limited classical chambers to remain in a
superheated state for only a short time. The COUPP experiment has paid special
attention to material selection and manufacturing techniques to remove roughness
and radiocontamination to allow the superheated state to be long lived. The
PICASSO experiment suspends superheated fluid droplets in a gel whose surfaces
are so smooth that the droplets can stay in a superheated state indefinitely.
Both experiments have made the superheated state sufficiently long lived to
search for dark matter. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will allow the PI to
continue his work on the COUPP and PICASSO experiments. The sound sensors
produced by the Indiana University group have been used for rejecting cosmic ray
induced events and distinguishing the radioactive signals for moderately
superheated fluids. The PI and his students have built equipment to test the
sound sensors under realistic conditions mimicking those in the detectors and to
measure changes in their sensitivity as a function of age. The group has also
taken on the task of measuring contaminants in the fluid target and is now
prepared to routinely assay the fluid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
Enhancing the education of undergraduates is an integral part of this program.
Undergraduates, high school teachers and students have participated in design,
construction and characterization of acoustic transducers, measurement of
radioactivity, and other projects. In addition, the PI and his group has
provided acoustic sensors to other scientific groups to assist in other
experiments.