* 1205105
* The NACK National Network for Nanotechnology Workforce Development
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Stephen Fonash, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2016
* USD 4,601,667.00

The National ATE Center for Nanotechnology Applications and Career Knowledge
(NACK) is creating the "NACK Network", a designation that reflects the
philosophy, structure, and operation to be developed across the U.S. The
objectives are enhanced national coordination and dissemination of micro-
nanofabrication workforce educational resources, programs, and activities, and
enhanced growth of the US nanotechnology workforce. The methods to be employed
include pressing forward the NACK approaches of (1) resource sharing among
community colleges as well as among community colleges and research
universities; (2) providing course materials that deliver a core set of
industry-recommended nanotechnology skills; (3) stressing broad student
preparation for careers in any industry utilizing micro- or nanotechnology; and
(4) developing economically viable, quality nanotechnology education across the
U.S. NACK Network methods also include further expansion of its alliance of
community college/university and community college/community college resource-
sharing hubs, including the addition of virtual hubs.

To support this network and all U.S. community college nanotechnology education
efforts, the Network offers up-dated and free-of-charge core skills course
lecture and lab materials, recruiting materials, retention and completion
approaches, web-accessible equipment capability, and faculty development
workshop curricula at its web site www.nano4me.org. In addition the NACK Network
is developing and disseminating an assessment rubric for its core skill course
lecture and lab materials, and continues to work with industry to have its core
skills institutionalized into industry standards. The NACK Network continues to
offer its well-received faculty development workshops and is further expanding
its dissemination methodologies at www.nano4me.org with enhanced functionality
and the further enhancement of social networking tools. Recruitment, retention,
and education completion are key NACK Network-wide endeavors and include new
tasks addressing these issues as they impact veterans, Hispanics, African-
Americans, and women.

Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of NACK's activities lies in their
addressing, researching, experimenting with, and evaluating effective-practice
approaches for (1) motivating students from across the U.S. social and
geographic spectrum to consider careers in nanotechnology; (2) enhancing student
retention, completion, and future career opportunities; (3) defining and
evolving a model nanotechnology workforce education program, and (4) helping to
develop economically sustainable nanotechnology workforce programs in colleges.
Based on positive feedback on the intellectual content of its products and
services, the continuation has a clear vision of what the community values and
needs.

Broader Impacts: The NACK Network materials, practices and services are having a
broad impact across the US. Their ready-availability at www.nano4me.org is
strengthening secondary and community college education, in particular, and STEM
education, in general. NACK workshops bring faculty and administrators together
from across the country and have resulted in a better national understanding of
nanotechnology education demands and requirements, approaches, resources, and
sustainability issues. In addition, NACK's partnering/resource-sharing approach
is a model for all aspects of science and technology education. The NACK Network
establishes a nation-wide experiential basis for effective, working, community
college/community college and community college/research university resource
sharing relationships.

In their totality, the intellectual merit and broad impact of the NACK Network
activities are profoundly important to the nation's nanotechnology workforce,
and to the global competitiveness of U.S. industry.