* 1205800
* Shearing Rheology and Glassy Behavior in Athermal and Thermalized Models of Granular Materials, Simple Liquids, and Amorphous Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Stephen Teitel, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 302,776.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on the nature of equilibrium and driven nonequilibrium critical
phenomena in granular materials, glassy forming simple liquids, and related soft
matter systems such as foams, emulsions and colloids.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using extensive numerical simulations, the PI will
investigate new regions of the jamming phase diagram that characterize a diverse
array of physical systems that undergo transitions from flowing liquid-like
states to rigid but structurally disordered states. The research will focus on
the following activities: (i) The PI will study the rheology of athermal
amorphous solids above jamming, characterizing the singular behavior as one
approaches the yield stress, and exploring the relation to dynamic
heterogeneity. (ii) The PI will investigate the relationship between thermal
glassy behavior and the athermal jamming transition. Shear driven steady states
at low temperature and low shear strain rate will be used as a new probe to
demonstrate whether a true singular thermal glass transition exists. (iii) The
PI will explore the effect of different dynamics on the critical behaviors of
interest, in particular the difference between mean-field and non-mean-field
models of viscous dissipation, and the crossover from inertial to overdamped
dynamics. (iv) The PI will study the effect of frictional forces on shear driven
athermal jamming. The experimental observation of novel shear jammed states will
be explored in simulations. The PI will examine the effect differing models for
friction, sliding contacts as opposed to geometric asperities, have on
simulation phenomena. These investigations will also address the applicability
of concepts and methods from equilibrium statistical mechanics to fundamentally
nonequilibrium systems and driven steady
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students will participate in the
research, gaining experience, skill, and insight into modern scientific research
and methods of numerical simulation. The University of Rochester has several
site REU programs that greatly assist in attracting high quality undergraduate
students to work on summer research projects. Many of these continue with senior
projects or theses during the following year. This project involves
international collaboration with Ume¢ªa University in Sweden, as well as other
research groups at Duke, Yale, and Rochester. These interactions will provide
students with the opportunity to directly confront theory with experiment, to
use state of the art high performance computing
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and education on
granular and glassy materials with an emphasis to investigate the nature of the
apparent transitions from a flowing liquid-like state to a rigid state with an
amorphous structure that occur in granular materials, foams, colloids,
emulsions, and liquids cooled to become a glass. The understanding of granular
and glassy materials is not only of intrinsic scientific interest, but is
important for a wide variety of industrial processes, from the processing of
pharmaceuticals, to transportation of seeds and grains, to materials
fabrication. This research will contribute to the knowledge base on granular and
glassy materials and may lead to advances and improvements in efficiency in many
important areas of modern industry and technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using
extensive numerical simulations, the PI will explore uncharted regions of the
jamming phase diagram, a diagram that charts the conditions under which
materials undergo transitions from flowing liquid-like states to rigid but
structurally disordered states. The jamming transition occurs far from the
steady state of equilibrium. While the theory of nonequilibrium statistical
mechanics is not well developed, an important research direction is to
investigate the extent to which the concepts and methods of equilibrium
statistical mechanics can be applied or adapted to the realm of nonequilibrium
systems and driven steady states. The PI will contribute to this effort.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will explore the relationship between the jamming
transition and the transition where a cooling liquid becomes a glass. Because
the energy scales in granular systems are usually very high compared to the
temperature, temperature does not normally play a role in the jamming
transition. The PI will use a novel strategy and innovative techniques to study
the nature of the jamming transition at sufficiently high temperatures and
compare the signatures of the jamming transition at temperature to the glass
transition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of granular systems often neglect
friction between particles, but nonetheless are able to observe the jamming
transition. The PI plans to study the effect of frictional forces that occur in
real granular materials on jamming. The PI will investigate different models
through simulation to illuminate experimental observations of novel jammed
states that occur under the application of shear strain. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students will participate in the research, gaining
experience, skill, and insight into modern scientific research and methods of
numerical simulation. The University of Rochester has several site REU programs
that greatly assist in attracting high quality undergraduate students to work on
summer research projects. Many of these continue with senior projects or theses
during the following year. This project involves international collaboration
with Ume¢ªa University in Sweden, as well as other research groups at Duke,
Yale, and Rochester. These interactions will provide students with the
opportunity to directly confront theory with experiment, to use state of the art
high performance computing platforms.