* 1205054
* Clarion University Advanced Technological Education (ATE) Proposal
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Robert Huemmrich, Clarion University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 03/31/2016
* USD 186,381.00

Clarion University's Venango Campus is piloting a NanoManufacturing
concentration within its Industrial Technology 2-year associates in applied
science degree (AAS-IT), which provides workforce proficiency in nanotechnology.
The students receive an AAS in Industrial Technology and a NanoFabrication
Manufacturing Technology (NMT) certificate from Penn State University. The
NanoManufacturing concentration within the AAS-IT requires the core math and
science courses of 4-year science degrees, an immersion semester at Penn State
University's Nanofabrication Center and a practical capstone offered as a
NanoManufacturing course. The NanoManufacturing capstone course is a hands-on
lecture and laboratory course that provides fundamental skills necessary to work
in a nanotechnology production environment and to prepare the students for the
immersion semester. The course discusses theoretical concepts behind research,
development, production, and processing of nano-scaled materials. The course is
conducted within the Center for Applied Research &amp; Intellectual Property
Development in order to expose the students to local industries. The courses at
Penn State University are offered through the ATE National Center NACK. The
project is providing an increased educational foundation for technicians to keep
up with the rapid development in the current and emerging industrial fields. The
project has outreach to regional K-12 schools, teachers, displaced workers,
veterans, and has established a regional industry advisory board.