* 1205839
* 2012 Bioinspired Materials GRC
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2013
* Ashutosh Chilkoti, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* David A. Brant
* 01/31/2013
* USD 7,680.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1205839 PI: Chilkoti, Ashutosh ORG: Gordon Research
Conferences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: 2012 Bioinspired Materials
GRC&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Funds are requested to support the
inaugural Gordon Research Conference on Bioinspired Materials to be held June
24-29, 2012 at Davidson College, North Carolina, USA. The emerging,
interdisciplinary field of Bioinspired Materials focuses on developing a
fundamental understanding of the synthesis, directed self-assembly, and
hierarchical organization of natural occurring materials, and uses this
understanding to engineer new "bioinspired" artificial materials for diverse
applications. This conference, co-chaired by Ashutosh Chilkoti (Duke University)
and Jeffrey Hubbell (EPFL, Switzerland) was born from the twin realizations
that: (1) there is an explosion of research in Bioinspired Materials; and yet
(2) there is no single and unique venue that solely focuses on the dissemination
of research in this field. The objective of the inaugural GRC on Bioinspired
Materials is to capture the excitement of this burgeoning field by a cutting-
edge scientific program that focuses on fundamental research in Bioinspired
Materials Science and the myriad applications that stem from this fundamental
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The impact of this GRC is that
it will promote cross-disciplinary fertilization of new ideas in the emerging
field of Bioinspired Materials and will promote interactions among young
scientists, underrepresented minority scientists, junior faculty, and prominent
senior investigators. It will do so by bringing together a diverse group of
researchers at one venue who have common interests that span the field of
Bioinspired Materials. The hope is to stimulate the growth of this area of
research by providing a single venue for the dissemination and exchange of
results and ideas. The ultimate, long-term goal is to create a cohesive and
interactive community of scholars though a bi-yearly GRC that will be the first
choice for researchers in this field.