* 1205002
* Rees algebras and singularities
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Bernd Ulrich, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2016
* USD 256,837.00

A general goal in equisingularity theory is to provide criteria for a family of
analytic sets to be topologically trivial. Ideally, such criteria involve
numerical data, like multiplicities, that only depend on the individual members
rather than the total space of the family. In prior work the investigator
established a sufficient condition for the Whitney equisingularity of families
of arbitrary isolated singularities, using the new notion of epsilon
multiplicity as numerical invariant. Now he wishes to prove the necessity of his
condition for equisingularity, which would result in a fiber-wise numerical
characterization of Whitney equisingularity in the case of isolated
singularities. In addition, he intends to advance the general theory of epsilon
multiplicity beyond the context of equisingularity theory. The investigator
proposes a program to study rational curves in projective space, most notably
rational plane curves, through the syzygy matrix of the forms parametrizing
them. Solely from the syzygy matrix, he wishes to extract local information
about the singularities of the curve and understand the global positioning of
these singularities. In particular, he proposes to set up a correspondence
between the types of singularities on the one hand and the shapes of the syzygy
matrix on the other hand, and to use this correspondence to stratify the space
of rational plane curves of a given degree. The investigator plans to continue
his work on Rees algebras of ideals by studying the implicit equations of such
algebras. Understanding or finding these equations is a fundamental and
difficult problem in elimination theory that is wide open even for the simplest
of ideals. The investigator intends to focus on ideals whose generators
parametrize projective varieties. In order to bound the degrees of the implicit
equations and to understand the Castelnuovo-Mumford regularity of the Rees
algebra, he wishes to prove that the Rees algebra and the homogeneous coordinate
ring of the variety have the same regularity. The investigator has the long-term
goal to determine the defining equations explicitly if the parametrized variety
is a rational plane curve.

The proposed research is in the area of Commutative Algebra, a field of
mathematics that has its roots in the qualitative study of systems of polynomial
equations in several variables. Commutative Algebra has close ties to geometry,
a connection that is prominent in the investigator's projects on equisingularity
and rational curves. Systems of polynomial equations also arise in numerous
applications outside of mathematics. The investigator's project on implicit
equations of Rees algebras encompasses this applied aspect. In particular, the
problem of finding implicit equations of surfaces defined parametrically has
relevance in geometric modeling and computer-aided design, where it is known as
implicitization problem.