* 1205169
* Digital Technology Education Collaborative (DigiTEC)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* John Reutter, J F Drake State Technical College
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie August
* 09/30/2016
* USD 899,792.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reconfigurable digital systems using Field
Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) and microcontrollers are sweeping the
electronics world in the rush to create smaller, faster, and more flexible
consumer and industrial devices. Building on previous work, the Digital
Technology Education Collaborative (DigiTEC), led by J. F. Drake State Technical
College and including the University of New Mexico, Michigan Technological
University and Chandler-Gilbert Community College, provides industry-driven
professional development about FPGAs and microcontrollers for community college
faculty. The development of introductory and advanced professional development
courses for Xilinx and Altera FPGAs, as well as a course in Microcontroller
architecture, applications, and programming, enriches the electrical technology
curriculum of community colleges, universities and secondary schools. Each year
a three-day introductory or advanced workshop is offered at each of the four
sites as well as one-day awareness workshops for high school electronics
instructors. Digital technician career information is developed through
community college, industry, K-12 and university partnerships to facilitate
pathways to careers as technicians using FPGAs. The materials are disseminated
widely especially to first-generation, minority and other under-served
populations, including veterans and to industry. The Collaborative engages in
outreach, expands and improves delivery of education and training materials and
provides students and workshop participants with the critical skills sought by
diverse electronics industries. Articulation agreements are developed between
two year colleges and secondary schools on one hand and with four-year
institutions on the other by each of the four sites. Certification of
technicians through national organizations is explored. Successful practices are
disseminated through a websites, webinars, publications and conference
proceedings and through interactions with other ATE centers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Kirkpatrick model is used to evaluate the
effectiveness of the professional development and participants are surveyed
twice per year and student data from their classes are analyzed. The project
also evaluates the impact on partner institutions' electronic programs. The
effectiveness of the outreach programs is evaluated through student surveys and
matriculation in technical programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides
up-to-date information about digital technologies that can reinvigorate to
electronic programs in two-year colleges to produce the technicians required by
industry.