* 1205373
* Origins and Evolution of tRNA Synthetase Fidelity Modules
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Susan Martinis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 06/30/2017
* USD 844,548.00

Intellectual Merit: The tRNA synthetases (aaRSs) are enzymes responsible for the
first and most crucial step of protein synthesis, covalent attachment of the
correct amino acid to its cognate tRNA. The tRNA then delivers the attached
amino acid to the ribosome for insertion into the correct place in each protein
that is synthesized, guided by the mRNA template. Accurate protein synthesis is
essential to the survival of all living organisms and requires that aaRS enzymes
attach the correct amino acid with high accuracy. For about half of the amino
acids, the corresponding aaRS enzyme has difficulty selecting the correct amino
acid because at least one other amino acid is similar in size and chemical
nature and occasionally is incorporated in place of the correct one. These aaRS
enzymes have evolved proofreading or editing modules to correct errors in amino
acid selection. Mistakes in protein synthesis can be very harmful to cellular
function and may even result in cell death. This project focuses on two aaRS
enzymes that have editing modules. Leucyl-tRNA synthetase (LeuRS) has an editing
module called CP1. Computation and biochemistry were used to determine that
LeuRSs from three different Mycoplasma species contain mutations in the CP1
domain that compromise its editing activities. Phenylalanyl- and threonyl-tRNA
synthetases from Mycoplasma also appear to lack functional editing modules.
These aaRS editing-defects translated into errors in protein synthesis. This
project will test the hypothesis that the loss of editing function in these
enzymes is actually beneficial to these organisms and have been selected by
evolution because proteins with random mutations provide a benefit to these
parasitic organisms. The benefit of statistical errors in protein sequences will
be probed in this project using more facile non-parasitic model bacteria.
Sulfolobus are bacteria that thrive in hot springs that are subject to
fluctuating high temperatures and acidic environmental conditions. All known
Sulfolobus species contain two, apparently fully functional, copies of the LeuRS
gene. What distinguishes these two genes is that one contains modifications in
the editing module, expected to disrupt its error correction mechanisms. It is
likely that this secondary LeuRS lacks fidelity. Experiments with Sulfolobus
will be carried out to investigate if decreased aaRS fidelity is maintained as a
selective advantage. Yeast mitochondrial LeuRS has an adapted CP1 editing domain
that is responsible for an essential RNA splicing activity. Co-evolution of the
CP1 domain for RNA splicing occurred at a cost to its fidelity function and is
consistent with published experiments showing that yeast mitochondria can
tolerate LeuRS editing defects. The mechanistic and molecular co-adaptation of
LeuRS and its CP1 editing domain for splicing will be investigated.It has been
shown that naturally occurring protein synthesis errors are produced in
organisms and that they can be dependent on error-prone aaRSs. This was
paradigm-shifting because it demonstrated that mutations that are 'statistical'
can be tolerated and perhaps even preferred by certain organisms. The
intellectual merit of this project is a focus on new models to investigate
cellular benefits that occur when aaRS editing is compromised, resulting in
decreased thresholds of fidelity and statistical errors. It will also
investigate the evolutionary and functional co-adaptation of an aaRS editing
domain for secondary functions in the cell.&lt;br/&gt; Broader Impacts: It was
shown that unusual aaRSs produce mischarged tRNAs for the purpose of generating
proteins with statistical errors. This broadly impacts the field of evolution
and current beliefs of cellular dependence on translational fidelity. This
project will develop models to probe the benefits and selective advantage of
decreased fidelity for the cell. A portion of this project is dedicated to
outreach efforts to young children in their school classrooms to improve science
literacy across a broad spectrum of students. Academic modules with an
experimental component will introduce students to microbiology and the three
kingdoms of life. This module is designed to educate young children in
fundamental biology concepts and would be expected to broadly impact and
stimulate their interest in science. In addition, graduate and undergraduate
training and mentoring will be integrated throughout the research and education
plan to enhance their professional and scientific development as well as to
provide role models to children and also junior researchers.