* 1205993
* Characterizing Transient Gravitational Waves
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Neil Cornish, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

The LIGO gravitational wave detectors are currently undergoing a major upgrade,
with the goal of improving the sensitivity by an order of magnitude. But it
takes more than lasers, mirrors and photodiodes to detect gravitational waves.
Another key component is the signal processing used to tease the faint
gravitational wave signals out of the instrument noise. The research supported
by this award seeks to develop tools that will enhance our ability to detect and
characterize transient gravitational wave signals. The initial searches for
gravitational waves have taught us that non-Gaussian features in the data, such
as noise transients or ``glitches'', impair our ability to detect weak signals.
Our goal is to develop powerful new techniques that can help separate
gravitational wave signals from instrument artifacts. The detection of
gravitational waves will allow a host of science questions to be addressed.
Foremost among these will be whether the signals detected conform to the
predictions of Einstein's theory of general relativity. This award will support
the development of robust techniques for identifying departures from general
relativity using LIGO/Virgo data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LIGO project presents
young researchers and students with a wonderful opportunity to participate in
the birth of a new observation science that is poised to make discoveries that
will revolutionize astronomy and deliver unique insights into some of the
Universe's most exotic phenomena. The research program supported by this award
offers tremendous opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students: the
blend of creative activities associated with the development of sophisticated
and innovative data analysis techniques, combined with hands on exposure to
running existing search pipelines and working with production level computer
code will provide excellent training for the next generation of gravitational
wave astronomers. These skills are transferable and highly sought after in other
fields: recent graduates from the Montana State gravitational wave astronomy
group have found employment as national security intelligence analysts and in
the medical research field of bioinfomatics.