* 1205962
* High Precision Experiments to Study Light Neutral Meson Decay Rates and the Proton Charge Radius Using Electromagnetic Probes
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2018
* Ashot Gasparian, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2018
* USD 361,714.00

The award includes three projects at Jefferson Lab (JLab): (a) developing a new
experiment to measure the proton charge radius with a sub-percent precision; (b)
extracting the lifetime of the pi-zero meson with an unprecedented 1.4%
precision from the PrimEx-II data set; and (c) developing and preparing the
approved experiment to measure the lifetime of the eta meson in the newly
developing Hall D. As one of the most fundamental quantities, accurate knowledge
of the proton size was always important in physics. Very recently, a new result
from a muonic-hydrogen experiment, with its unprecedented less than 0.1%
precision, stated that the proton size is up to 7 standard deviations smaller
than it was previously known to be. This experimental fact triggered the well-
known "proton radius crisis" in physics. To address this crisis, a collaboration
led by the PI of this award developed a uniquely designed electron-scattering
experiment that was approved by PAC38 at JLab with the major condition of
developing a new windowless gas hydrogen target. Precision measurements of the
light pseudo-scalar meson lifetimes continue to be an important part of this
award. The PrimEx collaboration performed the first measurement (PrimEx-I) of
the pi-zero meson lifetime with the best precision up to date (2.8% in total).
The results have been published and included in the Particle Data Group average.
To reach the projected unprecedented 1.4% precision, our collaboration upgraded
the experimental setup and performed the second (PrimEx-II) experiment in the
fall of 2010. Under this award, the analysis process will be completed, and the
results published. Under the leadership of the PI, a award to measure the eta
meson lifetime with the best up to now precision (3%) was developed and approved
to run in Hall D at JLab. We will prepare this experiment to run for the next
few years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Precise knowledge of the proton size is
critically important for understanding of the structure of hadronic matter. In
addition, it is very important for atomic physics, in particular, the
spectroscopy of atomic hydrogen. The currently developed experimental situation
with the proton size limits the determination of the Rydberg constant, one of
the basic and the most precisely known constant in physics up to now. The
proposed experiment, with its independent novel approach and projected
precision, has a direct potential to either significantly shift the current
value of the Rydberg constant (if it confirms recent muonic-hydrogen result) or
question the sufficiency of the basic theory calculations in muonic-hydrogen
system. In the latter case, it may also indicate new physics beyond the Standard
Model. The lifetimes of the light pseudo-scalar mesons carry direct information
about the symmetries, and in particular, their partial breaking effects in the
theory of interaction in physics. Therefore, the precise knowledge of these
important quantities will serve as benchmark tests to our understanding of
Nature. In particular, the anticipated high precision measurement of the eta
lifetime will significantly improve the ratio of light quark masses in a direct
and most model independent way in physics. The quark masses and their ratios are
input into the contemporary particle physics from the experiment. This project
will provide advanced and highest scientific training for African-American
students in a field where they are currently under-represented.