* 1205840
* Damage Mitigation in Signal Transduction Networks
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Reka Albert, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2018
* USD 653,496.00

In this project the PI will design a comprehensive network-based framework that
will allow the study of the attractors corresponding to signal transduction
networks, and biological networks in general, even in the absence of
quantitative information. A set of parsimonious methodologies will be developed
that iteratively bridge qualitative and quantitative modeling, specifically
graph theoretical analysis as well as Boolean, Boolean-continuous hybrid, and
Hill-type continuous dynamic modeling methods. The proposed models allow for a
direct interpretation of their results as they represent behaviors such as
apoptosis, proliferation, migration, pathogen clearance, as output nodes of the
network. The main hypothesis of this work is that the damage due to the
cascading effects of a perturbation can be mitigated even if the original
perturbation can no longer be reversed. The framework will be used to determine
how node perturbations (changes in state or in interactions) change the output
nodes dynamic attractors and furthermore to identify those interventions - such
as externally supplying or depleting a node, or placing a node under the control
of an upstream element - that can restore the normal dynamics of output nodes
even in the presence of node perturbations.

Two specific aims will be pursued: (i) to develop a suite of network modeling
methods to identify, filter and rank candidate restorative interventions, and
(ii) to make these network modeling methods easily usable by a large community.
All analysis methods will be implemented in the open-source library BooleanNet,
which will feature a web-based interface, a network analysis layer and a
visualization layer. The damage mitigation methodologies developed in this
project have implications in addressing major societal needs such as sustainable
food production, ecosystem restoration, and human health. This project will
provide funding and cross-disciplinary training for a graduate student and a
postdoctoral scholar, both co-advised by the PI and co-PI. Both investigators
have extensive experience in co-advising and in mentoring of female and minority
scientists at all levels. The project will provide research opportunities for
Penn State undergraduates recruited by various means such as the Physics REU
program and the Women in Science and Engineering program. This research will be
incorporated into the courses taught by the PIs, including the undergraduate
course Systems Biology and Networks and the graduate course Practical Data
Analysis for Life Scientists, both attended by students from diverse
departments. Groups of under-represented middle school students will be hosted
during summer visits to Penn State as part of the Higher Achievement Program, a
non-profit, academic support program that prepares students to complete high
school and be college-ready. In addition, one member of the team will yearly
attend the SACNAS (Society for the Advancement of Chicano and Native American
Scientists) conference and participate in conversations with scientists and
other activities designed to facilitate entry of minorities into careers in
science.

This project is being jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems program
in the Division of Physics and the Physiological and Networks and Regulation
Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.