* 1205492
* Collaborative Research: CI-ADDO-NEW: Parallel and Distributed Computing Curriculum Development and Educational Resources
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Charles Weems, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2017
* USD 80,001.00

Computing increasingly permeates daily lives, yet few appreciate the growing
presence of Parallel and Distributed Computing (PDC) in common computing
activities; e.g., modern laptops' processors contain multiple cores and special-
purpose devices such as graphics processors (GPUs). With increasing availability
of powerful PDC technology, familiarity with single-processor computers and
sequential computing no longer constitutes computer literacy. Technological
developments point to the need for a broad-based skill set in PDC at all levels
of higher education in disciplines such as Computer Science, Computer
Engineering, and the related computational disciplines. The rapid changes in
technology challenge educators to decide what to teach and how to teach it.
Students and employers face similar challenges in characterizing "basic"
expertise in computing. The PIs are addressing these challenges via a project
devoted to creating and sustaining curricular and educational infrastructure to
facilitate the teaching of PDC topics in undergraduate computer-related
curricula. The goal is for every graduating student to become skilled in PDC
technology, hence be prepared to enter tomorrow's
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project embodies multiple synergistic
activities that develop: flexible PDC curricula for a spectrum of academic
programs and institutions; mechanisms that help individuals maintain currency;
instructional materials for PDC-related topics; experience-based guidelines for
injecting PDC into curricula. A signature activity is competitions for early
adopters of PDC curricula (winners receive seed funds, equipment donations from
industry) and workshops and training sessions to foster awareness and adoption
of PDC curricula. Feedback from early adopters and coordination with the
ACM/IEEE 2013 CS Curriculum Taskforce steers future development of both the PDC
curricular guidelines and of strategies for deploying PDC material within
computing curricula at a larger scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by CISE, OCI, and EHR/DUE.