* 1205712
* tert-Butyl Chalcogenides as Useful Synthetic Tools for the Synthesis and Surface Modification of Semiconductor Nanocrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Richard Brutchey, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 06/30/2015
* USD 345,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research funded by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry program is to utilize general and rational
synthetic methods for the solution-phase synthesis of semiconductor
nanocrystals. The PI developed a facile, low-temperature synthesis method to
make semiconductor nanocrystals using thermally (and photolytically) unstable
di-tert-butyl dichalcogenide precursors in the presence of readily available
metal salts. This method allows for the synthesis of a wide variety of
semiconductor nanocrystals, and the high level of kinetic control offered by
this approach has been instrumental in the discovery of several new crystal
phases of semiconductor nanocrystals. This project will focus on the controlled
synthesis of SnSe and Cu2SnSe3 nanocrystals and their derivatives using this
synthesis method. These IV-VI and I-IV-VI semiconductors posses band gaps (Eg =
1.0-1.5 eV) in the optimal range for solar energy conversion, in addition to
having high absorption coefficients, high carrier mobilities, and being
comprised of relatively earth abundant elements; however, neither of these
systems has been explored in great detail with respect to well-defined
nanocrystals or solar cells. Once in hand, efforts will be placed on removing
the insulating ligand shell from the nanocrystal surface and replacing it with
small, thermally labile ligands that can still provide enough colloidal
stability to form usable nanocrystal inks. These inks will be cast to give
nanocrystal films, which upon mild thermal annealing will yield inorganic films
that are largely devoid of insulating organic material. The efficacy of the
ligand exchange will be rapidly screened using solid-state device and
photoelectrochemical measurements, and the most promising nanocrystal/ligand
combinations will be further explored in all-inorganic nanocrystal solar
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite
over fifty years of developments in the field of solid-state and materials
chemistry, there are still only a limited number of ways to rationally and
reproducibly synthesize inorganic materials - the majority of which require
energetically costly and harsh conditions. As such, there is a need to develop
new methodologies, using rational chemical design principles, for the
sustainable synthesis of materials under inexpensive and scalable conditions.
This will ultimately enable a 'materials by design' approach to be taken, in
which new functional materials can be rationally synthesized to meet specific
applications. The PI will utilize a method developed in his research group for
the kinetically controlled, low-temperature synthesis of semiconductor
nanocrystals. These nanocrystals can be dispersed as an ink, and deposited as
films for solar cell active layers using extremely inexpensive methods.
Particular focus will be placed on the synthesis of nanocrystals with optimal
band gaps for solar energy conversion that are also comprised of earth abundant
and sustainable elements. Integrated into this research plan is an outreach
program specifically aimed at local community college students. The community
college student demographic is among the least targeted in traditional chemistry
outreach programs; however, the greater Los Angeles area is home to the largest
number of community college students in the United States. The PI has partnered
with Cerritos Community College, an institution with a large number of
underrepresented students, to provide internships on solar cell research. The
objective of this annual 8-week outreach program is to provide these students
with research opportunities that are typically not afforded to them at the
community college level, and thereby increase their transfer rate to 4-year
institutions.