* 1205623
* Collaborative Research: Neutron Interferometry Experiments in Nuclear Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Timothy Black, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 05/31/2016
* USD 77,981.00

A neutron interferometer splits the wave function of a free neutron into two
coherent beams by Bragg diffraction in a single silicon crystal. The relative
phase shift caused by different path lengths, potentials, or materials in the
beams produces interference fringes in one or more neutron counters. This phase
can be measured within a fraction of a degree in an interferogram so the neutron
interaction potential in the sample can be determined to high precision. This
program is focused on using neutron interferometry to make precision neutron
scattering length measurements of importance to nuclear physics. The neutron
interferometer measures a phase shift so it has direct access to the scattering
length. This is a fruitful and often more precise alternative to nuclear
scattering experiments which measure a cross section (a product of scattering
lengths). For example, in a cross section measurement one is limited by
uncertainty of the incident neutron flux; in a phase shift measurement that is
not important. Experiments include precision measurement of few body neutron
scattering lengths, important for improving our understanding of the nucleon-
nucleon potential through semi-phenomenological models and effective field
theories; and a precision measurement of the neutron mean-squared charge radius,
an important quantity for understanding the internal structure and dynamics of
the neutron.

According to the theory of quantum mechanics, all matter becomes wave-like when
it moves very slowly. Matter waves exhibit wave properties such as diffraction
and refraction that are normally associated with light waves. A neutron
interferometer uses neutron matter-wave diffraction in a silicon crystal to
split a slow neutron beam into two distinct paths. By placing a test sample into
one of these paths, and observing the resulting wave interference, we can
precisely measure the interaction of the neutron beam with the sample. Such
measurements are used to improve our understanding of the physical forces
between neutrons and matter, and of the fundamental sub-structure of matter
itself.