* 1205816
* Coral Fertilization as a Model System for Reactive Stirring and Mixing in Free-surface Turbulent Flows
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* John Crimaldi, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 06/30/2016
* USD 319,839.00

In this project the Principle Investigator will determine how the physics of
free-surface oceanic turbulence impacts the success of a reproductive strategy
(broadcast spawning) used by corals and other marine invertebrates. The
timeliness of the research is punctuated by the worldwide demise of coral reefs.
The goals are to use a physics-based investigation to learn about reproduction
in the living system and to see how evolutionary adaptations to complex
turbulent physics shed light on subtleties of the physics themselves. Broadcast-
spawning adult males and females simultaneously extrude sperm and ova into the
surrounding flow. Subsequent fertilization relies primarily on turbulent
stirring to mix the gametes. Most reef-building corals release buoyant gametes
that rise to the free surface, where they are stirred by the free-surface
turbulent flow. Buoyant particle paths in free-surface turbulence are
compressible, even when the underlying 3D flow is incompressible. This results
in regions of buoyant particle coalescence and divergence (corresponding to
upwelling). This physical phenomena plays a role in the structure of floating
and near-surface particles in the ocean, including foam streaks, oil spills, and
the infamous garbage patch in the Pacific, but its effect on fertilization
success is unknown. This research program will integrates laboratory experiments
and numerical simulations to study the effect of free-surface turbulence on
coalescence of initially distant buoyant scalars, and to predict fertilization
rates for broadcast spawning corals. The Principle Investigator will integrate
research methods into the teaching curriculum as an effective tool for learning
fluid mechanics, and use the topic of broadcast spawning as a vehicle for
getting K-16 students interested in engineering and science. A hands-on
interactive module demonstrating the role of surface turbulence on the spreading
and aggregation of buoyant scalars will be developed and used as part of the on-
going effort to integrate research topics into outreach activities, many of
which directly target women and other underrepresented K-16 students.