* 1205443
* Universal and Non-Universal Few-Body Physics in the Ultracold
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Doerte Blume, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 06/30/2015
* USD 255,000.00

Few-body physics has played a prominent role in atomic, molecular and nuclear
physics since the early days of quantum mechanics. A microscopic description of
universal and non-universal aspects of ultracold s-wave interacting atomic few-
body systems with up to six particles is planned. Specifically, a hyperspherical
explicitly correlated Gaussian approach (HECG) applicable to four- and five-body
systems with finite orbital angular momentum will be develoepd. Together with
the "standard" explicitly correlated Gaussian approach, this approach will be
applied to few-atom systems with various symmetries and large s-wave scattering
lengths. Moreover, the physics of few-body systems in periodic structures (a
periodic box or an optical lattice) will be investigated. Lastly, microscopic
finite-temperature approaches will be developed and applied.

The algorithm developments are expected to have implications for a variety of
subdisciplines within physics and chemistry. The successful generalization of
the HECG approach to states with finite angular momentum is expected to provide
access to single- and multi-channel scattering observables. As such, the
developed approach may find applications in nuclear and chemical physics, in
addition to applications in atomic and molecular physics. The applications to
ultracold few-body systems will significantly enhance our understanding of
fundamental, yet highly correlated, few-body states, which govern much of the
dynamics of ultracold quantum gases. Students will be actively involved in all
aspects of the proposed research activities including the planning of the
fundamental studies, the calculations and the interpretation and dissimination
of the results. The research training of undergraduate and graduate students in
atomic theory with emphasis on analytical and numerical techniques prepares them
for a wide variety of future pursuits. Students' classroom experiences will be
improved by incorporating some of the latest advances.