* 1205986
* Elementary Particles, Nuclei and Relativity
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* John Donoghue, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2016
* USD 540,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors John F. Donoghue and
Lorenzo Sorbo at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The search for new physics beyond our present Standard
Model of the fundamental interactions is in an exciting phase at the moment.
Both in particle physics and cosmology there are many experimental opportunities
and novel theoretical ideas. The research of Profs. Donoghue and Sorbo will
explore a range of theoretical topics aimed at understanding and extending our
fundamental theories. These include work in quantum field theory in cosmological
or gravitational applications, new physics for inflation in the early universe,
and tests for unusual features of the underlying physical laws. Attention will
be paid to both basic theoretical structure and also interplay with experiment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is also envisioned to have significant broader
impacts. Profs. Donoghue and Sorbo will involve graduate students in their
research, providing critical training for young scientists. Prof. Donoghue is
revising his successful book "Dynamics of the Standard Model" (with Profs.
Golowich and Holstein) which provides a solid grounding in the Standard Model of
particle physics. Both Profs. Donoghue and Sorbo also use their expertise in
providing science instruction to both undergraduate science students and to non-
science students in a general-education setting.