* 1205493
* Collaborative Research: CI-ADDO-NEW: An Open Memory Array Compiler Framework to Support Devices, Circuits and Systems Research
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Matthew Guthaus, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2017
* USD 522,000.00

The OpenRAM project aims to provide an open-source memory compiler framework for
Random-Access Memories (RAMs). Most academic Integrated Circuit (IC) design
methodologies are inhibited by the availability of memories since commercially
available memory compilers are often black box, not modifiable, and have limited
available memory configurations. However, memories are the largest barrier to
future scaling and require urgent solutions to lower leakage power consumption,
improve reliability in shrinking supply voltages, and incorporate post-CMOS
technologies. The OpenRAM compiler will enable research in these areas by
providing a completely modifiable, verified, technology independent compiler for
single-port and multi-port RAMs and many-port register files. The availability
of the OpenRAM will enable research in a variety of IC-related disciplines
including: computer architecture and system-on-chip (SOC) design, memory circuit
and device research, and computer-aided design (CAD). Computer architects and
SOC designers need access to a variety of memory configurations including
specialized many-ported register files to prototype system-level
implementations. Similarly, memory circuit and device researchers need a
framework to prototype new circuits and devices in the context of these many
configurations. Last, CAD researchers need a framework to study the optimization
and analysis of power and yield of on-chip memories. In addition to the broader
impact of enabling future memory system scaling, OpenRAM will also be an
important education tool by allowing anyone to synthesize and utilize memory
macros in standard-cell design flows and implement custom extensions.