* 1205415
* CI-ADDO-EN: Enhancing and Supporting a Community Testbed
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Justin Cappos, New York University
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 05/31/2015
* USD 362,340.00

This project will support the following development of the Seattle platform for
running distributed experiments: 1) building a new virtual machine that executes
native code using the Google Native Client (NaCl) sandbox and 2) providing
sufficient support to ensure the testbed continues to be useable by the
community.

Adding native code execution will make it easier for researchers to run legacy
code on the Seattle testbed. As a result, researchers and students can use code
written elsewhere on this testbed via the Google Native Client and Google Native
Client toolchain. The resulting code will execute computationally in the NaCl
sandbox, but call into Seattle?s Repy V2 sandbox to safely perform system calls.
An implementation of a POSIX-like API will be provided that is safe, portable,
and adequate to execute most code without modification. Unmodified programs can
be compiled and executed and their calls will be re-mapped to use this API. This
will allow researchers to have a write-once, run anywhere API across thousands
of diverse user devices.

The project will also maintain the core software and servers for the Seattle
testbed. While new feature requests are outside the scope of the project
addressing serious bugs is within scope. In addition four new machines required
to maintain reliable service to the Seattle community will be added.

The resulting Seattle Testbed will: - Have sufficient uptime to continue as a
valuable resource for educators and researchers; - Allow researchers to write C
code in native client for performance critical measurements; - Provide
facilities for legacy code execution.

Broader Impact: The Seattle testbed has already had a positive impact in the
educational and research communities. It is used to teach undergraduate
networking, distributed systems, and security at approximately a dozen
universities. Researchers use it as a platform to study networks, mobile
devices, cloud environments, and large scale distributed systems under the
varieties of access links, configurations, and loads encountered in the real
world. This project supports these broader impacts by enhancing the support
infrastructure and, via the new sandbox, broadens the range of code that can be
used in teaching and experimentation.