* 1205658
* II-EN: Infrastructure to Support Desktop Virtualization Experiments for Research and Education
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Prasad Calyam, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 09/30/2013
* USD 396,311.00

This project is a Computing Research Infrastructure Enhancing Infrastructure
(CRI II-EN) project focused on measurement and evaluation of thin clients and
?virtual desktop clouds? (VDCs) at Ohio State University . By transitioning
their ?traditional desktops? that have dedicated hardware and software
installations to VDCs that are accessible via thin-clients, user communities
greatly benefit in terms of user convenience, and cost-savings. However, to
allocate and manage VDC resources in a scalable and cost-effective manner, cloud
service providers are faced with unique challenges. User workload profiles in
VDCs are bursty (e.g., during daily desktop startup, when user switches between
text and graphic intensive applications), and thin-client user Quality of
Experience (QoE) is highly sensitive to network health variations in the
Internet. Unfortunately, existing works focus mainly on managing server-side
resources based on utility functions of CPU and memory loads, and do not
consider network health and thin-client user experience. Resource allocations
without combined utility-directed information of system loads, network health
and thin-client user experience in VDC platforms inevitably results in costly
over-provisioning of resources, even for as few as tens of users. Also, due to
lack of tools to measure the user experience from the server-side of VDCs,
management functions in VDCs such as configuring thin client protocol parameters
are often performed using guesswork, which in turn impacts user QoE. To address
the above research challenges in developing scalable VDCs with satisfactory
thin-client user QoE, the PIs have developed a ?VMLab? pilot infrastructure that
can support desktop virtualization experiments for research and education
communities. Over the last two years, this infrastructure has supported: (a)
research and development activities relating to VDC resource allocation and
thin-client performance benchmarking, (b) desktop virtualization sandboxes for
system administrators, (c) virtual desktops for classroom labs involving faculty
and students, and (d) evaluation of the feasibility to deploy computationally
intensive interactive applications (e.g., remote volume visualization) in
virtual desktops. This project will expand the VMLab infrastructure and enable
system measurement and user experience evaluation during productive use.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
project include serving high-school students and other users from under-
represented groups. The proposed research will explore the potential for using
the thin-client computing model to provide high-quality user experience to
groups otherwise unable to purchase or maintain a full blown PC. The thin-client
model may not only be cost effective in terms of purchase costs (assuming end-
users do not have to amortize the cost of back-end infrastructure, which is the
case in this scenario), but also has a low steady-state cost due to simplicity
of device maintenance and troubleshooting. The area of desktop applications
hosted in a cloud is an important and rapidly emerging area (both in academia
and industry). The broad dissemination of results will have positive impact in
an economically valuable technology.&lt;br/&gt;