* 1205295
* Behaviors of Systems with Many Interacting Components
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Lincoln Chayes, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2017
* USD 456,000.00

This program concerns the behavior of systems with many degrees of freedom -
either infinite or asymptotically large. Under these circumstances, the detailed
behavior of all the constituents is essentially a meaningless concept and one
looks for (a) collective behavior of the system as a whole or (b) a statistical
description of the behavior of an individual component. The analyses of various
systems pursued by the PI will, whenever feasible, embody both descriptions. The
studies will use four interrelated methods from depictions of condensed matter
problems. These are (i) Classical Spin &amp; Particle Systems, (ii) Quantum Spin
Systems, (iii) Interacting Particle Models and (iv) Cluster Models/Graphical
Representations. Problems from all four categories will be examined. Specific
instances include discontinuous phase transitions in quantum, classical and
continuum fluid systems, the disruptions and enhancements of transport due to
inhomogeneities in disordered media and the approach of critical 2D systems to
their continuum conformal invariant limits. The PI maintains extensive contact
with physicists in the areas of field theory and condensed matter physics as
well as mathematicians from various subdisciplines. Most often the PI brings to
bear the necessary mathematics in order to elicit enhanced understanding of a
physical system. On occasion, physical insight for a particular system can
influence the associated areas of mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact. A philosophy which became prevalent beginning in the late 1960s is that
of universality - largescale and/or longtime collective behaviors do not depend
on the details of the model. Hence, while the primary scientific goals of this
proposal lean towards the advancement of the physical sciences, these
investigations lead directly to considerations of models with supplemental
applications. In particular: (1) Studies of collective swarming behavior in
biological systems and in crowded human aggregations with further applications
to surveillance and gathering of intelligence. (2) Studies of criminal behavior
with applications to hotspot formation in the statistical occurrences of
residential burglaries and to hostility reciprocations of rival street gangs.
(3) Studies of the dissemination and flow of information in large scale
networks. This research encompasses an extensive array of applications research
opportunities at every level. The program will require the assistance of many
collaborators and extensive use of the facilities at UCLA. The PI has
collaborated with undergraduate, graduate, postdoctoral, and senior level
coresearchers from a variety of cultural backgrounds with both genders
adequately represented.