* 1205729
* Cavity QED with MicroToroidal Resonators
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2018
* H. Kimble, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 950,000.00

The research program explores quantum dynamical processes for strong radiative
interactions between one atom and the electromagnetic field of a microscopic
optical cavity. The setting for these investigations is cavity quantum
electrodynamics (cavity QED) in a domain of strong coupling in which the time
scale for coherent quantum evolution of an interacting atom and photon is much
shorter than the times scale for irreversible
decay.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Capabilities are being developed to trap single
atoms within the evanescent fields of microscopic optical resonators with
extremely low optical losses, thereby enabling cavity QED with critical atom and
photon numbers significantly beyond current and projected values for
conventional optical cavities. With a single atom-cavity system, nonlinear
interactions between single photon pulses are investigated, including entangling
operations between `flying photons' and quantum non-demolition measurements of
single-photon fields. Multiple atom-cavity systems are being linked together for
investigations of the creation and distribution of quantum entanglement among
atom-cavity systems at remote locations by way of photon-mediated
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program propels optical physics
beyond traditional nonlinear optics and laser physics into a regime with quantum
dynamical processes now involving atoms and photons taken one by one. On the one
hand, the research extends knowledge of fundamental radiative processes for the
interaction of light and matter. On the other hand, the research endeavors to
harness these basic radiative processes to create new scientific possibilities
and technical capabilities in Quantum Optics and Quantum Information Science
(QIS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the research program include
applications ranging from measurements of fundamental constants to the
development of novel semiconductor devices to the deterministic generation of
entangled photon pairs. The research contributes to the realization of complex
quantum networks by way of interactions in cavity QED. Such capabilities could
have broad impact, including for quantum computation, communication, and
metrology. The attainment of strong coupling in atomic physics has inspired
similar investigations in a wide class of physical systems, including quantum
dots coupled to micro-pillars and photonic bandgap cavities and Cooper-pairs
interacting with superconducting resonators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
program makes contributions to education and human resources in areas of
immediate importance to the nation's scientific and technological future by way
of advanced training of undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral
scholars. With the end of scalability of conventional silicon-based information
technology on the horizon, such investments in the training of talented young
scientists are vitally important.