* 1205453
* II-NEW: An Experimental Infrastructure for Cross-Domain Research in Wireless Computing, Cybersecurity and Data Mining
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Daniel Barbara, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2016
* USD 547,307.00

Among the developments that are pushing the boundary of computer science and
engineering research, these stand out: the emergence of Big Data as a reality,
pushing the need for scalable data analytics (e.g., data mining), the
proliferation of wireless and cellular networks, and the deployment of large
scale cyber-physical systems. Every year, petabytes of new data are collected
and stored by companies and organizations, prompting the need for scalable data
mining to make sense of the data that has been collected. Further, the
proliferation of wireless and cellular networks has enabled the advent of mobile
and nomadic computing. This proliferation has also given rise to many new
challenges.

This new computing research infrastructure enables research into cross-layer
protocols for cognitive radio networks, wireless security energy management
techniques for mobile devices, designing security for cyber-physical systems,
malware detection and prevention for mobile devices, design of deeply embedded
systems for monitoring water distribution infrastructure, new tools to perform
scalable Time Series analysis, tools to perform Bayesian inference in critical
data mining problems, and to perform Metagenome annotation and comparison. It
supports undergraduate and graduate courses on these topics. Software developed
under this program and supporting data will be made available to the research
community, strengthening efforts for technology transfer.