* 1205921
* Collaborative Research: Characterization of a BIoluminescence Reporter System for Mechanical Stress
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2013,02/29/2016
* Alexander Groisman, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 02/29/2016
* USD 252,000.00

In this project, the PIs will investigate the relationship between mechanical
properties of the cell and physiological response, using bioluminescence as a
fast reporter of mechanosensitivity. Specific questions to be addressed are: (1)
What are the mechanical properties of the cell? (2) How is mechanosensitivity
related to the mechanical properties of the cell? and (3) What is the role of
the cytoskeleton in determining the mechanical properties of cells and their
physiological sensitivity? These issues will be studied in three species of
dinoflagellates using atomic force microscopy to measure the elasticity of
living cells and apply quantified mechanical stress to cells, microfluidics to
subject cells to known levels of fluid shear stress, and laser confocal
microscopy coupled with fluorescent probes to visualize the cytoskeleton.
Pharmacological treatments that disrupt the cytoskeleton will be examined for
their effect on cell elasticity and mechanosensitivity. This collaborative
project applies advanced methods of physics, material science, and microfluidic
technology to characterize the mechanical properties of the cell and the
relationship to physiological sensitivity. The goal of the project is to enhance
the value of dinoflagellate bioluminescence as a reporter of mechanical stress
for applications in both the biological and physical sciences. This project will
broaden the participation of underrepresented groups and advances discovery and
understanding by providing internship opportunities to these undergraduate
students through UCSD internship programs, the opportunity for a Ph.D. graduate
student in the physical sciences to work in an interdisciplinary setting, and
for two undergraduate students to participate as REU interns. The project
advances discovery and understanding by contributing to the professional
development of middle and high school science teachers by developing course
materials through the Scripps Classroom Connection Summer Institute in
partnership with COSEE CA, and providing demonstration kits of dinoflagellate
bioluminescence to their students. Project results will be broadly disseminated
through established scientific venues as well as education and public outreach
activities through the Birch Aquarium at Scripps.