* 1205217
* Investigations of Solid Helium
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,01/31/2017
* Robert Hallock, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 01/31/2017
* USD 580,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** This project is centered on an investigation of a
fundamental and important current question in Condensed Matter Physics: What is
the mechanism by which 4He atoms are apparently able to flow though solid 4He?
Prior controversial work by others has suggested that there may be a
"supersolid" state of matter that may exist in solid 4He at very low
temperatures. This is an issue that has aroused intense interest in the
Condensed Matter community, stimulated a number of experiments and theoretical
works, and resulted in a number of possible explanations and some substantial
paradoxes. The theoretical debate insists that perfect crystals of solid helium
cannot be a "supersolid", and that any mass flux through the solid must be
carried by defects. Various defect mechanisms have been proposed. Some believe
that a previously unknown plasticity mechanism may be at work. The experimental
approach used in this research is to impose a chemical potential gradient on the
solid by a unique technique: for example, application of a pressure difference
to liquid helium that interfaces the solid instead of applying pressure directly
to the 4He crystal lattice; or, the application of a temperature difference to
utilize the superfluid Fountain Effect. The approach employs the known behavior
of 4He to remain a liquid at elevated pressure in Vycor (a porous glass), at
pressures at which bulk 4He would be a solid. Studies as a function of
temperature and pressure (and 3He impurity concentration) will provide further
evidence for flow and limit the set of possible mechanisms that are responsible
for flow. The students (undergraduate, graduate) and post-graduate (postdocs)
involved in these studies will gain experience in fundamental physics and
cutting-edge technology. Graduating students will be poised to contribute to
scientific research and technological development in industrial, national
laboratory, and academic settings.

****Non-Technical Abstract**** This research is centered on an investigation of
a fundamental and important current question in Condensed Matter Physics: What
is the mechanism by which 4He atoms are apparently able to flow though solid
4He? Prior controversial work by others has suggested that there may be a
"supersolid" state of matter that may exist in solid 4He at very low
temperatures. This is an issue that has aroused intense interest in the
Condensed Matter community, stimulated a number of experiments and theoretical
works, and resulted in a number of possible explanations and some substantial
paradoxes. Some believe that a previously unknown plasticity mechanism may be at
work. Most agree that disorder in the solid is a crucial ingredient. The
approach used in this research is to impose, for example, a pressure difference
across the solid by a unique technique that does not employ pushing on the
crystal sides of the solid; instead, application of a pressure difference is
made to superfluid liquid helium that interfaces the solid on its sides using
the unique properties of superfluid helium in a porous material that contains
the superfluid. Participating undergraduate, graduate and post-graduate
(postdocs) students will gain experience in fundamental physics and cutting-edge
technology. These investigations may lead to advances in materials science that
could have significant technological implications, for example in metallurgy.