* 1205805
* Physics at Flavor Factories
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Michael Sokoloff, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 06/30/2016
* USD 899,999.00

The Cincinnati group is expert in Flavor Physics and continues to make
significant contributions to the physics of charm and heavy quarks. These
contributions have come most recently through participation in the BaBar
Experiment, whose active operations have ended, but whose data legacy is
extensive and is being currently mined for important physics results. The
Cincinnati group is now transitioning to the LHCb experiment at the CERN Large
Hadron Collider, which is currently in an intense data-taking phase for 2012,
and which will segue into an analysis and upgrade phase during the period
2013-2014.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In the physics of BaBar, Cincinnati is focusing
on a mixing analysis of neutral D decays, on a precision measurement of the mass
difference between charged and neutral D mesons, and absolute mass measurements
of charged and neutral D mesons. At LHCb the group will work on charm mixing and
CP Violation, studies that can assess indirectly high mass scales and provide
powerful constraints on models for new physics beyond the standard model. Among
the processes of interest are three-body decays of neutral D mesons with Kshort
mesons in the final state and amplitude analyses of four-body neutral D decays.
Technically, the group intends to make contributions to the LHCb High Level
Trigger with emphasis on increasing the efficiency of charm decays, and notably
increasing the sensitivity to triggering on Kshort mesons. For the LHCb
upgrades, the group will be working on tracking simulation, and in the domain of
core computing, the group will contribute to the maintenance of the Conditions
Database.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Cincinnati group has a strong record in
education and outreach, and has had a very active QuarkNet Center since 2004,
which offers local and regional high school teachers and students several
opportunities. Among these are opportunities for teachers and students to
participate directly in the research program; participation in QuarkNet
International Masterclasses; and through their annual Teachers' Institute, the
group has helped local high school teachers introduce particle physics and
related topics in modern physics into their courses.