* 1205781
* Stability and Structure of Gibbs' Measures in Mean-field Spin Glass Models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Dmitriy Panchenko, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,151.00

We propose to study some known stability properties of the Gibbs measures in
several mean-field spin glass models and to develop new stability properties for
other models, as well as to explore what kind of information about the Gibbs
measures can be deduced from their stability properties. One of the most
important objectives in any given model is to understand the asymptotic
structure of its Gibbs measure and in a number of models this structure is
expected to be described by a version of the Parisi ultrametric Ansatz. For
diluted models, such as diluted p-sat and p-spin models, the proposal concerns
with a better mathematical understanding of a framework for the diluted Parisi
ansatz described by a random measure on the space of measurable functions and,
in particular, with finding new ways to utilize some recent stability results in
these models. For perceptron type models, the proposal aims to develop new
stability properties with applications to certain cavity computations.

Many models in the general area of Spin Glasses originate from the attempts to
understand the behavior of various optimization problems from different branches
of science (physics, computer science, biology) and, more specifically, their
average or typical behavior rather than focusing on one fixed scenario. This is
done by randomizing the parameters of the problem and then trying to answer
several key questions using the methods from Statistical Physics and Probability
Theory. In the seventies and eighties, the physicists developed a number of
novel ideas to approach these very difficult questions, first, in the setting of
the now famous Sherrington-Kirkpatrick model, and then later successfully
applied these ideas to other models as well. The ideas of the physicists were
for the most part heuristic and are often described by the German word "Ansatz"
which means "an educated guess that is verified later by its results". In recent
years, many of these ideas have been confirmed rigorously, especially, in the
setting of the Sherrington-Kirkpatrick model. The goal of this project is to
build upon recent progress and try to confirm other, even more bold, predictions
of the physicists that are crucial for broader applicability of their ideas.