* 1205727
* Lightning and Thunderstorm Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Paul Krehbiel, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 12/31/2016
* USD 745,198.00

This project will advance understanding of storm electrification through a
combination of instruments and techniques, including time-of-arrival and
broadband interferometric mapping of lightning discharges inside storms,
wideband electric and magnetic field measurements, high-speed video recordings
of flashes, energetic radiation measurements inside storms, and dual-
polarization meteorological radar storm observations. A particular initial focus
will center on data collected during the May-June 2012 Deep Convective Clouds
and Chemistry (DC3) study to be conducted in May-June 2012, for which this team
will provide high-quality lightning mapping observations in the CSU-CHILL/North
Colorado study area. The intellectual merit of the research will result
primarily from the scientific investigations. Specific issues to be addressed
include investigating the mechanism by which lightning is initiated, determining
the nature of positive- and negative-polarity breakdown, homing in on the
details of various discharge processes, and further differentiation of various
types of lightning (such as blue- and gigantic-jets, bolts-from-the-blue,
energetic compact intracloud discharges, and triggered lightning. In addition to
individual lightning flashes, four-dimensionally mapped observations of the
overall lightning activity will be used to infer storms' electrical structures,
which will in-turn be compared with dual-polarization radar observations of
associated microphysical and dynamical structures. The latter studies are to be
carried out in conjunction with the Colorado State University (viz. CSU-CHILL)
radar beginning with the DC3 investigations, where a more permanent, Lightning
Mapping Array (LMA) will be set up and operated. These studies will help assess
and quantify the effects of storm electrification and lightning on important
trace atmospheric chemical constituents. Of particular subsequent interest will
be studies of supercell and hail-producing storms, storms exhibiting inverted
polarity signatures, positive cloud-to-ground lightning discharges, and
wintertime lightning, and will also benefit from additional data collected by
the S-POL radar operated by the National Center for Atmospheric
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collectively, broader impacts of these studies
will include improved use and interpretation of lightning data in a) short-term
forecasts of thunderstorm severity and intensification, b) determining the
effect of lightning and electrified storms on atmospheric chemistry, c)
detecting and monitoring volcanic eruptions, and d) validating space-borne
lightning observations in advance of launches of the GOES-R and European
geosynchronous satellites. The North Colorado LMA will also provide detailed
observations of lightning occurrences and effects on the major energy-producing
windfarms along the Colorado/Wyoming border. Work will also continue on studying
underground transients produced by lightning, of substantial interest to the
coal-mining and electric power industries. This work sill serve to further
continued development of lightning mapping technology and dissemination of this
technology to other research groups and operational users, as well as through
graduate education and training of the next generation of researchers.