* 1205091
* Developing an Engineering Technology Workforce to Meet Employers' Needs - Students in Engineering Technology (SET)
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* John Chapin, Tallahassee Community College
* Standard Grant
* ece yaprak
* 05/31/2016
* USD 199,565.00

The Students in Engineering Technology (SET) project is addressing employer's
needs by producing highly skilled and educated technicians who are prepared to
enter and succeed in the field of Engineering Technology (ET). The SET project
partners include Leon County Schools, Wakulla County Schools, Daytona State
College, Florida State University College of Engineering, FLATE, and regional
employers. The project is developing a career pathway in ET in manufacturing
that leads to a diverse population of students entering the program at different
stages. Entry points include high school dual-enrollment, the community college,
4-year institutions and incumbent workers through co-operative education
programs. The project is providing multiple exit points to support student
educational career needs that include credit certificate programs, associate
degrees or baccalaureate degrees. The SET project is stimulating learning by
offering educational opportunities that far exceed current curriculum options.
By providing concentrations in a variety of technical areas as well as an
emphasis on contextual, practical training and education methods, this project
is encouraging the study of ET in manufacturing with the outcome as either a
technician in industry or continued progression into a four-year ET program.
This project is broadening the participation of underrepresented groups by an
aggressive high school campus presence with mentoring and advising of students
and parents. Further, summer bridge courses and technology camps are providing
continuity in the education process, a valuable marketing tool to attract future
students for program sustainability and intensive practical experience for all
student participants.