* 1205870
* Advanced Tests and Applications of Quantum Nonlocality
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Paul Kwiat, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2015
* USD 400,287.00

Nonlocal entanglement has long been of great fundamental interest in quantum
mechanics, and is now seen as a cornerstone in the nascent field of quantum
information. However, although nearly half a century has passed since John Bell
first showed that it was possible to perform a true, unambiguous test of the
nonlocal, non-realistic aspects of quantum mechanics, such an unambiguous test
has never been performed. Experimental tests of this quintessential quantum
phenomenon have thus far been incomplete, all of them plagued by one or more
"loopholes". We are addressing three main topics in advanced tests of quantum
nonlocality. First, we employ new very efficient, fast detectors to realize an
unambiguous test of nonlocality, a major quantum physics milestone. In the first
phase, the "detection loophole" can be closed, which has never been done in
optics; in the second phase, the "timing loophole" will also be closed, leading
to the first truly loophole-free test of the nonlocal nature of reality.
Realizing a system that can perform such a test is relevant for "verified"
quantum random number generation and "device-independent" ultra-secure quantum
cryptography systems, advantageous over traditional implementations because they
do not rely on extra assumptions about the equipment being used.

The second activity capitalizes on our recent NSF-funded successes in producing
and controlling hyperentanglement -- photons that are simultaneously entangled
in multiple degrees of freedom -- to study novel features of quantum nonlocality
in larger Hilbert spaces. Specifically, using polarization, spatial-mode and
time-bin entanglement, we explore states that reside in an unprecedented
~37,000,000-dimensional Hilbert space. In collaboration with University of
Illinois colleague Prof. Anthony Leggett, we study the nonlocal character and
robustness of the complex hyperentanglement in the face of decoherence, and as
the dimensionality of the Hilbert space increases. Finally, using techniques
developed here, we address two applications in the realm of advanced quantum
information processing: realization of a completely verifiable source of quantum
random numbers, and first implementation of a "device independent" quantum
cryptography protocol. This project should lead to a number of other interesting
investigations at the boundary between foundations of quantum mechanics and
quantum information processing.

One can hardly discuss the nature of reality without the notion of quantum
entanglement -- ultrastrong-correlations between separated quantum systems -- in
fact, entanglement is now seen as a cornerstone in the nascent field of quantum
information. Therefore, testing it thoroughly is essential, if challenging. Our
experiments will, once and for all, exclude all models of nature that rely on
the intuitive principles of locality (there are no actions at a distance) and
realism (things we measure have values before we measure them), as well as
testing for the presence of correlations beyond those predicted by quantum
mechanics. Should a "positive result" (i.e., an apparent breakdown of QM
predictions) be found and confirmed, the eventual implications for our view of
the physical world itself would be truly revolutionary. Moreover, the ability to
study nonlocal correlations in much more complex quantum systems than has
heretofore been possible -- using hyperentanglement -- may reveal new features
in the robustness/fragility of entanglement phenomena. Finally, as part of the
project, nonlocality experiments for undergraduate laboratories are being
developed in collaboration with colleagues at undergraduate institutions,
bringing the realities of quantum information phenomena to students at an
earlier age and in broader venues.