* 1205223
* Collaborative Research: Anomalous Transport and Wavefront Shaping in Complex Photonic Media
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Alexey Yamilov, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 05/31/2016
* USD 170,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** Compared to electronic systems, the robustness of
coherence effects for photons at room temperature highlights the suitability of
optical systems for fundamental studies of mesoscopic wave transport and also
points to practical applications. This award supports a collaborative research
program between an experimental group and a theoretical group to conduct
systematic experimental and theoretical investigations on mesoscopic transport
of light in aperiodic dielectric structures, with the goal of acquiring
fundamental understanding of the effects of structural correlations on multiple
scattering and localization in complex photonic systems that lie in-between
random and periodic structures. Complex structural correlations in the aperiodic
systems are expected to break the limitations imposed by the universal optimal
transmission on fully random systems, thus providing additional degrees of
freedom for control of mesoscopic transport via wave front shaping. The non-
universality of wave transport will be exploited to achieve unprecedented
control of light propagation via wave front shaping, including enhancement of
light transmission, steering of output beams, and selective delivery of optical
energy. The collaborative experimental-theoretical program will train graduate
and undergraduate students to conduct interdisciplinary research across the
evolving boundaries of multiple fields, including condensed matter physics,
optics of complex media, nanotechnology, and computational physics. The cutting-
edge research will be incorporated in the curriculum at both participating
institutions.

****Non-Technical Abstract**** Rapid advances in nanotechnology have enabled the
fabrication of micro- and nano-photonic structures with high degree of
precision. Joined experimental and theoretical effort aims to uncover unusual
optical properties of nano-structures that are neither completely disordered nor
perfectly ordered. Instead, the so-called deterministic aperiodic nano-
structures are defined by the iteration of simple mathematical rules. These
artificial photonic materials span the entire spectrum in a hierarchy of
complexity all the way from random to periodic structures. Because of their
structural distinction and unusual physical properties, the aperiodic systems
have been called the third form of solid matter. The project aims to design and
fabricate artificial photonic nano-materials with prescribed transport
properties. Because the structures are known a priori, it will be possible to
obtain predictable and reproducible transport behaviors by controlling the
incident light. This control is expected to lead to enhancement of light
transmission, steering of output beams, and selective delivery of optical energy
to targeted area. The outcome of this research may have a wide range of
applications from biomedical imaging and photodynamic therapy, to laser trapping
and micro-manipulation. The experimental-theoretical program will train students
in interdisciplinary research across the evolving boundaries of multiple fields,
including condensed matter physics, nanotechnology, and computational physics.
The cutting-edge research will be incorporated in the curriculum at both
institutions.