* 1205935
* Digitization TCN: Collaborative: The Macrofungi Collection Consortium: Unlocking a Biodiversity Resource for Understanding Biotic Interactions, Nutrient Cycling and Human Affairs
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Andrew Methven, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 231,064.00

The Macrofungi Collection Consortium: Unlocking a Biodiversity Resource for
Understanding Biotic Interactions, Nutrient Cycling and Human
Affairs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mushrooms and related fungi (macrofungi) play a
critical role in the lives of plants and animals, including humans, yet their
diversity is underestimated. Understanding this diversity will be critical in
analyzing impacts of habitat change, nutrient cycling in ecosystems, and
distributions and diversity of host organisms. Scientists in the U.S. have been
studying these fungi for the past 150 years, resulting in a legacy of
approximately 1.4 million dried scientific specimens conserved in 35
institutions in 24 states. These institutions have now joined in an effort to
digitize and share online all data associated with macrofungi specimens. The
resulting resource will enable a national census of macrofungi, never before
attempted, and will allow researchers to better understand the diversity of
these organisms and the relationship between macrofungi and the organisms with
which they form intimate relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organized into
clubs across the country, citizen mycologists play an important role in
documenting macrofungi diversity, and these enthusiastic individuals are the
conduit between professional scientists and the general public for critical
information about wild edible and poisonous fungi. Citizen mycologists will join
the collections institutions in this project to help to create the on-line
resource. The project will fund two workshops for high school teachers to
promote classroom study of fungi. University students employed by the project
will gain work experience in digitization and formal training about fungi.
Students will share the knowledge they gain through oral and video
presentations. This award is made as part of the National Resource for
Digitization of Biological Collections through the Advancing Digitization of
Biological Collections program and all data resulting from this award will be
available through the national resource (iDigBio.org).