* 1205032
* TechSpot 2.0
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Carmen Lamha, City College of San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 09/30/2016
* USD 449,967.00

City College of San Francisco (CCSF), in partnership with Year Up Bay Area, is
developing TechSpot 2.0 with the goal of creating opportunities for community
college students to gain hands-on work experience in the field of information
technology (IT), particularly those students from backgrounds typically
underrepresented in this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific objectives for
TechSpot 2.0 are:&lt;br/&gt;1. Recruit students typically underrepresented in
the field of IT into the Fundamentals of Technical Support certificate and/or
the CNIT Associate degree program. &lt;br/&gt;2. Establish a computer
refurbishing, recycling and technical support center to provide students with
hands-on work experience that augments CCSF's existing Fundamentals of Technical
Support certificate curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;3. Implement innovative strategies for
sustainability, including highly competitive TechSpot service fees, A+ test
preparation, and A+ testing, all of which feed back into supporting the
technical support center's operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TechSpot 2.0 builds
on a proven, successful model (CompTechS at De Anza College) and utilizes a
variety of networks to disseminate project findings and materials, both through
in-person presentations at various conferences and through the network of the
ATE-funded Mid-Pacific Information and Communication Technologies Regional
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To ensure that TechSpot 2.0 engages and supports
historically underserved and underrepresented students as optimally as possible,
the project taps into the resources of several other partners that promote
equity for special populations in career and technical education programs: the
Institute for Women in Trades, Technology, and Sciences; the National Alliance
for Partnerships (NAPE); and California's Joint Special Populations Statewide
Advisory Committee (JSPAC).