* 1205384
* Engineering Protein-Based Multifinctional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Jin Montclare, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2015
* USD 338,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1205384 PI: Montclare, Jin ORG: Polytechnic Institute of
New York

Title: Engineering Protein-Based Multifinctional Materials

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The design and synthesis of functional self-assembling
systems capable of encapsulating, storing, and delivering small hydrophobic
molecules/therapeutics is becoming increasingly important. A majority of the
delivery vehicles are derived from lipids and synthetic polymers. However, self-
assembling peptides/proteins are emerging as potential materials that can be
readily manipulated for therapeutic delivery. This work aims to tailor
genetically engineered protein block polymers for the delivery of small
hydrophobic molecules/therapeutics. The fabrication of multi-functional,
nanoscaled protein-based delivery agents for the dual delivery of doxorubicin
(dox) and curcumin (ccm) to cancer cells is proposed. The engineered protein
materials can: (1) be targeted via hyperthermia conditions, concentrating the
agents at the localized disease site, (2) bind/encapsulate dox and ccm without
the need for further chemical alteration of the delivery agent or the
therapeutic agent, (3) be retained at the cancer site due to the enhanced
permeation retention (EPR) effect, and (4) be decorated with cancer targeting
peptide sequences for active targeting of breast cancer cells. The central
hypotheses to be tested are that (1) appropriate combinations of protein domains
will enable supramolecular assembly in the hyperthermia temperature range and
(2) tailoring small molecule-binding abilities and cancer specific targeting
domains into a single construct will enable the controlled delivery of desired
chemical agents to treat breast cancer as a model. Critical features of the
proposed delivery vehicle are that the modular nature of these protein materials
enables integration of the above domains into a single polymer chain and that
their ability to self-assemble allows dual drug encapsulation as well as control
over the delivery and targeting ligand presentation. This will be accomplished
by exploiting the most powerful methods of molecular biology and protein
engineering. The insight gleaned from these studies may be used to identify
common themes or predictable rules towards engineering protein-derived materials
with tunable properties for therapeutic delivery.

BROADER IMPACTS: The proposed work may lead to encapsulating vehicles capable of
selectively delivering anticancer, and other, therapeutic agents. This project
will train the next generation scientists and engineers to integrate tools from
biology, chemistry, and engineering to address the biomedical challenge of
targeted drug delivery. The educational and outreach components of this proposal
fall into distinct but interrelated activities. In addition to teaching and
mentoring graduate students and postdocs, the PI has and continues to supervise
both undergraduates and high-school students from the Youth in Engineering and
Science (YES) program in laboratory research. The PI will continue, in
partnership with the Urban Assembly Institute for Math and Science for Young
Women (UAI), to develop a tiered mentoring outreach program that provides
classroom support for teachers and infuses technology into the curriculum
through modern, engaging modules. This program integrates modern technology and
interdisciplinary science for young students and teachers in the Brooklyn
schools. Additional hands-on, technologically advanced modules will be developed
together with undergraduate fellows. For example, they have developed an iPad
app "Lewis Dots" that enables the molecular visualization of chemical structures
that, together with blog-based learning approaches, has been implemented in the
UAI classroom.