* 1205686
* RUI: Hadronic Structure and Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Mary Alberg, Seattle University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2016
* USD 163,402.00

This research focuses on two areas: (i) the description of hadron properties in
terms of their constituent quarks and gluons, and (ii) the production of
strangeness and charm in antiproton-proton interactions. (i) A hybrid approach
will be used to describe hadron properties in terms of both perturbative and
non-perturbative processes. A statistical model will represent perturbative
degrees of freedom, and a meson cloud model will represent the nonperturbative
fluctuation of baryons into meson-baryon states. A study of the pion-nucleon
form factor will reduce the model-dependence of pion cloud contributions to this
and other hadron structure calculations. This project will address one of the
outstanding challenges to theory posed by recent experiment, the momentum-
dependence of light quark distributions in the proton sea, and determine the
parton contributions to strangeness and spin in the proton. Predictions will be
made for experiments running at Fermilab and planned at JPARC. (ii) The creation
of antihyperon-hyperon pairs in antiproton-proton annihilations tests
theoretical models for the description of strangeness and charm production.
Quark model calculations and reaction matrix analyses of these reactions will be
made and compared to meson-exchange and constituent quark models, and to recent
spin transfer measurement results from CERN, which disagree with all theoretical
calculations. Cross sections and spin observables will be calculated for the
experiments planned by the PANDA collaboration at FAIR, which will extend the
CERN measurements to higher energies and to the production of charmed hyperons.

Nucleons (protons and neutrons) and other hadrons are particles composed of
quarks, gluons, and a fluctuating sea of quark-antiquark pairs. In this research
we study the fundamental questions of how the properties of a particle are
determined by the properties of its constituents, and how those constituents
affect the ways in which particles interact with one another. An example of this
type of question is proton spin. The proton spin is 1/2, but it consists of many
quarks (spin 1/2) and gluons (spin 1). How do all these spins add up to give us
a spin-1/2 proton? This work will be carried out with undergraduate research
assistants from Seattle University. Their research experience will provide an
integration of classroom learning and the excitement of contemporary research.
Students will receive training in research methods and scientific communication.
They will work in teams, mentor younger students and present their work in
papers, posters and talks at meetings of professional societies. They will also
share their work with the local campus community in seminars and events
sponsored by Seattle University student research organizations.