* 1205778
* Electromagnetic Properties and Hadronic Parity Violation in Lattice QCD
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Brian Tiburzi, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 05/31/2016
* USD 249,000.00

The distributions of charge and magnetism within hadrons will be explored by
calculating their magnetic moments and electromagnetic polarizabilities from
lattice quantum chromodynamics (QCD). Computations will be performed using
background field techniques developed earlier by the PI and collaborators. New
techniques will also be developed in conjunction with effective field theory,
and computations utilizing lighter quark masses and multiple volumes will be
carried out. Manifestations of the weak interaction at low energies will
additionally be investigated in lattice QCD. The parity-violating component of
non-leptonic weak interactions introduces hadronic parity violation (HPV), and
probes the quark-quark correlations deep within hadrons. The precise nature of
HPV depends on running the weak interaction down to hadronic scales, and non-
perturbative physics that can only be addressed with lattice QCD computations.

This research will help to advance our understanding of particles that make up a
nucleus at the most advanced level yet achieved. Members of under-represented
groups will be afforded opportunities in nuclear science as a result of this
project. Ethnic minority groups constitute a majority of the student population
at The City College of New York. In introductory courses serving these students,
the PI will integrate nuclear science concepts, focusing on important
applications in energy, medicine, and security. In upper-level courses, the PI
will integrate numerical work, including examples from this project. Students
will gain computational literacy and a broadened understanding of nuclear
science concepts. Building on these opportunities at a more professional level,
this project will fund the research of a graduate student in nuclear physics.