* 1205544
* Transient Quantum Optomechanics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Hailin Wang, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

This work aims to coherently couple light to a macroscopic mechanical oscillator
via a radiation pressure force and to explore quantum entanglement between light
and the mechanical oscillator in such an optomechanical system. Specific
objectives of the project include preparing a macroscopic mechanical oscillator
near its motional ground state and entangling the mechanical oscillator with
light through a two-mode-squeezing optomechanical process. The experimental
effort will focus on the study of transient, instead of steady-state,
optomechanical interactions, which should enable entanglement operations in a
timescale short compared with the mechanical decoherence time. The project will
also develop optomechanical resonators that can feature high mechanical quality
factor, ultrahigh optical finesse, as well as strong optomechanical coupling. A
particular emphasis is to realize a well-isolated optomechanical system for
exploring macroscopic quantum phenomena in an otherwise classical mechanical
system. This work makes contributions to education and human resource by
providing excellent training to graduate and undergraduate students in areas of
both scientific and technological importance.

Quantum mechanics, as a fundamental theory, describes the microscopic world of
electrons, atoms and molecules and predicts strange or weird behaviors, such as
quantum superposition and quantum entanglement. Exquisite control of these
quantum behaviors has now been achieved in a variety of microscopic systems.
Applying quantum mechanics to otherwise classical objects or systems in the
macroscopic world, however, encounters both conceptual and technical issues. The
optomechanical system developed in this project provides us a specific
experimental platform for investigating quantum behaviors in a macroscopic
mechanical system. In such a system, one can control the mechanical motion down
to the quantum regime by exploiting the interaction between light and the
mechanical motion. Extending the study and control of quantum behaviors to this
macroscopic system can potentially shed light on the boundary between the
quantum and classical worlds and can also have significant impact on the
development of quantum technologies such as such as quantum information
processing and precision or ultra-sensitive measurements.