* 1205565
* Atomic Coherence and Interference in a Coupled Atom-Cavity System
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Yifu Zhu, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 449,925.00

This award supports an experimental research program that studies coherent
photon-atom interactions in a coupled cavity-atom system consisting of multiple
multi-level atoms interacting with one or two cavity modes and also with free-
space laser fields. The experiments are carried out with laser-cooled rubidium
atoms confined in an optical resonator. The prior work of the PI's group showed
that the collective coupling of the cavity field and atoms can be used to
produce the intra-cavity dark state and create cavity electromagnetically
induced transparency. The PI's group also showed that the free-space laser field
can be used to induce the destructive interference in the coupled cavity-atom
system and control the quantum states of the cavity QED system. The planned
experiments will use such interplay of the cavity QED and the quantum
interference induced by the free-space laser fields to obtain large optical
nonlinearities and to study light control light phenomena such as all-optical
switching and large cross-phase modulation at ultra-low light intensities. The
experiments will also be carried out in the cavity-atom system with a free-
space, multi-frequency control light field that creates broadband
electromagnetically induced transparency, which is useful for studies of a
multichannel, broadband light memory. The funded research will advance knowledge
of the fundamental physics of photon-atom interactions, lead to discoveries of
new phenomena, and result in the development of coherent optical techniques for
applications in quantum state manipulation, spectroscopic measurements, light-
control-light photonic devices, and storage and conversion of quantum
information. The research activities are carried out at Florida International
University (a minority institute) and involve contributions from graduate and
undergraduate students, particularly minority students. The research projects
use advanced experimental methods and perform sophisticated experiments with
advanced laser optical techniques and spectroscopic measurements, which offers
research related education and training opportunities for the graduate and
undergraduate students and enable them to develop scientific knowledge and
technical skills in their pursuit of scientific and technological careers.