* 1205973
* Superfluid Atomic Bosons, Fermions and Their Mixtures
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Han Pu, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 06/30/2015
* USD 180,000.00

The field of ultracold atomic physics has been progressing rapidly without signs
of slowing down. Under this award, we will carry out a theoretical study of
several important problems concerning the superfluid properties of cold atoms.
These projects are of fundamental importance, and in the meantime are inspired
by recent experimental progress in the field. We will consider the properties of
cold atomic ensembles whose effective spatial dimensions in which they live are
tuned. A tunable spatial dimension is not readily achievable in other materials.
But for cold atoms, by adjusting the geometry of the trapping potential that is
used to confine them, such a feat can be realized in the lab. We will also
consider the novel properties of cold atoms under the manipulation of
appropriately arranged laser fields. Under proper conditions, the laser beams
can induce synthetic electromagnetic fields such that the neutral atoms behave
like charged particles moving in electric and/or magnetic fields. These research
projects are of great relevance to current experiments, some of which are being
carried out by PI's colleagues at Rice University. These problems span a quite
wide spectrum within the field of cold atoms with close ties to condensed matter
physics and nonlinear physics. Students involved in these projects will receive
a solid training in theoretical physics, including both analytical methods and
numerical techniques. Such a training will be very valuable for their future
career in science and engineering.