* 1205762
* Quantum Optics with Polariton Condensates
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* David Snoke, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2016
* USD 425,000.00

Creating Bose condensates of polaritons in microcavity structures is now fairly
routine. In addition, we now have structures which have very long polariton
lifetime compared to their thermalization time, so that we can do experiments
with equilibrated condensates of these particles. This project has three primary
goals based on our ability to make long-lifetime polariton condensates. First,
we plan to use a polariton condensate to create enhanced two-photon absorption.
In principle, this enhancement can be so much that the two-photon absorption
process becomes deterministic even for sets of two single photons. This would
have immediate impact in the area of quantum optics. The second main goal is to
map the phase diagram of an equilibrium polariton condensate as a function of
density and temperature, with emphasis on the changes of the spectral function
of the condensate, which is immediately observable to us. In addition, we plan
to create intersecting beams of ballistic polaritons, which would allow us to do
many polariton-polariton scattering studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bose
condensation is a ubiquitous effect in which many particles spontaneously
organize to act collectively as a single wave. The most well known example of
this is a gas of atoms at ultra-low temperatures, but the effect occurs in other
systems as well. In recent years, it has been shown to occur at moderate
temperatures (tens of Kelvin) with particles called "polaritons", which are
essentially photons that have been given atom-like properties, namely mass and
weak interactions, by means of a specially designed optical system. A main goal
of this project is to use a Bose condensate of polaritons to manipulate the
transmission of infrared photons. If this goal succeeds, we will have a system
in which one photon passing through the system will be unaffected, but two
photons passing through together will be absorbed. This ability to manipulate
single photons can be used in a number of schemes of quantum optical
communications. The project will be tremendous experience for graduate students
working on the project to do cutting edge optics research.