* 1205159
* Mid-Pacific Information and Communication Technologies Regional Center
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Bill Doherty, City College of San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 08/31/2016
* USD 2,249,812.00

The Mid-Pacific Information and Communication Technology (MPICT) Center is
working toward, and has already made some progress toward, harmonization of
information and communications technology (ICT) related course nomenclature,
frameworks, programs, and academic credentials in the California Community
College System (CCCS) through student learning objectives tied to employer
workplace demands for, at least, a common core of ICT related programs. The
Center also works with industry to develop a more common set of job titles and
descriptions. ICT encompasses 1) Hardware (electrical and computer engineering),
2) Software (computer science and software engineering), 3) Web (web design and
development), 4) IT Operations (networking/telecom/ system
administration/storage), 5) Digital Media, 6) Database and Information Systems,
and 7) Security. MPICT continues its current mission of coordinating, improving,
and promoting ICT education, with a focus on community colleges, but changing
its regional focus to all of California, Nevada, Hawai'i and the Pacific
Territories. MPICT continues to develop and sustain collaborations to leverage,
expand, improve, and enhance the region's ICT education capacity. These
collaborations help create a diverse ICT workforce that can meet the economic
needs of the region for a wide range of industries, not only for information
technology employers. Regional, national, and global best practices in ICT
education are identified and disseminated to encourage implementation of these
best practices throughout the region, working towards a harmonization of ICT
competencies, skills, and education approaches. MPICT advocates for the
development of core ICT student learning outcomes that serve as a framework for
articulated, comprehensive ICT education pathways throughout the region. MPICT
staff work closely with the external evaluator to develop evaluation plans,
methods and vehicles that are administered by an internal evaluator. The
evaluation documents the value and implementation use of professional
development, the framework for core ICT competencies and also tracks students
into jobs and further education.