* 1205763
* RUI-Norfolk State University's Research Participation at Jefferson Lab
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Carlos Salgado, Norfolk State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 05/31/2016
* USD 130,374.00

The Nuclear and Particle Physics group at Norfolk State University is engaged in
experimental studies on the physics of the strong interactions. We are
interested in testing basic quantum chromodynamics (QCD) signatures. Our
research is based at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility
(Jefferson Lab - JLab). Our group is involved in hardware construction for the
ongoing 12-GeV upgrade at JLab (we are participating in the construction of a
Pre-Shower Calorimeter), and in the data analysis of previous experiments. Our
main research centers on the photo- and electro-production of mesons and the
study, through full Partial Wave Analysis, of multi-particle final states. In
particular, we are working on the analysis of data from two CLAS and CLAS data-
taking runs, both exploring the production of exotic hadrons and expanding meson
spectroscopy. These studies will continue after the upgrade, at CLAS12 (part of
the 12-GeV upgrade), using virtual photons (electron scattering at very small
angles) at low momentum transfer. We are also part of the PRIMEX collaboration
for high precision measurement of the neutral pion two-photon decay width that
will be extended to include the etas and eta-prime channels in the upgrade and
the Heavy Photon Search experiment that will search for special extensions of
the standard model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this experimental program, NSU
faculty and undergraduate students will directly participate in the construction
of hardware and analysis of data from experiments in the forefront of nuclear
physics research. NSU is one of the leading HBCUs in the country and its main
campus is conveniently located a short distance from Jefferson Lab. A main
objective of this project is to provide opportunities to under-represented
minorities and strengthen diversity in nuclear physics research.