* 1205894
* Studies of Impurity-Atom Dynamics in Lattice-Modulated Bosonic Mixtures
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Dominik Schneble, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2016
* USD 447,000.00

The coupling of a particle to its surroundings enables important condensed-
matter phenomena such as the formation of polarons in solid-state and low-
temperature systems, and is a central concept in the study of decoherence and
dissipation. This project focuses on the experimental study of such coupled
systems using mixtures of ultracold bosonic atoms trapped in an optical lattice.
Using a hyperfine-ground state mixture of bosonic atoms in state-dependent
optical lattices allows for the immersion of localized atoms in a bosonic
background medium. One of the goals of the projectis to detect polaronic energy
shifts and clustering spectroscopically in the limit of strong interactions.
Another goal is to study the dynamics of a localized, driven atomic spin coupled
to a bosonic superfluid as a simple realization of a spin-boson model for the
study of quantum dissipative effects. Using state-dependent potentials as a
manipulation tool, a third goal is to study out-of-equilibrium dynamics of one-
dimensional spin mixtures with the possibility of observing spin-charge
separation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The elucidation of behavior specific to
complex materials will have the potential for broad scientific and technological
impact that can ultimately benefit society. The project will advance the state
of the art of quantum-gas research in this direction, and it will also provide
scientific and technical training to both graduate and undergraduate students
who will gain proficiency in the enabling technologies of lasers and optics,
ultrahigh vacuum, and electronics.