* 1205548
* Disorder and Dynamics in Strongly Correlated Optical Lattices
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Brian DeMarco, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 07/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

We are carrying out two projects that will advance the state-of-the-art for
disordered quantum gases, thus enabling new methods for attacking outstanding
questions related to condensed matter physics and materials science. First, we
are developing a technique to directly measure compressibility for ultra-cold
gases trapped in 3D disordered optical lattices. We will apply this method to
identify the nature of a disorder-induced insulator that we discovered,
potentially detecting a Bose-glass phase using atoms unambiguously for the first
time. Second, we are adding a cubic optical lattice to our disordered Fermi gas
apparatus to achieve the first realization of the disordered Fermi-Hubbard model
using ultra-cold atoms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In these experiments, trapped atom
gases are cooled to nanoKelvin temperatures using a combination of lasers and
magnetic fields. A disordered optical lattice is superimposed on the gas by
slowly turning on three pairs of counter-propagating infrared lattice laser
beams and a green optical speckle field. The equivalent of material parameters,
such as the disorder strength and tunneling energy, are smoothly tuned by
adjusting the laser intensities. To measure compressibility, two laser beams
(tuned near an electronic transition) applied to a Rubdium-87 gas will be used
to image only the atoms located in the middle of the disordered lattice as the
confining trap is changed. To create a disordered lattice for fermionic
Potassium-40 atoms, additional lattice laser beams will be applied to an ultra-
cold gas. We will measure the velocity of the gas as a force is applied in order
to search for a predicted metal-insulator transition in the disordered
lattice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interplay of disorder and strong interactions
is one of the key outstanding problems in condensed matter physics. Fundamental
questions center on how disorder and interactions either cooperate or compete to
create localized phases in equilibrium and the influence of disorder on
dynamical properties. The impact of disorder on quantum materials is also of
prime importance to technological applications. Insight gained from our
experiments may lead to improvements in materials with superlative properties
that are important to energy applications, such as the high-temperature
superconducting cuprates. Enhanced understanding of how disorder and
interactions influence material properties may also enable new applications for
strongly correlated materials in functions such as thermoelectric power
generation.