* 1205376
* Elementary Particle Physics with ATLAS
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Allen Mincer, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Saul Gonzalez
* 05/31/2016
* USD 1,746,000.00

The ATLAS physics program at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN, Geneva,
Switzerland is in full operation, with the LHC now delivering proton-proton
collisions at 8 TeV collision energy. The NYU group continues to take a leading
role in the implementation of the ATLAS detector's triggering system used to
select collisions with large or imbalanced transverse momentum signatures.
Through this program of effort, the NYU group proposes to continue its searches
for new phenomena, to further develop statistical tools and techniques, and to
maintain responsibility for the transverse energy trigger signatures. The group
also aims to be a leader in a new analysis archival strategy and to continue
R&amp;D work on the tracker upgrade needed for the upgraded collider, the HL-
LHC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analytically, the group will leverage the expertise
gained from measurement of the top-antitop production cross section in the
dilepton final state to search for the Higgs boson and exotic physics in the top
sector. If a new particle is discovered in searches for the Higgs boson, the
group plans to use its expertise in statistical techniques and the vector boson
fusion production mode to measure the new particle's properties and confirm if
it is indeed responsible for electroweak symmetry breaking. NYU also plans to
commission a new detector signature from highly collimated groups of leptons, a
generic prediction from a class of models motivated by observations in dark
matter searches. These analyses also provide the group with the depth and
breadth of experience necessary to deal with surprises in the
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, for upgrade of ATLAS, NYU has developed
an IR-laser system for study of prototype silicon strip detectors to be used in
the ATLAS upgrade required for the HL-LHC. It plans to develop a modified system
to allow rapid tests of detectors read out with digital chips being developed by
ATLAS/CERN.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NYU group is engaged in two distinct areas
of broader impacts of their research effort. The first of these is the
development a large exhibit on the LHC physics program for display at public
events. The exhibit has been seen by thousands of people in diverse audiences in
events in New York, Illinois, and California. The group proposes to extend this
public outreach by further developing this exhibit, adding new interactive
components and updated results. This will be done with the involvement of
educators and students from the NYU Department of Teaching and Learning, who
will help make this exhibit even more accessible to the K-12 population. The
exhibit will be shown at science fairs and other
venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the second effort, the NYU group is actively
involved in the important area of Data Preservation and Open Access. The
statistical tools (under the name RECAST) that continue to be developed as part
of this proposal have broader impacts within the physics community, and are
gaining attention outside of physics as well. The question of how to archive
data in high energy physics that allows future use (such as confronting new
theories with preexisting data) is a daunting one, as the expertise and software
required to do such analysis fade with time. The RECAST framework proposed by
the NYU group represents a new approach to data management and access, which can
address a crucial issue for the LHC and serve as a model for a broad range of
scientific disciplines.