* 1205518
* CI-P: REFT - A Reconfigurable Execution Framework Testbed for data-driven and extreme scale computing
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Matthew Link, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2015
* USD 98,820.00

The field of supercomputing is experiencing a rapid change in system structure,
programming models, and software environments in response to advances in
application requirements and in underlying enabling technologies. Traditional
parallel programming approaches have relied on static resource allocation and
task scheduling through programming interfaces such as MPI and OpenMP. These
methods are reaching their efficiency and scalability limits on the new emerging
classes of systems, spurring the creation of innovative dynamic strategies and
software tools, including advanced runtime system software and programming
interfaces that use them. To accelerate adoption of these next-generation
methods, a unique environment is being created and operated that provides a
comprehensive ensemble of state-of-the-art runtime system software and
programming interfaces. Taken from previous research and development projects,
some at the host institution, Indiana University, and others from premiere
research organizations across the nation, these execution systems are integrated
in a single supported Reconfigurable Execution Framework Testbed (REFT) and made
available to parallel application algorithm developers as well as researchers in
advanced tools for parallel computing. The basic REFT hardware capabilities
include a medium- scale heterogeneous Linux cluster with multi-core sockets,
high-bandwidth interconnect, and mass storage; field-programmable gate arrays;
and instrumentation for power measurement. ParalleX-based HPX-3, ETI SWARM,
Berkeley GasNet, Rice University?s Habanero, Illinois? Charm++, Cray Chapel, IBM
X-10, and UPC among other programming and execution models comprise the major
components of this unique facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supercomputing is
making a sharp corner turn in form, function, and methodologies. Unfortunately,
few in the field are skilled in the use of the emerging execution and
programming models that are becoming increasingly critical to effectively
utilizing supercomputers to deliver quality science for extreme-scale
applications?either those at the highest end of the performance spectrum
(Petaflops currently and Exaflops at the end of the decade) or strong-scaled
fixed-size problems. REFT serves the NSF computational science community by
dramatically lowering the barrier to training, experimentation, and adoption of
new dynamic execution methods and systems. It provides full documentation, on-
line tutorials, in-house classes, and workshops for skill development and
community building for the broad US HPC community to accelerate application,
evaluation, and exploitation. As a repository for competing and complementary
software environments it provides a single site for conducting comparative
studies by end-users to establish best practices. As an NSF resource, it serves
to expedite and further goals of computational science by enabling effective
application of the next generation Petaflops-class computer systems of millions
of cores and eventual Exascale systems with billion-way concurrency.