* 1205411
* Neutrino Oscillation Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Robert McKeown, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2016
* USD 471,999.00

The last decade has produced a remarkable revolution in neutrino physics. We now
know that at least some of the three flavors of neutrino have finite mass, and
that flavor transformations occur through the process known as neutrino
oscillations. Neutrino flavor oscillations are governed by a matrix with three
mixing angles and a Charge-Parity (CP) violating phase. It is currently thought
that the possibility of CP symmetry violation in the neutrino sector is the best
possibility for explaining the apparent matter-antimatter asymmetry in the
universe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two of the three mixing angles have been well
determined by previous experiments. This award provides base support for work on
determining the final mixing angle (known as theta-13) through the precision
study of the oscillation of antineutrinos emitted from the Daya Bay Nuclear
Power Plant in China. This experiment has been under construction for several
years, and has just begun to acquire data using two of the full complement of
eight antineutrino detectors. The Daya Bay experiment has recently published
their initial results for theta-13. During the period covered by this award, it
is expected that an improved measurement will be
obtained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The group plans to
take advantage of their connection with the Thomas Jefferson National
Accelerator Facility (JLab) to partner with their renowned Office of Science
Education to enable them to impact science education in middle schools and high
schools. They will work with the JLab Science Activities for Teachers (JSAT)
program to update and expand their materials for middle school teachers in the
area of nuclear energy. Since the incident at Fukushima in Japan, the public
interest in nuclear power and its safety has been heightened. It is important to
provide teachers and students with up-to-date and accurate information related
to the issues associated with nuclear power. This subject fits well with the
group's interest in also exposing them to this group's neutrino research using
nuclear power reactors.