* 1205392
* Rydberg Atom Interactions and Collective Behavior
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* James Shaffer, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2016
* USD 405,000.00

The extremely large polarizability of Rydberg atoms leads to interactions at
internuclear distances of microns that are larger than their kinetic energies at
ultracold temperatures (T less than 1 milliKelvin). The long range interactions
make ultracold Rydberg atoms important systems for studying dipolar quantum
gases, building single photon sources and constructing quantum gates. Their
sensitivity to electric fields makes Rydberg atoms useful for applications in
sensing and measurement standards. The ability to generate quantum entangled
material particles using Rydberg atom dipole blockade, increase light matter
interaction times, and create exotic states, like macrodimers and trilobite
molecules, has further motivated the study of ultracold Rydberg atoms. Key
questions that we are addressing are: how can the anisotropy of the interactions
be controlled, what is the role of static background electric fields, how does
Rydberg atom-electron scattering in ultracold gases lead to the formation of
interesting states of matter and what happens when two Rydberg atoms interact at
short range? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the interaction between
ultracold ground state atoms and Rydberg atom electrons is being investigated
experimentally with a unique collision imaging spectrometer. Phase transitions
and magnetic phenomena that are predicted to occur due to the scattering of the
weakly bound Rydberg electron from the ground state atoms are being studied.
These experiments complement others on Rydberg atom- Rydberg atom interactions,
which quantitatively measure the anisotropy of the interactions and their
influence on phase transitions that are postulated to occur in ultracold Rydberg
gases. The results of these experiments are being compared to theory done by our
research group. This award supports two graduate students and enables
undergraduate research projects to be carried out on the apparatus.