* 1205158
* 14th Meeting of New Researchers in Statistics and Probability
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Ery Arias-Castro, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 12/31/2013
* USD 24,713.00

This proposal describes plans for the 14th Meeting of New Researchers in
Statistics and Probability, a conference series sponsored by the Institute of
Mathematical Statistics (IMS), to be organized by and held for junior
researchers. The primary objective is to provide a much needed venue for
interaction among new researchers. The proposed meeting will take place over
three days, July 26-28, 2012, at the University of California, San Diego, in La
Jolla, California. The meeting will be held immediately preceding the Joint
Statistical Meetings (JSM) in downtown San Diego. Participants will be
statisticians and probabilists who have received their Ph.D. within the past
five years or are expecting to receive their degree within the same year. Each
participant will present a talk or poster. Topics will cover a variety of areas
in statistics and probability, from theory and methods to applications. Senior
speakers will give plenary talks for inspiration and other senior researchers
will take part in discussion panels covering topics of importance for young
people embarking on an academic/research career, such as teaching, mentoring,
publishing and funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference series is
explicitly aimed at training the future leaders and workers in statistics and
probability. In helping to create networks of new researchers, it lays the
groundwork for future collaboration and the informal exchange of ideas and
knowledge. It is also critical for professional cohesion, which is particularly
important as research fields become more and more specialized. Meeting people
outside of one's research specialty area, and learning about their research,
favors a more comprehensive view of research, which is important when taking
editor positions and other professional service activities. The conference also
attracts participants with different backgrounds and nationalities, and
underrepresented groups --- women, minorities and people with disabilities ---
are explicitly encouraged to attend.&lt;br/&gt;Conference website:
http://www.math.ucsd.edu/~nrc2012/index.html