* 1205895
* Collaborative Research:  Coherent Control of Interactions among Ultracold Rydberg Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Michael Noel, Bryn Mawr College
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2016
* USD 328,284.00

This project is a collaborative effort between Bryn Mawr College and Ursinus
College in which we are exploring the coherent control of interactions among
ultracold Rydberg atoms with a combination of experimental and computational
efforts. When atoms in an ultracold gas are excited to weakly bound Rydberg
states, they can exchange energy through a dipole-dipole interaction. In many
cases this energy exchange proceeds quickly enough that the atoms are
essentially stationary, resembling an amorphous solid. This leads to complicated
many-body processes during the energy exchange that can be manipulated with a
variety of techniques. We are focusing our efforts on coherently controlling the
dipole-dipole energy exchange among atoms by exciting coherent superpositions of
initial states, arranging the Rydberg atoms in particular spatial patterns, and
manipulating the geometry and timing of the electric field used to tune this
energy exchange into resonance. These experiments are helping to expand the
toolkit for controlling atomic interactions. We are modeling the experiments
using parallel computing resources in order to contribute to the understanding
of the complex many-body interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cold Rydberg atoms
provide a rich system in which to explore a range of fundamental physics that is
of interest to a broad segment of the community. The precision with which both
the internal structure of each atom and the spatial arrangement of these atoms
can be controlled will allow us to study many-body and correlation effects for a
range of configurations. The interest in ultracold gases coupled by long range
dipole-dipole interactions has grown rapidly in recent years and is being
explored using atoms with large magnetic spins and heteronuclear molecules as
well as Rydberg atoms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will engage
undergraduates, with particular attention to attracting female students, at both
Bryn Mawr and Ursinus in computational and experimental research on ultracold
Rydberg atoms. Bryn Mawr and Ursinus are small, national liberal arts colleges
located in close proximity in southeastern Pennsylvania. Bryn Mawr awards a
small number of PhDs and this project will also support a graduate student. The
collaborative nature of the project will broaden opportunities for students at
both institutions.