* 1205534
* Highest Energy Physics with the Auger Observatory
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Paul Sommers, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 832,109.00

High-energy cosmic rays are important cosmic messengers that are producing new
insights about extreme processes in the universe. The Pierre Auger Cosmic Ray
Observatory has measured millions of cosmic rays. Some of the most interesting
are protons or atomic nuclei, whose arrival directions are correlated with the
large-scale distribution of matter within 250 million light years of the Earth
and thereby reveal which astrophysical objects are capable of producing these
extremely high energy particles. A primary advantage of the Auger Observatory in
studying cosmic rays is its complementary ground detector array, which detects
the cascade of particles produced in the atmosphere by the parent cosmic ray,
and ultraviolet telescopes, which image the pattern of nitrogen fluorescence
generated by the passage of the particle cascade through the atmosphere.
Combining these two techniques provides the best possible measurements of these
rarest of particles.

The Auger group at Pennsylvania State University has been involved with the
Auger project since 1992. With this award they will continue their work to
resolve the issues involved in utilizing the two detection techniques and
exploit the Auger measurements to deduce properties of particle interactions at
energies far beyond the reach of laboratory studies on Earth. The Pennsylvania
State University group will continue their established series of popular week-
long summer workshops for high school teachers that are based around new results
in cosmology and high-energy astrophysics. The concepts of basic college physics
are interwoven into the curriculum, so that teachers strengthen their working
knowledge of their core curriculum while getting an inside look at what is
happening at the forefront of astrophysics research. The teachers are provided
with knowledge and tools to use in their classrooms, to inspire and engage their
students, and to enrich their understanding of the scientific method.