* 1205457
* Partnership for Research and Education in Materials: Partnership for Advanced Functional Metamaterials (Meta-PREM)
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Theodore Norris, Norfolk State University
* Continuing Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 08/31/2018
* USD 3,430,000.00

Partnership for Advanced Functional Metamaterials (Meta-
PREM)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout human history, new materials have played a
pivotal role in the development of technologies and the progress of whole
civilizations. Terms such as Stone Age, Bronze Age, or Silicon Valley underscore
the defining societal impact that the discovery or harnessing of a new material
can foment. The beginning of the 21st century has coincided with the invention
of an entirely new materials platform - metamaterials - engineered multi-phase
composite materials containing inclusions that often have tailored shapes,
sizes, mutual arrangements and orientations. Such materials exhibit unparalleled
responses to many types of wave excitations, including electromagnetic, acoustic
and thermal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many applications of metamaterials systems and
devices, e.g. next-generation electronics operating at optical frequencies,
require both passive and active (amplifying or nonlinear) components. The
development of metamaterials over the past decade has focused primarily on
passive metamaterials. One of the two research foci of the Partnership is aimed
at the development of active metamaterials: tunable, nonlinear, and amplifying.
The other intriguing class of metamaterials, whose development has been
pioneered by the team members, is metamaterials with hyperbolic dispersion. In
one direction, the response of these unique materials to electromagnetic waves
is similar to that of metals. However, in an orthogonal direction, it is similar
to that of dielectrics. The studies of unparalleled classical and quantum
properties of such materials (including spontaneous emission, energy transfer,
and many others) comprise the second research focus of Meta-PREM. The research
will be performed in a highly collaborative manner by the partners with
complementary expertise and capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Meta-PREM
integrates the research and education efforts of a historically black
university, Norfolk State University, and three research-intensive institutions,
Michigan State University, Purdue University and Cornell University. The
project's education and outreach activities flow from identified complementary
strengths of the partners. This synergy allows for a range of relevant programs
that will benefit a diverse body of students in the full spectrum of the
education continuum, especially at the graduate level. Norfolk State
University's Ph.D. program in materials science and engineering is only five
years old, being the only STEM doctoral program on campus. By integrating NSU's
students and faculty with those at well-established graduate programs, Meta-PREM
will accelerate the young doctoral program towards maturation, effectively
increasing the capacity to produce a more diverse group of highly trained
materials science professionals.