* 1205189
* Center for Enabling New Technologies through Catalysis (CENTC) Phase II Renewal
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Karen Goldberg, University of Washington
* Cooperative Agreement
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2018
* USD 20,416,566.00

The Center for Enabling New Technologies Through Catalysis, or CENTC, brings
together a group of 18 investigators and their students in chemistry and
chemical engineering at 14 different institutions across North America. The
focus of this team is to develop fundamental science needed for the sustainable
production of chemicals and fuels. CENTC scientists will create and investigate
new reactions and catalyst systems for the selective cleavage and formation of
C-H, C-C, C-O, O-O and O-H bonds. The information gained will be exploited to
devise new methodologies for the chemical industry that are efficient,
inexpensive and environmentally benign. A broad scope of projects is being
pursued in CENTC including direct alkane functionalization, selective
defunctionalization of biomass, utilization of carbon dioxide as a feedstock
chemical, and the oxidation of water.

CENTC offers a collaborative training environment for students and postdoctoral
researchers, and includes education in innovation integrated throughout many
activities. The center has an industrial affiliates program that allows for
direct communication of CENTC research results to industry where they can be
developed for commercial use. Center research is focused on the basic science
that will underpin a range of new technologies for sustainable production of
chemicals, pharmaceuticals and fuels and thus have significant potential to
increase US competitiveness and to enhance our national security through an
increase in energy independence.

The Center for Enabling New Technologies Through Catalysis is led by the
University of Washington and is funded as part of the Centers for Chemical
Innovation (CCI) program.