* 1205148
* ON TARGET Technically &amp; Academically Ready for Global Employment in Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Amanda Stoecklein, State Fair Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

State Fair Community College, regional high schools, three universities, and
committed business partners are creating a pipeline for high school and
postsecondary students who possess an understanding of technical career
opportunities and are academically prepared to be successful in those careers.
This project aligns curriculum from high school through college into the
workplace and provides partner-developed activities for improving students'
knowledge-based skills. The focus is on building mathematics and communication
skills using effective and strategic teaching methods that interweave acquired
knowledge and skills with applied experiences in business and industry. The
project promotes career exploration that results in students making informed
decisions regarding technical career fields. The collaboration of classroom
instructors and business and industry leaders in developing, implementing and
assessing all aspects of the project demonstrates the intellectual merit of this
project. Technology is being used to innovatively bring business and industry
into classroom experiences so students are making connections between what they
are learning and why and how it is being used in the real world. The broad
impact of this partnership project is that students from rural areas with
limited life experiences are acquiring an empirical foundation in technical
careers that translates into a strong, excited and technically prepared
workforce.