* 1205273
* Conference Meeting:  How Can the History and Philosophy of Science Contribute to Contemporary Science Teaching?
* EHR,DRL
* 02/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Peter Garik, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 06/30/2016
* USD 81,811.00

This project will support a conference on teaching history and philosophy of
science in K-12 science classes. The history and philosophy of science (HPS) are
important topics that play a significant role in scholarship about science: its
historical and current development; its methods and innovations in such methods;
and its philosophical and theoretical bases. HPS is also included, in some form
or other, in many state's science standards and in national standards and reform
efforts. Despite this prevalence and relevance, there is surprisingly little
empirical evidence on how HPS should be taught to achieve desired learning
outcomes. This is particularly true of the relationship of HPS to science
achievement, as measurable by most standardized tests, but it is also true of
the relationship of HPS to other outcomes, such as inquiry skills, practices of
science, or scientific reasoning ability.

The present conference will envision a research agenda about the role of HPS in
K-12 education. It will include scholars from a variety of fields: HPS; STEM
disciplines; science education research; psychology and cognitive sciences; and
education research methods. The 2.5-day conference will combine three
activities: a one-day symposium with public lectures and panel discussions by US
and international scholars on HPS, science education, cognitive science, and
education research; a one-day invitational workshop to set an agenda for future
research and ideas for proposals for future funded projects; and a meeting of
the project steering committee to synthesize points from Days 1-2 and to
coordinate writing of a monograph, journal special issue, or similar compilation
of reports to the field.