* 1205113
* E-books and Mobile Apps for Technician Education  (E-MATE)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Michael Qaissaunee, Brookdale Community College
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 09/30/2017
* USD 899,360.00

A rapidly increasing number of students have strong connections with their
mobile devices. To leverage this connection, this project is creating a generic
framework for the development of e-books and mobile applications in STEM
education. The framework is initially used to create e-books and mobile apps for
Photonics and Networking courses in conjunction with content experts at two
National ATE Centers of Excellence. The framework consists of templates, sample
code, documentation and other materials that are enabling faculty and
institutions to create their own e-books and mobile apps. The framework
development is broad-based, covering iOS, Android, and web-based platforms for
maximizing adoption. The two ATE Center partners work closely with the project's
team to ensure the optimal integration of the best pedagogical approaches and
technology to benefit student learning and to support faculty teaching using
these new tools. Evaluation of the deliverables includes testing by both end
users (students and faculty) and developers interested in using the project
framework (other institutions), as well as assessing potential gains in student
learning. The broader impact of the work is potentially substantial since users
can download the e-books and mobile apps from the respective market places such
as Apple's App Store, the Android Market, and amazon.com at much reduced costs
than for traditional textbooks. Additional dissemination of the materials and
framework is broad through the OP-TEC and ICT Centers, as well as a website and
workshops, forums, and presentations at national conferences.