* 1205484
* CI-P:  Collaborative Research: LexLink:  Aligning WordNet, FrameNet, PropBank and VerbNet
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Martha Palmer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 05/31/2013
* USD 25,000.00

This Computing Research Infrastructure planning grant addresses two challenges
for automatic systems performing deep semantic processing: identifying the
context-appropriate sense of polysemous words and interpreting the meanings and
interrelations of verbs and nouns in event-denoting phrases. Preliminary steps
are taken for aligning and linking four existing widely used lexical resources
(WordNet, FrameNet, PropBank and VerbNet) with different but complementary
contents and coverage. Methods for completing current cross-resource links and
full transitive closure are explored and tested. The resulting infrastructure
(LexLink) is designed to make the resources fully interoperable, capitalizing on
their particular strengths with respect to word sense disambiguation and
Semantic Role labeling.

Four activities are carried out in the context of planning LexLink. First, a
workshop is held where key representatives of the Natural Language Processing
and computational semantics communities articulate needs and requirements for
the planned resource and offer advice on algorithms, annotation techniques and
evaluation. Second, a subsection of cross-resource links for word senses and
Semantic Role labels (Agent, Instrument, etc.) resulting from the automatic
transitive closure is evaluated, yielding estimates for the error rate and
leading to fine-tuning of algorithms. Third, current best performing mapping
algorithms for word senses and Semantic Role labels are evaluated against a
human-annotated Gold Standard. Fourth, new Gold Standard data are created for
additional training and testing and to refine existing algorithms. As a whole,
the work provides a solid foundation for a resource with significant beneficial
impact on a range of natural language applications, including machine
translation, text summarization and sentiment analysis affecting areas such as
health care, marketing, and education.