* 1205219
* Studies in Mathematical Physics: Advection, Convection and Turbulent Transport
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Charles Doering, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2017
* USD 708,501.00

This research program is focused on the development and application of rigorous
analytical and computational approaches to some longstanding problems in fluid
dynamics and turbulence with the goal of deriving reliable mathematical
estimates of physically important quantities for solutions of the advection,
advection-diffusion, and Navier-Stokes and related systems of partial
differential equations. These have important applications in the applied
physical sciences and engineering, including weather prediction and climate
modeling. &lt;br/&gt;The project has three major components:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advection: Mathematical mixing measures introduced by the
principal investigator and collaborators will be applied to study solutions of
the advection and advection-diffusion equations as models of laminar and
turbulent mixing. Analysis will place absolute limits on mixing for passive
tracers in terms of bulk and/or statistical features of the stirring flows, and
it will indicate key features of particularly efficient stirring. New searches
for optimal stirring strategies will be undertaken, and the mixing effectiveness
of turbulence will be investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Convection: Issues in
thermal convection will be studied via analysis and direct numerical simulation.
The sharpness of new rigorous limits on heat transport in the classical two-
dimensional model of Rayleigh-Benard convection will be tested via asymptotic
analysis and computation of laminar flows and high Rayleigh number simulations
of turbulent flows. New estimates for three-dimensional convection will be
pursued exploiting the maximum principle for the temperature equation in the
Boussinesq approximation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy dissipation and enstrophy
production: A major new program to determine maximal enstrophy production in the
three-dimensional Navier-Stokes equations over finite time intervals will be
initiated. Mathematical and computational techniques in the context of maximal
palinstrophy production in the two dimensional Navier-Stokes equations will be
developed. New methods for determining absolute limits on the bulk and time
averaged turbulent energy dissipation rate in solutions of the Navier-Stokes
equations will be sought for simple flow setups where current analysis methods
fail. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: These projects are suitable for
doctoral students and postdoctoral researchers at the University of Michigan.
The Principal Investigator's research routinely involves collaborations with
graduate students, postdocs, junior faculty, and distinguished senior
researchers in a variety of different departments at institutions across the
United States and beyond. These interactions foster broad dissemination of
results, stimulate and motivate new investigations, and promote transfer of
mathematical methods across disciplinary, institutional, and national
boundaries. The Principal Investigator is also actively engaged in organized
efforts to encourage and enhance the participation of women and members of
under-represented groups in physics and mathematics education and research.