* 1205103
* Integration of Natural and Synthetic Biomaterials with Organic Electronics 2012 Symposium Materials Research Society Spring Meeting (MRS) at San Francisco, CA on April 9-13, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2012,07/31/2012
* J. Ardie Butch Dillen, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 07/31/2012
* USD 12,500.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;1205103, Bettinger&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The application of flexible and nonconventional electronics to
biomedical engineering has the potential to transform both disciplines. First,
flexible devices may be used to unlock mysteries of biological systems at
various levels. This symposium provides a great opportunity for scientists and
engineers from around the world, and from many different disciplines to share
their results and insights in the field of nonconventional electronics with a
specific focus on the application of these devices to biomedical engineering. As
compared to other symposia on flexible electronics, this unique effort will
focus on synergistic interactions with neural engineering and cellular phenomena
to address unmet needs. Existing symposia are firmly grounded in either the
field of biomaterials, organic electronics, or devices. However, this symposium
aims to integrate all three through rich interactions. The NSF funding will
increase the affordability of the meeting for oral and poster presenters, who
consist mainly of young and emerging investigators in the field with a strong
focus on participation by students and postdoctoral
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;This NSF funding will
allow the student attendees to become familiar with state of the art in micro-
systems, structures, and devices for modulating cell function and medical
devices. Specifically, research groups across the country will be encouraged to
support undergraduate participation in the poster sessions, as a means of
exposing students to a high level of research at an early age. This symposium
will also inform investigators at all levels about the unmet needs and emerging
opportunities in the areas of research at the inter face between non
conventional electronics and biomedical engineering.