* 1205465
* Study of Plasmon-Assisted Cell Transfection
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2018
* Eric Mazur, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2018
* USD 688,379.00

In this project the PI will combine techniques and expertise from physics and
the life sciences to advance fundamental knowledge and providing a new technique
for gene and drug delivery. The proposed approach is based on plasmon-mediated
cell transfection. Cell transfection by femtosecond laser is an attractive
alternative; however, this technique is currently limited to single-cell
transfection. The PI will address the important goal of high-throughput, low-
toxicity, and high-efficiency DNA delivery to cells by using plasmon devices
that possess micrometer-sized points of extreme local field enhancements to
porate cell membranes when irradiated by an ultrafast laser. By running parallel
theoretical modeling of the field enhancement, fabrication of the substrates,
and experimental analysis of the light-plasmon-cell interaction and DNA
diffusion, the project will provide a powerful tool with broad applicability to
transfection of numerous cell lines. The method proposed in this project will
address challenging genetics questions and has the potential for transformative
impact in the field of genetics and, more broadly, any biomedical research
involving transfection. It will enable efficient, safe, and high-throughput
introduction of genetic vectors into mammalian cells. This is the first step
toward studying and optimizing the modification of genetic expression.
Simultaneously, it will provide further insight in the light mediated
transfection mechanisms. This work will also contribute to the education and the
training of future multidisciplinary scientists through research-based education
of undergraduate and graduate students. The work will be broadly disseminated to
the general public.