* 1205796
* Neutrino Physics and Astrophysics with IceCube at Stony Brook University
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Joanna Kiryluk, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 06/30/2016
* USD 516,122.00

The IceCube Neutrino Observatory (ICNO) is a one cubic kilometer neutrino
telescope at the South Pole with unique capabilities to observe high-energy
phenomena in the Universe. Its primary goal is to discover cosmic neutrinos from
Active Galactic Nuclei, Gamma Ray Bursts, or other astrophysical sources. The
IceCube design makes it possible to discover extra-terrestrial point sources of
muon-neutrino flux as well as a diffuse flux of electron, muon, and tau
neutrinos that may originate from multiple sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will provide support for this group to analyze data obtained with the
recently completed ICNO. They plan to measure the spectrum of yet unobserved
high energy (~ TeV neutrino energies) atmospheric neutrino-induced cascades and
to make sensitive searches for the diffuse flux of neutrino-induced muons. The
combination of these search channels is anticipated to enhance the discovery
potential of all-flavor diffuse neutrino flux searches. Once a signal is
observed, the information about the neutrino flavor composition at Earth can be
used to study the initial flavor composition of these fluxes at their source.
The group will also study directional cascade reconstruction to search for up-
and down-going neutrino-induced high energy cascades. This serves both
astrophysical purposes and also the PI's longer-term interest to gain
sensitivity to the high-energy neutrino-nucleon scattering cross section.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this award involve Stony Brook
University's educational and outreach programs. The PI will take part in the
Women in Science and Engineering (WISE) program, which is designed to increase
the number of women in science, math, and engineering. This will consist of a
WISE introductory research course unit on cosmic ray research and detection, and
in facilitating related research opportunities for undergraduate WISE students.
The group will also participate in outreach activities for local high school
teachers and students through K-12 and Summer programs organized by the Center
for Science and Mathematics Education (CESAME) and in activities aimed at the
general public, such as the Stony Brook Astronomy Open Nights.