* 1205263
* Planning Grant for the The Howard University Institute of Psychological Science Excellence in STEM Workforce Development and Education of Women and Girls
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Cynthia Winston, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2016
* USD 218,956.00

The primary goal of this planning grant proposal is to achieve the following
objectives (1) complete two archival data manuscript projects- the first on
Black women?s lives and roles in the history of science generally and their
leadership at HBCUs in particular and the second on gender differences in
achievement motivation and identity of Black adolescents in an HBCU middle
school of mathematics and science; and (2) solidify formal collaborative
partnership memorandum of understanding with universities and colleges,
industry, a professional school, industry, and a national laboratory. The
proposal adopts a behavioral science theoretical model to engage in activities
that will fill significant gaps in the scholarship of the intersections of race,
gender, and STEM workforce development and education. In addition, it also
proposes to provide a firm foundation for the formulation of future competitive
grant proposals and philanthropic giving for this
institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of the project's short term broad
impacts, it proposes to establish formal collaborative partnerships to engage
diverse institution types with complementary strengths and proven track records
of leading the nation in broadening the participation of underrepresented groups
in STEM. Moreover, it proposes to produce and broadly disseminate scholarship
that can inform future theory, method, and practice in
secondaryandhighereducationactionresearch. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results
from this project will be disseminated broadly both nationally and
internationally through the professional societies and networks of the research
team, as well as through the Howard University Office of Communications. The
global competitiveness of the nation and its ability to reestablish itself as a
world leader in scientific and technological education and innovation requires
significant federal, corporate, private, and institutional investment in the
scholarship and professional development of female innovators (Tchen &amp;
Jarret, 2011). The sustained engagement of behavioral scientists is an important
but typically overlooked national strategy for STEM human talent development.