* 1205031
* Student Entrepreneurs: A Reality-Based Video Series following the STEM Virtual Enterprise
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Stuart Schulman, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,073,442.00

Building on a successful track record to infuse soft-skills and entrepreneurship
into STEM courses, Advanced Technological Education Television (ATETV), Baruch
College, the Institute for Virtual Enterprise (IVE) at the City University of
New York (CUNY), and Pellet Productions, Inc. are developing a series of web
videos that depict students from four community colleges creating science and
technology businesses, using the NSF/ATE-funded STEM Virtual Enterprise (STEM-
VE) pedagogy. In this model, students assume the roles of members of business
enterprises and operate their businesses face-to-face in teams. STEM-VE is a
modular, active-learning pedagogical framework for delivering the content of
existing IT, biotechnology and electronics courses and teaching technical,
business and interpersonal skills within the context of an entrepreneurial
experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The videos being developed have three primary
audiences and serve different purposes: 1) as a catalyst for interest in STEM
entrepreneurship among STEM and business students, 2) as an instructional tool
for entrepreneurial education within the STEM classroom, and 3) as a
professional development series for faculty seeking to incorporate
entrepreneurial components into their STEM classes. The first set of videos
consist of dramatic and engaging reality-TV style videos showcasing students in
STEM-VE classes engaged in various hands-on, real-world STEM business enterprise
activities within their virtual firms. These videos are designed to stimulate
other students' interest in and excitement about working with STEM enterprises.
The project is also producing professional development videos showing faculty
how to incorporate similar VE content and activities into their curricula, that
students can also view in those classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Formative
assessment guides video development in the project using input from both
students and faculty. The project adds to the body of evaluation results on
effective practices in STEM-VE entrepreneurship education by tracking the gains
in students' learning. Wide dissemination is accomplished through high
visibility with other ATE Centers (many of whose directors serve on the advisory
board) and through the websites of ATE TV.