* 1205301
* Semiconductor Cavity QED
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Galina Khitrova, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 12/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

This project builds on the breakthrough observation of accelerated decay
(Purcell) of the resonant near-field coupling between two "oscillators" -- one
the typical gain of a single semiconductor quantum well (InGaAs) and the other
the very strong absorption of an array of metallic (silver) split ring
resonators with very large dipole moments. The observation of this coupling is
possible because of the giant vacuum field produced by the split ring resonator
having a mode volume, V, a thousand times smaller than the minimum V for a
photonic crystal slab cavity fabricated in a dielectric (silicon or GaAs). One
can predict from the quantum well results that one should even be able to see
coupling between such a resonator and a single stationary quantum dot -- the
principal goal of this project -- thus opening a new regime for light-matter
(resonator-emitter) interaction. Usually, Purcell enhancement (proportional to
Q/V) is achieved in a dielectric cavity of very high quality factor, Q. Thus,
enhancement occurs only for an emitter lying within the very narrow range of
frequencies of the cavity peak. In contrast here, the Q of the split ring
resonator is only of order 10; nonetheless, the Purcell enhancement is still
large because of the metallic resonator's very tiny mode volume. Consequently,
emitters with transitions lying anywhere within the very broad resonance are
subjected to a very large vacuum field and have their spontaneous emission
accelerated, resulting in overlap of their radiatively broadened
spectra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of fundamental atomic and
semiconductor cavity QED research have had lasting impact on semiconductor laser
technology. A specific ongoing example is the development of the vertical-cavity
surface-emitting laser (VCSEL) pioneered by a graduate from this group. Single
quantum dot cavity QED enables nanoscience to go beyond traditional nonlinear
optics and laser physics into a new regime with dynamical processes and active
devices now involving quantum dots and photons taken one by one. This research
on quantum optics in monolithic solid-state cavities would continue to forge new
links between the AMO and nanophotonics communities begun by the observation of
strong coupling reported in a highly-cited Nature article.