* 1205321
* CI-P: Collaborative Research: Advanced Text Analysis Infrastructure for Software Engineering
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2014
* Emily Hill, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 05/31/2014
* USD 38,307.00

This planning project brings together the community to begin addressing the
challenges of using text analysis (i.e., the analysis of the information
extracted from the natural language used in software artifacts and program code)
in software engineering. A set of workshops will be organized with researchers
in the software engineering community interested in the use of text analysis, in
order to elicit requirements for the design of the necessary infrastructure for
the research community. The common infrastructure of foundational text analyses
for the software domain will include software libraries, data, and educational
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the textual information embedded in
software artifacts, program code and documentation encodes the software?s domain
incepts and developers? knowledge about them, it is critical in supporting
developers to effectively maintain today?s software and it is essential to the
other stake- holders in the software engineering process, including managers,
clients, and users. A study of recent literature shows that over 25 distinct
software engineering tasks, ranging from requirements analysis to program
comprehension, utilize textual analysis based tools. This project?s outcomes
will have a broad impact, enabling researchers to: combine different types of
text analysis techniques; transfer results of successful research to industry
and facilitate entry for software engineering researchers in applying text
analysis techniques; integrate new components for exploration of novel
approaches to specific analyses; gain continual user evaluation of text
analysis-based software engineering tools; and enable other researchers and
practitioners to easily leverage text analysis to solve new software engineering
problems. The long-term goal is to create such an infrastructure, which will
allow text analysis to integrate seamlessly with current technology and
environments used by software engineers. The increase in software size and
complexity, as well as larger development teams, have made it significantly more
challenging for humans to maintain software without tools to support them.