* 1205396
* Lattice Field Theory and Hadronic Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2017
* Rajamani Narayanan, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 04/30/2017
* USD 308,991.00

Numerical studies of non-abelian gauge theories coupled to fermions in different
representations of the gauge group will form the central focus of all projects
in this proposal. Quantum chromodynamics (QCD) belongs to the class of theories
we will investigate. The aim is to understand confinement and chiral symmetry
breaking, the two features that help understand mass generation and much of the
low energy non-perturbative aspects of these theories. We will consider the
SU(N) gauge group and consider the limit of a large number of colors (N). We
will couple the gauge theory to quarks in the adjoint representation. Using a
phenomenon called reduction, we will be able to numerically study the theory on
a single site lattice with the number of quark flavors extended to take on any
real value. This will enable us to study conformal and near-conformal theories
and help us understand mass generation. The de-confinement transition in QCD is
currently under intense experimental investigation and we will study the role of
baryonic chemical potential in the large-N limit of QCD. Two-dimensional fermion
will be used as a probe to study the strong to weak coupling transition in the
large N limit of QCD-like theories. We will study the effect of quark masses in
multi-favor QCD and, in particular, consider the case of negative quark masses
with the aim of identifying a curve in the space of mass parameters where one
has massless pions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quarks carry a color charge
and nuclear matter is formed from the binding of colored quarks mediated by
gluons. Quantum chromodynamics (QCD) is the theory that describes the
interaction of these color charges. Experiments have shown that quarks come in
three colors but all nuclear matter is color neutral. Massless quarks and gluons
give rise to nuclear matter that has mass. An understanding of this mass
generation is of fundamental importance and this project will address various
approaches to this problem by focusing on QCD-like theories in the limit of
large number of colors. Such theories are closely related to recent developments
in string theory and we will be able to make connections between field theory
and string theory. The scientific methods involve analytical calculations and
numerical computations. A post-doctoral fellow with prior experience in this
area during his/her recent graduate work will be mentored by the PI to work on
several aspects of the proposal. Computer clusters will be used for numerical
computations and the results obtained as part of this proposal will be presented
at international conferences in nuclear and particle physics.