* 1205412
* RUI - Vibrational Structure of the Gd Isotopes
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Shelly Lesher, University of Wisconsin-La Crosse
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Hicks
* 05/31/2015
* USD 142,000.00

This project aims to address a persistent question in our understanding of
atomic nuclei. The nature of low-lying excitations, K=0+ bands in deformed
nuclei remain enigmatic in the field. The effort focuses on the search for
vibrational excitations in the Gadolinium isotopes. Measurements will be
conducted at the University of Kentucky Accelerator Facility (UKY), and analysis
will be performed at the Institute for Structure &amp; Nuclear Astrophysics
(ISNAP) at the University of Notre Dame (ND) during the three summers of the
duration of the grant period and at the University of Wisconsin - La Crosse
(UW-L) during the academic year. The UW-L group will set-up, run, and analyze a
series of (n,n'gamma) experiments during this time. To prepare the students for
this summer work, the UW-L Nuclear Science Group will concentrate on detector
work and analysis during the academic year. The results will be broadly
disseminated through publications and conference presentations by the PI and
undergraduate researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary broader impact of
this project is to promote teaching and learning, while extending scientific
innovation and understanding. All aspects of this project will be completed in a
collaborative environment with UW-L undergraduates. The project will support an
undergraduate research program that has a mentoring plan based on teaching
rigorous analytical principles and on engaging undergraduates in research as
freshmen or sophomores. Early engagement provides students with adequate time to
develop advanced skills and participate in multiple stages of research, from
experimental design to dissemination at conferences and in publications. The
UW-L Nuclear Group strives to quickly develop a sense of independence in the
undergraduate researcher. The goal is to continue to do relevant, potentially
transformative science that is valued by the scientific community as a whole and
simultaneously to transform the students from passive classroom learners to
active researchers as they take responsibility for their particular research.
This is accomplished by having regular group meetings and frequent individual
planning meetings but then allowing the students to work independently with
modern instrumentation. As a result, they learn planning, running experiments,
analysis, modeling, and communication skills. Experience shows that
undergraduate research enhances a student's education and better prepares the
student for graduate work or for a wide variety of science careers in either
industry or academia.