* 1205977
* Fundamental Studies in Nuclear Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Bradley Filippone, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2016
* USD 2,234,925.00

Technical Description of Project:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our project - Fundamental
Studies in Nuclear Physics - at California Institute of Technology is primarily
focused on experimental research addressing fundamental properties of the free
neutron. In particular we will continue taking data with the UCNA experiment
while also developing hardware for construction of a new, highly sensitive
experiment to search for the neutron's electric dipole moment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UCNA experiment has already produced a precision
measurement of the beta-asymmetry in neutron decay using Ultra-Cold Neutrons for
the first time. This quantity allows a sensitive test of the unitarity of the
CKM quark-mixing matrix and has the potential to provide evidence for new
physics beyond the Standard Model of particle interactions. With recent
improvements to the apparatus we are poised to improve the precision on the
asymmetry down to ~ 0.3% with additional data-taking and analysis during the
period of this grant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the new electric dipole
moment experiment - nEDM at the Spallation Neutron Source at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory - is to improve the sensitivity by a factor of 100 compared to
previous measurements; observation of an electric dipole moment signals
violation of time-reversal and charge-parity (CP) symmetry, and could provide
important information related to the origin of the matter-antimatter asymmetry
of the universe and the new physical phenomena that is responsible.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description of
Project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our project at Caltech is primarily focused on
studying fundamental properties of the free neutron. The neutron is an unstable
particle and decays with a ten minute half-life into a proton, an electron and
an anti-neutrino. We are making precision measurements of the neutron decay
using very slow neutrons that can be stored in bottles. These measurements
should allow us to make the most precise measurements of the distribution of
electrons from the decay of spin-polarized neutrons. These data can push our
understanding of the neutron's decay to the limits of theoretical understanding
and may indicate that our current picture is incomplete and must be revised.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are also developing a new experiment to search for an
electric dipole for the free neutron. An electric dipole is a separation of the
plus and minus charge within this neutral particle. The existence of this dipole
would signal a significant breakdown of so-called Charge-Parity (CP) symmetry. A
significant breakdown of this symmetry has been suggested to explain why the
universe is dominated by material composed of standard particles with virtually
no anti-particles present in the universe. This puzzle (more matter than anti-
matter) has stumped physicists for many years and we hope to discover and
measure the neutron's electric dipole to help explain this basic property of the
universe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We also note that participation by postdoctoral
scholars as well as graduate and undergraduate students is an essential part of
the research program, affording young researchers exceptional opportunities to
advance their training and education in this frontier area of nuclear physics.