* 1205600
* Cascade-based Search for Tau Neutrinos in IceCube Data
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Dawn Williams, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 07/31/2013
* USD 184,000.00

The recently completed IceCube neutrino observatory, located near the geographic
South Pole, is collecting physics data in the largest instrumented volume of any
neutrino detector. The complete IceCube detector instruments a full cubic
kilometer of ice, including a densely spaced "DeepCore" component at the center
of the detector. IceCube has the greatest sensitivity of any detector to
astrophysical neutrinos at TeV - PeV energies. DeepCore extends IceCube's range
to energies near 10 GeV where IceCube's large sample of atmospheric neutrinos is
complementary to existing long baseline accelerator neutrino experiments. The
next three years will see the exploitation of the full dataset of IceCube, with
rich possibilities for neutrino physics and
astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award continues support for the IceCube
analysis group at the University of Alabama (UA) to explore cascade-based
neutrino searches in the tau neutrino channel. At high energies, the tau channel
is free of atmospheric neutrino background, making tau neutrino detection a
"smoking gun" for an astrophysical source. The UA group will focus on combining
the superior energy resolution of cascades with the unique waveforms and
improved direction resolution of tau neutrinos. DeepCore will enhance the search
for astrophysical tau neutrinos at energies down to 100 TeV where fluxes are
expected to be higher and neutrinos can be observed from both hemispheres of the
sky. At low energies around 25 GeV, where the tau neutrino appearance
probability from atmospheric neutrino oscillation is maximal, the UA group will
improve the directional and energy resolution of cascade reconstruction
algorithms in order to search for the appearance of tau neutrino cascades in
DeepCore.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: &lt;br/&gt;The University of
Alabama is located in the diverse community of Tuscaloosa, and the university
has a strong commitment to undergraduate and interdisciplinary research. The PI
has developed an activity for high school students based on diffusion cloud
chambers and has presented this activity to local physics and chemistry high
school teachers through the UA Science in Motion Program. The PIs will continue
to work with ASIM to bring high energy physics activities to the high school
classroom. The UA Department of Physics and Astronomy has a strong public
outreach program, and the PIs will continue public outreach activities at the UA
campuses in Tuscaloosa and Birmingham.