* 1205445
* RUI: Collaborative Research: CI-P: Reciprosody - A Repository for Prosodically Annotated Material
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Andrew Rosenberg, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Prosody is a critical component of spoken communication. Loosely defined,
prosody is ?how words are spoken?, as opposed to ?what words are said?. Prosody
is typically defined to include pitch, intensity, and timing -- and systematic
variation in these parameters can reinforce or augment a speaker?s intended
meaning. Prosody provides important information at every linguistic level,
disambiguating syntax, augmenting semantics and pragmatic information, e.g. by
conveying information about phrasal grouping and phrase-level prominence.
Emotions and other speaker-state information are also communicated through a
speaker?s prosody.

Although this aspect of speech is important, it remains under-investigated. A
major limiting factor is the lack of large sample of prosodically labeled
speech. Prosody researchers at CUNY, Columbia and MIT are developing
Reciprosody, a web source of prosodically annotated data and tools for analysis.
Reciprosody makes critical resources for the study and teaching of prosody
available to a growing and diverse population of researchers, students, and
technologists. This website hosts data in any language, annotated under any
prosody standard. The only restriction for hosting data in the repository is
that it must be made freely available for academic and educational activities.

Reciprosody is not merely a passive repository, but an active resource for
researchers and educators to communicate with each other on a regular basis.
This enables the resource to be a center not only for annotated data, but
information and support related to ongoing prosody research.