* 1205173
* Search for Continuous Gravitational Waves from Isolated and Binary Neutron Stars
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* J. Keith Riles, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2016
* USD 980,000.00

This research project will focus on a number of areas related to the Laser
Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) Experiment: 1) co-leading
the ongoing collaboration search for continuous gravitational waves; 2)
developing new algorithms for detecting quasi-periodic sources from both
isolated and binary neutron stars and 3) detector characterization of Advanced
LIGO interferometers focused on spectral line identification and mitigation. The
work to be carried out thus includes both searching in existing LIGO data for
evidence of rapidly spinning, non-axisymmetric neutron stars in our galactic
neighborhood and preparations for searches in the far more sensitive data
expected from Advanced LIGO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Discovery of gravitational
waves from astrophysical objects will mark a major milestone in science,
simultaneously confirming one of the fundamental predictions of gravitational
physics, while opening up an entirely new field of astronomy. The detection of
such waves from rotating neutron stars would be especially interesting because
many such sources are expected to continue emitting for long durations, allowing
follow-up investigation of increasing precision, and because it is believed that
these waves will provide insight into the poorly known structure of these exotic
stars. The research to be carried out, on both the instrumental and analytical
sides, will provide training to undergraduate and graduate students in state-of-
the-art science at the frontier of knowledge.