* 1205270
* Profiling singularities of geometric PDE
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Dan Knopf, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2016
* USD 160,679.00

This project is concerned with nonlinear parabolic partial differential
equations (PDE) and systems satisfied by geometric objects evolving by
geometrically natural quantities such as curvature. These PDE are used in
programs to evolve given geometries toward ones which are in suitable senses
"optimal" or "canonical," and which are thus amenable to classification. But
because these PDE generically develop singularities, a classification of those
singular behaviors is necessary for the successful completion of those programs.
Analyzing formation of (finite- or infinite-time) singularities is the unifying
goal of this project. A key approach is the use of matched asymptotics, a
technique that can provide the most precise description of the set of points on
which a solution becomes singular, and of the behavior of the solution in a
space-time neighborhood of that singularity. Major objectives of this proposal
include: (1) removing symmetry hypotheses in asymptotic singularity analysis for
mean curvature flow (MCF) and Ricci flow (RF), thereby proving that certain
singularity profiles are "universal" in a rigorous sense; (2) constructing and
analyzing (non-generic) Type-II RF singularities, which form more slowly than
the natural parabolic rate and thus feature faster curvature blow-up; (3)
constructing codimension-2 RF singularities and studying their asymptotics,
genericity, and stability; (4) constructing and studying new examples of RF
local singularity formation for complex surfaces (and complex manifolds of
higher dimension) with applications to the classification of singularity models
in those dimensions; (5) studying stability (properly understood) of product
structures and related curvature conditions preserved by RF in low dimensions;
(6) showing that singular profiles of geometric PDE depend continuously on their
initial data, with applications to topology; and (7) studying formation and
stability of infinite-time RF singularity models under distinct convergence
schemes designed to provide asymptotics at temporal infinity, along with other
geometric information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of geometric
partial differential equations (PDE) has surprising similarities with nonlinear
hyperbolic and dispersive equations. Furthermore, the PDE that arise in
curvature flows are remarkably similar to equations that model heat propagation,
the movement of oil in shale and thin films, combustion in porous media, and
certain effects in plasma physics. In all of these applications, the underlying
models are fundamentally nonlinear, a property which causes the associated PDE
to develop various critical or singular behaviors. The utility of these models
requires a precise mathematical understanding of these behaviors. This project
will further develop mathematical techniques, particularly matched asymptotic
expansions, that should help the analysis of singularity formation in these
varied systems and applications.