* 1205732
* Collaborative Research: Modeling Advanced LIGO Gravitational Wave Sources and Their Electromagnetic Counterparts
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* E. Sterl Phinney, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* James Neff
* 07/31/2015
* USD 248,589.00

This award will support a multifaceted theoretical study of the mergers of
various types of compact objects such as neutron stars. Understanding the full
sequence of events in these mergers is a great interdisciplinary challenge of
high current interest. The work will model binary formation and gravitational
wave-driven inspiral; the hydrodynamics of mergers; the viscous, thermal and
nuclear evolution of the post merger remnant; the general relativistic radiation
hydrodynamics of the collapse to neutron stars and black holes (with its
associated gravitational wave signals); and the nuclear and radiation
hydrodynamics of the unbound ejecta that produces observable electromagnetic
(light, radio wave, etc.) signals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major motivation is
to model both gravity wave and electromagnetic signatures from these mergers.
The two types of signatures provide important information about different
regions of the sources. Gravitational waves will determine the 'engine' of the
sources, their masses, spins, and inclinations. The electromagnetic signals will
provide the precise locations, compositions, and their relation to the rest of
astrophysics (nucleosynthesis, pulsars, magnetars, transients, Type Ia
supernovae, formation rates and progenitors). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will contribute to the training of graduate students and in regular student
exchanges between the participating institutions. Members of the research team
will continue their efforts to give non-technical lectures for the public, high
schools and undergraduate institutions, and consult on curricula, films, TV and
radio. The results of this research, on topics that tend to generate broad
interest (stellar collisions, explosions, collapse to black holes, gravitational
waves in space-time), will be incorporated into these activities. The team will
also make the results from this study widely available to the astrophysics
community.