* 1205946
* Quantum Engineering with Dissipation
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Thomas Killian, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2015
* USD 475,000.00

In the project entitled "Quantum Engineering with Dissipation," we create and
study strongly interacting quantum degenerate atomic gases, with a focus on
systems in which correlations are induced by strong inelastic, or dissipative,
interactions. Dissipation is emerging as a new tool for quantum engineering for
creating novel states of fundamental interest. We use dissipation to create
spatial correlations in strontium condensates in three-dimensional optical
lattices and study the dissipative analog of the superfluid-to-Mott-insulator
transition. An optical Feshbach resonance is used to create two-body inelastic
interactions, and the effects of three-body inelastic interactions can be
explored with Sr-86, which naturally has a large three-body decay rate. There
are many interesting properties to study in these systems, such as the criteria
for creation of particle correlations, excitation spectra, and adiabaticity
timescales for changing lattice and interaction parameters. In addition, in a
bulk system we will look at the response of a Bose condensate to a rapid quench
of the interaction strength from the weakly interacting to the strongly
interacting regime, which can be produced with an optical Feshbach resonance. Of
interest to experiments in a bulk system and lattice is the timescale for
development of spatial correlations in the many-body state.

When large numbers of particles come together and interact, new phenomena can
emerge that are unexpected from the basic form of the interaction between pairs
of particles. Superconductivity is a famous example of this. Understanding
strongly interacting, many-body systems is a grand challenge for many areas of
physics because of the promise of new material properties of technological
significance and also because the systems can be very complicated and they
stretch our understanding of the natural world. In the last decade, there have
been great advances in the creation and study of ultracold clouds of gaseous
atoms, which are cooled by lasers to temperatures around a millionth of a degree
above absolute zero. Ultracold atoms made in this way have the amazing property
that their interactions can be arbitrarily controlled, which opens the
possibility of using them to make designer materials or test models of
interacting, many-body systems. With the support of this National Science
Foundation grant, Prof. Killian's research group at Rice University in Houston,
Texas will develop new techniques for manipulating atom-atom interactions using
lasers and search for new emergent phenomena.

This work will involve at least two graduate students and one undergraduate
student, and it will train them for high-technology careers in optics or
materials. This work will also involve undergraduate researchers in summer
research and work during the academic terms leading to honors research theses.
Basic atomic physics experiments such as these lay the scientific and human
resources foundation today for the technological marvels of tomorrow.