* 1205985
* RUI:  Investigation of Group Behaviors and Biofilm Formation of Photosynthetic Bacteria
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Jean Huang, Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2016
* USD 268,469.00

In this project, the PI will study the group behavior of photosynthetic bacteria
that are growing in biofilms and in dense populations. The photosynthetic
bacteria that are the subjects of this study, the anoxygenic phototroph
Rhodopseudomonas palustris and the cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC6803,
collectively carry out all major modes of metabolism that exist in the bacterial
world. The PI will study the effects of different growth pressures on the
pattern formation of these bacteria. The PI will grow and analyze the
architecture of biofilms that are formed by photosynthetic bacteria which are
growing in different metabolic modes. Mathematical models will be developed and
compared to experiment to understand the physical principles that underlie the
observed growth patterns. Experiments will also be performed to analyze in
detail the collective motion of photosynthetic bacteria that are growing at high
cell population densities, with system modifications inspired by photosynthetic
biofilms. The research will explore a new range of parameter space for biologic
pattern formation and collective bacterial motion, providing experimental
evidence with which theoretical and simulational models may be compared. This
research will be undertaken in an undergraduate-only institution and involves
interdisciplinary faculty and student collaborations in applied physics and
microbiology. Undergraduate students will be trained in techniques at the
interface of these fields, will be co-authors on publications, and students will
be expected to present results of this research at local and national meetings.
The techniques and finding from this research will be used in the classroom in
teaching of biology and physics, and the techniques developed and data obtained
from this research will stimulate the development of future interdisciplinary
courses.