* 1205670
* Texas State University PREM: Center on Interfaces in Materials.  A Partnership with the Research Triangle MRSEC
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,02/28/2019
* Gabriel Lopez, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Continuing Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 02/28/2019
* USD 3,401,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PREM Center: Interfaces in
Materials at Texas State University - San Marcos (Texas State) will advance
minority participation by integration of discovery-based materials research into
innovative education and outreach programs. The Texas State PREM is partnered
with the Research Triangle Materials Research Science &amp; Engineering Center
(Triangle MRSEC). The proposed research outcome of this joint effort will be a
better understanding of how very small objects (10-1000 times smaller than a
human hair) can organize into arrays. Dispersions of nanometer-sized proteins,
polymers, and inorganic materials are known as colloids. This research will be
integrated into education and public outreach via Propagation of Knowledge
through Shared Mentorship, a model for collaboration between educational levels
that will ensure a pipeline for increased participation in the STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Texas State is a Hispanic serving
institution (HSI) located in Central Texas and has been recently classified as
an Emerging Research University within Texas. The Department of Chemistry &amp;
Biochemistry is growing with research foci of 1.) science education, and 2.)
interdisciplinary research at the biochemistry/materials interface. The
Department participates in a new Ph.D. program in Materials Science Engineering
and Commercialization. A partnership with world-class MRSEC scientists from Duke
University, North Carolina State University, University of North Carolina and
North Carolina Central University will significantly amplify infrastructure,
educational innovation, scientific advances and prestige to outreach activities.
The combination of regional demographics, Texas State institutional commitment
to materials research and the emerging research productivity of the Department
of Chemistry &amp; Biochemistry creates an ideal environment to advance the
goals of the PREM program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is divided into two thrusts:
1.) Multiscale Colloid Interfaces, and 2.) Regulatory Control of Polymer Self-
Assembly into Functional Nanomaterials. In Thrust 1, an externally applied force
(e.g., electric field) will guide the assembly of polymers, clay platelets and
nanoparticles. Controlled colloid assembly can dramatically affect properties
such as conductivity and heat dissipation. Thrust 2 is focused on assembly of
proteins using small-molecule modifiers and nature's built-in regulatory
processes. Using a combination of theory and experiment, the outcome of this
research will be a "set of rules" for building larger assemblies of proteins.
Both colloid research programs require the combined efforts of the Texas State
PREM and the Triangle MRSEC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;A principle objective of the proposed PREM is to increase minority
participation in STEM disciplines. Research results will be augmented with
knowledge transfer concepts in our education program. Entitled "Propagation of
Knowledge through Shared Mentorship - The Pipeline to Success in STEM
Education," this pipeline will connect Texas State and MRSEC participants at all
educational levels. Elements in Thrust 3 that exemplify Propagation of Knowledge
include: 1.) MRSEC graduate student/Texas State undergraduate collaborative
pairings, 2.) the PREM Academy for high school teachers, 3.) the PREM
Postdoctoral SEED Program, and 4) leadership development through a ladder of
shared mentorship. Using discovery-based projects, this center will produce
transformative science and create effective models and methods to elevate
participation of the regional minority population.