* 1205881
* Collaborative Research:  Maximum Caliber: An Approach to Modeling Stochastic Dynamics in Biology.
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2012,02/28/2018
* Ken Dill, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 02/28/2018
* USD 961,333.00

This interdisciplinary project will develop a principle of nonequilibrium
physics called Maximum Caliber (MaxCal). MaxCal offers a general way to make
dynamical models, particularly where fluctuations are important, as in single-
molecule and few-particle systems. This project focuses on developing better
kinetic models for applications in molecular and cellular biophysics. MaxCal
will be applied to analyze a genetic toggle switch, a genetic timer, a three-
gene repressilator circuit, and studies of a synthetic genetic oscillator with
activation and repression, the B. Subtilis ComK gene regulatory feedback system.
A way to identify hidden kinetic states from single molecule noisy data will be
investigated as well. The PI will iterate with his experimental collaborators to
test and advance MaxCal, motivate new experiments and develop insights into the
principles governing these complex systems. Thus this project will facilitate
the analysis of the rapidly growing body of experimental data, as well as
circuit design by synthetic biologists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principles of
MaxCal have broad utility: from nano-structures and nano-motor design to
modeling neural systems, ecology, vehicular traffic, econophysics and
interstellar chemistry. The project will impact multiple outreach efforts and
new centers for collaboration/education. Graduate students and post docs in the
Laufer Center and in the University of Denver's MCB program will be exposed to
MaxCal and the stochastic physics in biology that are under development in this
project. MaxCal applications from this proposal will be incorporated in the NESM
chapter(s) of future editions of the textbook (used in 150 graduate and
undergraduate courses worldwide) Molecular Driving Forces that the PI co-authors
with Sarina Bromberg. Besides training post docs and graduate students in this
project, at least one undergraduate student every year will be trained as part
of their honors thesis, a requirement in the department of Physics and Astronomy
at the University of Denver. The PI will also host high school students at
Laufer Center to introduce them to university research, continuing the tradition
he initiated at UCSF. The MaxCal project will also contribute to broader
education by involving personnel from collaborators at the University of
California, Berkeley; Arizona State University; and the University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center. The PI will make the computer codes freely
available on the Laufer Center web server for broader
usage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being supported jointly by the
Physics of Living Systems Program in the Physics Division and by the Molecular
Biophysics Program in Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.