* 1205222
* Making National Science Policy
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2011,02/28/2015
* Susan Greenhalgh, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2015
* USD 204,350.00

How does science and policy mutually influence each other? How do policy
priorities, for example, shape scientific research? In turn, how are scientific
findings used to justify particular policies and laws? These are central
questions for social and behavioral scientists who study policy as well as for
policy makers and the public. This project grapples with these questions by
exploring how scientific knowledge is created and what scientific policy-making
means in a critical new domain of population science and policy. This area is
particularly important since it creates incentives for the formation and
constitution of families.

Since the introduction of the one-child policy, China's ratio of males to
females at birth has been growing ever more masculine. The disappearance of
girls has led to what has been framed as a growing crisis for men who are unable
to find wives. Since 2005, a new field of population science and policy has been
emerging around this problem. Deeply worried about social stability, the
national government and its expert advisors are now framing the bachelors as
potentially violent menaces to the party's goal of creating a harmonious
society. Policy framings such as these are critically important: once embedded
in public policy, they can remake scientific research agendas, laws, and
individuals' perceptions of themselves and others.

Building on the Principle Investigator's long-term research on policies that
impact the constitution of families, this project involves 14 months of research
during 2011-13 aimed at understanding this emerging field of scientific
governance. Using Science and Technology Studies theories and ethnographic and
documentary research methods, the project has two parts, ethnographies of
science-making and policy-making. The Principle Investigator will investigate
the stakeholders involved in both scientific research and policy making. By
studying the micro-practices of both scientists and policy-makers, this project
investigates how science policy is made at the national level.

The project's broader impact illuminates the nature of scientific policy-making
and the mutual constitution of science and law. How expert knowledge informs
policy dynamics has substantial effects on what policies are created and how a
nation is governed. The focus on population science and policy provides insight
into policies that impact family formation more generally. Finally, this project
contributes to the creation of networks between the United States and China, and
adds to the social and behavioral scientific study of science and technology
policy.