* 1205468
* AREADNE 2012 Conference, June 21-24, 2012, at the Nomikos Conference Centre, in Santorini, Greece.
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2013
* John Pezaris, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 04/30/2013
* USD 15,000.00

1205468&lt;br/&gt;Pezaris&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support AREADNE
2012 Research in Encoding and Decoding of Neural Ensembles, to be held 21-24
June 2012, at the Nomikos Conference Centre, in Santorini, Greece. This will be
the fourth conference in the biennial AREADNE series that provides unparalleled
opportunities for US students and scientists studying neural ensembles to
interact with their international peers and develop long-term professional
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AREADNE Conference series serves an
important role, providing a unique forum in the developing field of neural
ensembles where investigators from a wide variety of subfields can exchange
ideas and interact in an intensive, focused environment. Under the leadership of
the two co-founders who serve as co-chairs, the AREADNE Organizing Committee has
successfully run the conference in 2006, 2008, and 2010; the 2012 session will
be the fourth. Many novel mechanisms are employed to ensure complete engagement
from the speakers and attendees that result not only in successful, invigorating
meetings, but in a strengthening of the field. Many cutting-edge and provocative
results have been premiered at the AREADNE Conferences this far, a pattern that
is expected to continue in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;About half of the
attendees from previous meetings have been from the United States, and half from
Europe and the Eastern Mediterranean. Across all attendees, one-third are
students, one third post-docs or junior faculty, and the remainder senior
faculty. Speakers are selected from the world experts in the field, and include
one-third women, reflective of the general attendance. The Organizing Committee
consists of systems neuroscientists with wide and varied backgrounds.
Hybridization within the committee is reflected in the range of invited speakers
and thus at the conference itself where cross-disciplinary discussions among
attendees, rather than being exceptional, are the norm. Feedback forms from
attendees are overwhelmingly positive, including specifically on the aspect of
discussion and interaction. The conference proceedings are provided to attendees
in printed form and on CD-ROM, and shortly after the end of each meeting, are
published on the conference web site. In the 24 months ending on 1 October 2011,
more than 3,000 copies have been downloaded from the web site, demonstrating a
very broad impact.