* 1205891
* Effect of Pair-Breaking Scattering by Extended and Anisotropic Objects in Superfluid 3He
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,06/30/2017
* Yoonseok Lee, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 06/30/2017
* USD 350,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the effects
of pair-breaking scattering by spatially extended objects in p-wave superfluid
3He. Specifically, the extended anisotropic pair-breaking objects are high
porosity aerogel immersed in bulk liquid and the boundaries present in a thin
film. The physical properties of these systems are strongly influenced by the
localized quasiparticle bound states induced by the pair-breaking scattering.
The ultimate goal of the proposed experiment is to identify the structure of the
impurity states and novel quantum phases predicted to emerge in these systems.
Especially, the study of thin films will employ a novel technique involving MEMS
devices developed in the PI's group. Merging state-of-the-art MEMS technology to
fundamental research could open a pathway to new discoveries and better
understanding. The proposed research will be conducted by two teams of graduate
and undergraduate students. The PhD students will be trained to gain a wide
range of expertise in low temperature physics, nano-fabrication technique,
device technology, and computer simulations. Undergraduate students will have
hands-on experience in modern scientific research and importantly will have an
opportunity to closely observe the entire process of conducting research from
planning to publication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research addresses a fundamental question:
"How does the nature of a quantum matter evolve in response to the presence of
disorder or boundaries?" This is an overarching issue because disorder is
ubiquitous. Unlike other physical systems, liquid helium three at low
temperatures offers an ideal platform for this mainly owing to the fact that it
is arguably the cleanest system which we have a detailed quantitative
understanding. Furthermore, the superfluid phases of helium three, which can be
characterized as more general unconventional superconductor, are known to
exhibit extreme sensitivity to external disorder. This project will investigate
the effects of controlled disorder on this unique quantum state of matter
presented in two distinct forms of disorder: anisotropic disorder in high
porosity aerogel and surface disorder in thin films. In this research, a novel
experimental technique involving micrometer-scale machines, called MEMS devices,
will be employed to investigate the fundamental nature. The ultimate goal of the
proposed experiment is to identify disorder induced new quantum phases expected
to emerge in these systems. The proposed research will be carried by two PhD
students in close collaboration with undergraduate students. Undergraduate
research is an important element of education and also a very effective way of
retaining Physics undergraduate student in this field.