* 1205797
* Applications of Non-Equilibrium Statistical Physics to Collective Phenomena in Materials and Complex Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Sidney Redner, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/29/2016
* USD 435,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
and education on fundamental issues of non-equilibrium statistical physics and
their applications to basic natural processes, such as the coarsening of
magnetic systems, and to phenomena driven by social forces, such as the spread
of opinions, technological innovations, and fads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
aims to deepen understanding of the coarsening of the Ising model. While this
paradigmatic system has been studied, the PI's recent research has found, quite
surprisingly, that coarsening dynamics in three dimensions does not conform to
the conventional picture of power-law domain growth. Instead, the system gets
stuck in a topologically complex state that consists of two highly
interpenetrating domains, with the relaxation time scaling exponentially with
the system size. The long-time properties of this system display a variety of
puzzling features that the PI will to investigate by a combination of large-
scale simulations, scaling arguments, and techniques from topology and
differential geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the two-dimensional Ising model,
the PI will exploit a recent connection with continuum percolation theory
developed to elucidate the topology of long-time states. Here single-phase
domains can organize into stripes of various winding numbers. The PI aims to
calculate the probabilities of stripe state and to broadly categorize spanning
domains according to the winding numbers. He will also investigate the evolution
of single interfaces between oppositely-aligned spin domains in idealized
geometries, such the evolution at a single corner. In two dimensions, this
system can be mapped onto an exclusion process, an equivalence that the PI will
use to solve the interface shape. This approach will be extended to the
unexplored case of Ising systems with longer-range interactions, where
surprising features appear to lurk. The connection to exclusion processes also
leads the PI to explore open questions about the role of additional repulsive
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will also investigate prototypical
social dynamics models in which reinforcement plays a decisive role.
Reinforcement means that an agent requires multiple prompts from interaction
partners before actually changing its state. This new attribute has a profound
effect on the ensuing dynamics. For the socially-reinforced voter model, there
is surprisingly fast dynamics in the mean-field limit and anomalously slow
dynamics on lattice networks. The origin of the latter appears to be an
effective surface tension at the interface between opposite-opinion
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For innovations, reinforcement delays its onset.
When an innovation is abandoned at some rate, the outcome is a transient fad.
The population fraction that adopts the fad undergoes a sudden transition as
function of the abandonment rate that the PI will explore analytically and
numerically. The PI will study how a fad spreads through a spatially dispersed
population. Anomalous features arise at a "smoldering" transition that separates
a regime where the fad spreads globally from a regime where a fad quickly
disappears. Contact with empirical data will be made where
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research and education to understand systems that are
far from the steady state of equilibrium. Non-equilibrium statistical physics is
concerned with evolving systems that contain many interacting elements or
particles. For systems in equilibrium, there exist global principles that
determine their detailed physical properties. However, when a system is out of
equilibrium, either by exposing it to changing external conditions or by adding
or extracting energy or mass, the understanding of the evolution is still not
well characterized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A prototypical example is a magnetic
system that is initially at high-temperature where it is not magnetized and
shows no spatial organization of magnetism at a microscopic level, and is
suddenly cooled to below the transition temperature to magnetism. From the
initial disorder, competing regions of magnetic order spontaneously grow to form
a coarsening mosaic of domains. The PI seeks to understand the geometry and
dynamics of this domain mosaic, as well as the properties of the interface
between ordered domains. Although this classic problem has been studied before,
the PI's preliminary results show that the three-dimensional system contains
many surprises that are not anticipated in current theories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI also aims to study a range of dynamic social
processes when reinforcement plays an essential role. Reinforcement means that
an individual agent must experience multiple prompts from neighboring agents
before actually changing its state. Reinforcement leads to very different
evolutionary phenomena compared to the case where an agent changes state after a
single encounter with a neighboring agent. The effect of this reinforcement
mechanism will be explored for both the dynamics of opinion evolution in a
population, as well as the spread of irreversible innovations and transient
fads. The effect of reinforcement is crucial for fads, because this feature
controls whether a fad can quickly fizzle out and barely be noticed or can
become widespread before gradually disappearing.