* 1205463
* Novel Dynamics in Complex Fluids: From Phonons to the Drying Process
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Arjun Yodh, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 08/31/2016
* USD 520,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** This experimental program explores fundamental
properties of complex fluids. Complex fluids are materials such as particle
suspensions, emulsions, oil-water interfaces, polymer & surfactant solutions,
liquid crystals, and mixtures thereof. A unifying feature of the proposed
experiments is their focus on dynamics in complex fluids. One set of experiments
will measure the vibrational properties of colloidal crystals with defects and
in colloidal glasses & gels, with an eye towards elucidating connections between
localized vibrations and internal rearrangements within these materials,
especially in the absence of external stresses. A second set of experiments will
investigate the effects associated with particle shape and interfacial
interactions in drying colloidal drops. This work builds on the recent discovery
that the geometric shape of suspended particles can be used to eliminate the
famous coffee ring effect; we will carry out experiments to understand the
nature of the novel elastic membranes that arise in these systems, i.e., via
adsorption and interaction of the particles on the air-water surface. Soft
materials find applications in the paint, food science, & cosmetics industries,
in practical control of fluid rheologies & microfluidics, in cell biology, in
high-tech problems such as photonics, printing & lithography, biochemical
sensing, and in design of composites. Knowledge gained will enhance our ability
to manipulate micro-/nano-particles and macromolecules in solution, providing
insight for practical problems listed above. The program trains PhD students and
post-docs in the science of soft materials and the technology of optical
microscopy & micromanipulation; these students and post-docs, in turn, will
leave Penn and strengthen the technological infrastructure of our nation.

****Non-Technical Abstract**** Complex fluids are materials such as colloidal
suspensions, emulsions, oil-water interfaces, polymer & surfactant solutions,
liquid crystals, and mixtures thereof. These soft materials find applications in
the paint, food science, & cosmetics industries, in practical control of fluid
rheologies & microfluidics, in cell biology, in high-tech problems such as
photonics, printing & lithography, biochemical sensing, and in design of
composites. The complex fluid research elucidates a wide-range of phenomena:
probing vibrations in glasses, exploring the origin of internal rearrangements
in glasses, and investigating the role of particle shape and interface
deformation in affecting drying processes. Knowledge gained in these studies
will enhance our ability to manipulate macromolecules in solution, providing
insight for the many of the practical problems listed above. Technology
developed as part of this research has led to the formation of two start-up
nanotechnology companies and to a major collaboration with a larger chemical
company. The program also teaches a new generation of PhD/post-doctoral
scientists and engineers about soft materials and optical microscopy &
micromanipulation; after finishing work here, these students and post-docs
strengthen the technological and economic infrastructure of our nation.