* 1205722
* 2012 Neural Interfaces Conference, June 18 - 21, 2012, Salt Lake City, Utah
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2012,10/31/2012
* Richard Normann, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 10/31/2012
* USD 16,944.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;1205722, Normann&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;The biennial Neural Interfaces Conference is the most prominent
multidisciplinary gathering of the leading engineers, neuroscientists, and
clinicians engaged in brain-computer interfaces and neural engineering
translational research in the world. The scientific program for the 2012
conference addresses ten immediately relevant themes in neural interfaces. The
presentations, discussions and formal debates related to each theme will focus
on the most salient problems remaining to be solved, thereby challenging all
conference participants to propose and explore transformative concepts. The
conference chairs, steering committee and program committee are preeminently
qualified to guide the development of the scientific program, as multiple
experts in each theme are represented. The Neural Interfaces Conference has a
long history (the 2012 conference is the 40th such conference), which attests to
the excellent organization and persisting importance of the meeting. In
recognition of the central role this conference plays in advancing
neurotechnologies, many private companies, as well as state and federal sources
have committed to support the 2012 Neural Interfaces Conference, ensuring
sufficient resources for this flagship meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;The Neural Interfaces Conference provides ample time for
dynamic exchange among engineers, scientists, and clinician-scientists, and
actively promotes new, multidisciplinary partnerships for neural interfaces
research and education. The conference is an ideal venue for the recruitment and
retention of trainees in the rapidly growing field of neural interfaces; because
a diverse workforce is essential to advancing and sustaining neurotechnologies,
travel scholarships will support the participation of women and underrepresented
minorities recruited and selected from graduate and undergraduate institutions
from around the country. The conference proceedings will be widely disseminated
via a dedicated issue of the Journal of Neural Engineering, the conference
website, and a special report written by a science writer for the general
public. The conference will seed the development of new neural interface
technologies, which will reduce health care costs, provide substantial benefits
to individuals with neurological disorders, and result in new industries that
will strengthen our economy.