* 1205539
* II-EN: Laboratory for Research on Deep Structures of Collaboration
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Laura Dabbish, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2017
* USD 532,000.00

Our society has greater need than ever before for people to collaborate
effectively, whether they be teams of employees, patients and their doctors,
large virtual communities, neighborhoods or family groups. Collaboration is
involved in many societal problems including energy use, law enforcement,
disaster relief, and scientific research. Researchers in human-computer
interaction and computer-supported cooperative work have an impressive record of
developing technology to support interpersonal communication and group
interaction in a range of problem areas such as medical team coordination,
disruption of family schedules, multi-tasking and interruptions in the
workplace, energy use in households, collaborative intelligence analysis,
virtual organization, and collaborative learning. Despite such efforts, the deep
structure of collaboration is not well understood. The goal of this project is
to acquire instrumentation that will enable the PI and her colleagues to
leverage advances in other disciplines such as neuroscience and engineering to
advance our knowledge of how details of brain and behavior are related to the
underlying meaning, processes, and outcomes of collaboration, that is, its deep
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The requested
research infrastructure will allow future projects to include a focus on the
fine details of human behavior, including brain responses, facial expressions,
body positions, gestures, and movements. The PI argues that in-depth analysis of
behavior is necessary for understanding the mechanics of face-to-face
interaction, for identifying those aspects of face-to-face interaction that are
key to successful remote collaboration, for increasing the benefits of social
media online, and for programming intelligent collaborative systems.
Availability for interaction in the home environment, for example, might be
indicated by a combination of posture and facial expression; detailed knowledge
of these indicators could then help us design systems that deliver notifications
to families at appropriate times. Similarly, remote experts collaborating around
shared visualizations may benefit from camera systems that understand when
partners have a shared understanding, as evidenced by their facial expressions
and movements. Human-robot interaction might be refined by a fine-grained
analysis of human-human interactions such as handoffs and greetings. And home
health care and remote health delivery could be improved with better feedback
about patient emotion and cognition during and after consultations. The
infrastructure to be acquired with this funding will provide a platform for
exploring ways to achieve these goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;The ability to understand the deep structures underlying
collaboration has the potential to radically transform science and engineering
in general, by furthering our ability to analyze contributors to effective team
performance across many domains, and by laying the foundation for new
collaborative interfaces that support interaction through gesture, facial
expression, eye gaze and brain activity. More specifically, there is a potential
for direct broader impact in the domains of health and education. In the domain
of health, the new techniques will enhance ongoing work at the PI's institution
on chronic illness management and home-health care, supporting better
collaboration between parents and children with chronic illnesses, and patients
and therapists through high fidelity patient observation. In education,
computer-supported and collaborative learning will advance by computer tutors
understanding student attention and knowledge sharing in groups. The
instrumentation will also have local impact in the CMU HCI Institute, allowing
faculty and student projects to include a focus on understanding the dynamics of
collaboration and on the development of new tools to enhance people's ability to
collaborate in diverse settings.