* 1205903
* Control of Molecular Quantum State Character by Coherence Effects
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* A. Marjatta Lyyra, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2016
* USD 415,000.00

Marjatta Lyyra's research group at Temple University is supported by the Atomic,
Molecular and Optical Physics Program to carry out a series of fundamental
studies of the interaction of light with small molecules in the frequency
domain. Her group has developed applications of quantum optics for molecular
systems including electromagnetically induced transparency and the Autler-Townes
(AT) effect. These studies have facilitated a shift of quantum optics studies to
molecular systems with practical applications as the goal.

The complex molecular energy level structure, molecular interactions, and
relaxation pathways provide a rich testing ground of coherence effects for
controlling molecular dynamics and quantum state character. Through combined
experimental and theoretical studies her research group has demonstrated control
of molecular angular momentum alignment, for example. Another important
application of the Autler-Townes effect is its use as a precision probe of the
internuclear distance-dependent transition dipole moment functions, which are at
the heart of the interaction of light with molecules. These measurements rely on
the measurement of the Autler-Townes splitting from the lineshape of the control
laser transition combined with an accurate measurement of the electric field
amplitude of this laser. Another application of the AT effect involves external
optical control over the mixing between a pair of closely-spaced molecular
singlet and triplet eigenstates that are weakly perturbed by the spin-orbit
interaction. The AT effect causes the nominal singlet level to split into a pair
of field modified levels, one of which tunes closer to the triplet, resulting in
increased singlet-triplet mixing, and the other farther from the triplet,
resulting in decreased singlet-triplet mixing. Thus this optical control
mechanism can be used to "tune" the spin-orbit mixing coefficients and as a
result control quantum state singlet and triplet character.

In addition to developing new applications of quantum interference and coherence
effects, this research bridges traditionally separate research communities:
molecular spectroscopy and dynamics on one hand, and quantum optics and control
on the other hand. Due to the fundamental nature of this research the results
are broadly applicable. Examples include finding optimal excitation pathways for
ultracold molecule formation and role of valence electron spin polarization in
photochemistry.

In this project, young scientists, many of whom are women, participate in
forefront scientific research at the undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral
levels and as a result develop critical experience and confidence for their
future participation in the scientific and technical workforce.