* 1205190
* Conference: 2012 Rustbelt RNA Meeting to be held October 19-20, 2012 at Crowne Plaza in Dayton, OH
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Subha Das, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2013
* USD 12,500.00

Intellectual Merit. The 2012 Rustbelt RNA Meeting will be held October 19-20,
2012, at the Crowne Plaza in Dayton, Ohio. The Rustbelt RNA Meeting is the major
Midwest regional meeting of RNA researchers. The intellectual objective of the
Rustbelt RNA Meeting is to provide an inexpensive, high-caliber,
interdisciplinary meeting for RNA researchers in the Midwest. The field of RNA
structure, function, and processing is growing at a rapid pace. RNA now has a
demonstrated role in many important biological phenomena, such as carcinogenesis
and development. Exciting new research areas, for example, to find functions for
long noncoding RNAs, are bursting with new information that reaches into
unexpected areas of cellular biochemistry. These functions are well beyond the
obvious prominent role for RNA as a product of transcription, a template for
translation, or as structural/catalytic components of spliceosomes and
ribosomes. At the same time, the methods used to study RNA are becoming
increasingly diverse, ranging from synthetic and physical chemistry to
biochemistry, genetics, and biophysical approaches all the way to cellular
imaging and computational methods. Exchange of information on topics such as
these offers an excellent opportunity for improving understanding of basic
mechanisms of gene expression mediated by RNA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. The broader impact of the Rustbelt RNA Meeting is in trainee and junior
faculty development. The Rustbelt RNA Meeting strongly emphasizes trainee
participation. One major feature of the Rustbelt RNA Meeting is the
participation of graduate and undergraduate students from a wide range of
institutions (from large research-intensive universities to small, primarily
undergraduate colleges). In addition to offering opportunities for interactions
with principal investigators and other trainees, the Rustbelt RNA Meeting
provides invaluable experience for trainees to present their research in an
educational and supportive atmosphere. Importantly, trainees account for the
majority of both poster and oral presentations. Such presentations instill
confidence in the trainees and inspire trainees in the audience to present their
results orally in the future. Students feel more comfortable to ask questions
when the speaker is a fellow student. The smaller size of the Rustbelt RNA
Meeting also benefits trainee presenters because of the greater attention paid
to them by principal investigators. To encourage top-notch presentations, prizes
are awarded for outstanding oral and poster presentations. Finally, the Rustbelt
RNA Meeting is an excellent forum for junior investigators to network as well as
to showcase their emerging research programs and develop new collaborations.