* 1205025
* LIGHTES-Leading Innovation through Green High Tech Engineering &amp; Sustainability
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2015
* Luckner Jerome, Suffolk Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 03/31/2015
* USD 200,000.00

Building upon the current green/renewable energy grant from the U.S. Department
of Labor and the highly successful NSF S-STEM Scholars Program, the Leading
Innovation through Green High Tech Engineering &amp; Sustainability (LIGHTES)
project is enhancing and expanding ongoing science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) collaborations with five regional high schools, the College
of Engineering at Stony Brook University (SBU), and Brookhaven National
Laboratory (BNL). The goals of the LIGHTES project are to: (1) create new and
revised alternative energy/green technology courses to enrich the Electrical
Technology (ELT) and Engineering Science (ENS) degree programs; (2) develop a
sequence of articulated green technology teaching and learning experiences that
reach from high school to the baccalaureate level on Long Island, thus
increasing the pool of skilled ATE graduates for green/sustainable technology
careers; and (3) collaborate with NSF ATE green technology grantee, Bristol
Community College (BCC), to establish a community of practice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative activities with BCC are: (1) designing
new alternative energy/green technology associate degree options by developing
four new ELT and ENS courses and modifying four existing ELT and one ENS course;
(2) forming a community of practice among STEM faculty at both institutions; (3)
mentoring high school science and technology teachers at regional high schools
using green technology workshops; (4) providing new student internships at BNL
and SBU; (5) creating new pipeline activities among engineering faculty at the
college, SBU and Hofstra University; and (6) integrating green technology
education with the S-STEM college scholarships award.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project is using or adapting
existing exemplary green technology, energy, and sustainability curricula
developed by BCC and other NSF- and Department of Energy (DOE) -validated
sources. Curricula are being developed by an experienced interdisciplinary team
of engineering science, engineering technology, and mathematics faculty and
validated by an Advisory Board comprised of scientists, academic faculty, and
industry representatives. Curriculum, activity, and exercise methods are being
guided by evidence-based practices including inquiry-based and problem-based
learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In keeping with national
trends, New York State (NYS) is stepping up its commitment to green industrial
growth. Approximately 50% of the 250 green businesses operating in NYS are
located in the metropolitan New York City/Long Island area. A well-articulated
pipeline from high school to baccalaureate degree-granting institutions is
needed to engage greater numbers of STEM students to meet current and future
local and national workforce needs in green and sustainable energy. The college
is establishing a community of practice with BCC, creating a new 2+2+2 STEM
pipeline in the Long Island region guided by a regional Advisory Board, engaging
high school teachers and students in LIGHTES activities, and disseminating the
project results at national ATE conferences. A peer-reviewed publication is
planned to disseminate results and add to the STEM education knowledge base.