* 1205923
* Collaborative Proposals: Institute for Theoretical, Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Hossein Sadeghpour, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,691,679.00

Intellectual Merits: The Institute for Theoretical Atomic, Molecular and Optical
Physics (ITAMP) at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics is a user
facility for theoretical atomic molecular and optical (AMO) Physics. Its core
programs are the postdoctoral and the visiting scholars programs, workshops and
topical groups and speaker series. AMO theory has played a vital role in
motivating and explaining avant-garde experimental developments in AMO and
condensed matter physics, astrophysics, chemistry and quantum optics. ITAMP has
a notable reputation for training and mentoring postdoctoral fellows, who go on
to occupy faculty and staff positions at leading universities, including Harvard
and MIT, and national laboratories, such as Los Alamos, and Oak Ridge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: ITAMP makes its activities accessible to
as large an audience as possible. The ITAMP website posts schedules of
workshops, visitors, colloquia, information about programs and the ITAMP
newsletter. The workshops are webcast and are archived for broad educational
purposes. The education and training of young scientists in AMO physics theory
is of primary importance to ITAMP. Postdocs organize luncheon discussions, and
interact with high-caliber international scientists. Since 2007, four female
postdoctoral fellows accepted assistant professor offers at colleges in the
U.S., including one at MIT. A new student training and educational outreach
initiative is the AMO Physics Graduate Winter School, in cooperation with the B2
Institute, featuring an all-star roster of lecturers.