* 1205899
* Spatial and Temporal Fluctuations in Coherent Electron Nanodiffraction from Metallic Glasses and Glass-forming Liquids
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Paul Voyles, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 09/30/2015
* USD 411,500.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This project supports investigation of the structure and
atomic dynamics of metallic glasses and metallic-glass forming liquids using
systematic coherent electron nanodiffraction in a scanning transmission electron
microscope, in a technique called fluctuation electron microscopy. Time-resolved
nanodiffraction experiments as a function of temperature will test the
hypothesis that metallic glass forming liquids exhibit spatial heterogeneous
dynamics which play an essential role in their glass transition. If spatial
domains with different dynamics are found, their relaxation time and their
internal structure will be determined experimentally. These potentially
transformative experiments will be the first direct, structural probe of the
existence, relaxation, and structure of spatially heterogeneous dynamics at the
nanometer scale. This project will also support investigation of the room-
temperature structure of a metallic glass of 75 at.% Ce and 25 at.% Al. This
glass has a novel metastable high-pressure crystalline phase, which has been
proposed to arise from long-range topological order quenched into the glassy
state. Conventional TEM will be used to investigate the structure and defects of
the high-pressure phase, and spatially-resolved nanodiffraction will be used to
investigate the structure of the glassy phase. The project will support
education and outreach about advanced characterization methods in STEM. The
Electron Microscopy Database, an online collection of example data sets for
teaching and learning advanced STEM techniques, will be enlarged, and the
underlying database technology will be modernized. The researchers involved in
this project will conduct public lectures and demonstrations of atomic-
resolution STEM imaging and microanalysis using the remote operation
capabilities of the STEM used for this project's research.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY Glasses are materials in which the atoms are jumbled up,
in contrast to crystals, in which the atoms sit on a grid. Most metal alloys
exist only as crystals, but a few special ones can be forced to make a glass by
cooling them very quickly from their liquid, melted state. This project will
investigate those special liquids and the metallic glasses they form to measure
how the atoms fit together and how they move around with respect to one another.
In both cases, it is clumps of 10-100 atoms which have the most important
structure, which corresponds to a size of about 1 nanometer. The researchers
supported by this project will make their measurements using an advanced
electron microscope with a beam of electrons one nanometer in diameter - just
matched to the size of the interesting clumps of atoms. Their discoveries will
help scientists understand why some metal alloys form glasses and others do not,
and may lead to the development of new metallic glasses with superior strength,
ductility, or other properties. This project will also support education and
outreach in advanced electron microscopy techniques required for the nation's
burgeoning nanotechnology workforce. The researchers will maintain and enlarge
the Electron Microscopy Database, an online collection of examples for teaching
and learning. They will also do public demonstrations of advanced electron
microscopy, including the ability to see single atoms, one at a time, in an
effort share with young people their interest and excitement about science.