* 1205713
* Two-Dimensional Quantum Turbulence in Bose-Einstein Condensates
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Brian Anderson, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2016
* USD 540,000.00

A distinction between hydrodynamic turbulence in a bulk fluid, and in one whose
flows are restricted to two dimensions, is that energy dissipation at small
length scales is generally inhibited in the latter. Under small-length-scale
forcing of energy and vorticity into a two-dimensional (2D) fluid, energy is
therefore transferred towards larger scales, opposite that of turbulence in a
bulk fluid. Most conspicuously, this means that eddies and vortices may merge to
form even larger vortices. Two-dimensional quantum turbulence (2DQT) involves
the study of 2D turbulence in quantum fluids such as atomic Bose-Einstein
condensates (BECs). In this emerging field of research, numerous open questions
generally relate to the dynamics of quantized vortices in superfluids and to the
distribution of kinetic energy among length scales. For example, do clusters of
quantized vortices of identical circulation naturally emerge in 2DQT flows, as
initially predicted by Onsager in 1949? This NSF award supports new experiments
aimed at understanding the relationships between vortex distributions, vortex
dynamics, and energy spectra in 2DQT. The experimental program of research
targeting these topics will utilize highly oblate BECs for the construction of a
new imaging system designed to observe vortex dynamics within a BEC, the
development of on-demand vortex generation and manipulation methods to study
vortex interactions in turbulence with a bottom-up approach, and the study and
characterization of developed 2DQT in BECs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superfluids
such as dilute-gas Bose-Einstein condensates have remarkable properties,
including frictionless flow and fluid circulation that is obtained only by the
formation of many microscopic quantum whirlpools known as vortices. The
distribution and dynamics of these vortices throughout the superfluid provide
information on fluid phenomena such as turbulence. This project is studying the
generation of quantum vortices and follows their dynamics in pancake-shaped
condensates as a means to understand the characteristics of two-dimensional
turbulence in superfluids. Turbulence in classical fluids is known to share
similarities with quantum turbulence in superfluids, but for the specific case
of two-dimensional flows, the similarities and differences between the quantum
and classical cases are unclear. This grant supports research and graduate-
student mentoring and training involving new methods of creating, manipulating,
and detecting quantum vortices in condensates, and probes the characteristics of
two-dimensional turbulence in these superfluids. Through controlled studies of
two-dimensional quantum turbulence, our aim is to develop new insights on vortex
interactions and other phenomena of turbulence, one of the most challenging and
complex topics in physics.