* 1205397
* Strong Field Molecular Ionization
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Thomas Weinacht, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 455,000.00

This work is focused on developing our understanding of strong field molecular
ionization by using pulse shaping, velocity map imaging detection of molecular
fragment ions and close collaboration with theory. Our research program draws
upon our previous NSF funded work on strong field coherent control, and is
composed of three main thrusts. First is the study of electron wave packets
generated via strong field ionization. Strong field ionization in an intense
ultrafast laser pulse can result in the population of multiple ionic states and
the generation of attosecond electron dynamics. We are interested in
characterizing which ionic states are populated and how this depends on laser
pulse parameters. The study of molecular ionization from electronically excited
molecules comprises our second thrust area. By studying ionization from
electronically excited states, we can investigate the validity of Dyson overlap
projections for strong field ionization and deepen our understanding of electron
correlation in molecules. Our third area is following neutral excited state
relaxation via strong field ionization and velocity map imaging. Strong field
ionization has many advantages as a probe of excited state molecular dynamics,
providing insight into dissociation and internal
conversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program continually seeks to
integrate teaching and research while impacting a large range of participants.
People involved in the research include undergraduate students (visiting
students through the NSF Research Experience for Undergraduates program as well
as students at Stony Brook University), local high school teachers (through the
NSF Research Experience for Teachers program), graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows and visiting scholars (through the NSF ROA program). The work is
inherently multi-disciplinary, and encourages students to develop knowledge and
interests at the boundary between physics and chemistry. It also provides
excellent technical and scientific training in the enabling ares of optics,
ultrafast laser technology, vacuum hardware, data acquisition hardware and
computer programming.