* 1205431
* High Power Beams, Collective Instabilities, and  Coherent and Compact Light Sources
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Shyh-Yuan Lee, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Hicks
* 07/31/2015
* USD 179,997.00

The award is to design a compact electron storage ring with circumference about
3 m capable of producing X-rays at energy 5 to 80 KeV, by employing inverse
Compton scattering of laser at 800 nm wave length with electron beams at 20-60
MeV. The photon flux is estimated to be about 100 billion photons/second. The
award will evaluate effects of the collective instability, intrabeam scattering
and Touschek lifetime. We will carry out experiments at the ALPHA stroage ring
to characterize beam properties. In addition to the compact light source, the
award will carry out design of a compact proton storage ring at energy of about
300 MeV. Such proton storage rings can provide industial and medical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is to investigate beam dynamics
problems associated with high brightness low energy storage rings and its
applications in the generation of inverse Compton X-ray source, and possibly
coherent light sources. This award is also intended to investigate physics
associated with high power accelerators. Topics associated with high power
accelerators are space charge physics, synchrobetatron coupling, nonlinear beam
dynamics and collective beam instabilities. The award activities also include
training of future accelearator scientists.