* 1205788
* Wave Statistics in Non-Integrable Systems: From Nanostructures to Ocean Waves
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Lev Kaplan, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2016
* USD 215,893.00

This grant is for fundamental research on the statistical properties of wave
functions and quantum transport in systems with a non-integrable classical
limit. Experiments and applications motivating this work come from fields as
diverse as current flow through two-dimensional nanostructures, rogue wave
formation in the ocean, Coulomb blockade conductance in quantum dots, microwaves
in irregularly-shaped electromagnetic resonators, energy transport in large
structural acoustic systems, chemical reaction statistics, asymmetric optical
resonators, and Casimir forces for nontrivial geometries. Interrelated research
topics are: (1) Branched Flow Through Weak Correlated Random Potentials and
Rogue Waves in the Ocean. Extreme event statistics are of particular interest in
the context of ocean wave dynamics. The PI has obtained analytical results for
the rogue wave formation probability as a function of sea parameters and will
extend these techniques to include nonlinear wave evolution, finite wavelength
effects, and depth variation in coastal waters, bringing closer the long-term
goal of rogue wave forecasting. Similarities with other physical systems will
enable improved understanding of branched flow in electron, microwave, and light
scattering. (2)Chaotic Wave Functions Beyond the Random Matrix and Semiclassical
Approximations: the PI has developed a robust and accurate method for extending
random matrix theory predictions by systematically incorporating the non-
universal short-time behavior of chaotic or diffusive systems. These techniques
will be extended to general Hamiltonian systems in arbitrary dimension and to
resonance wave function statistics in open systems. He will incorporate symmetry
effects (including time reversal symmetry), explore the consequences of mixed
classical phase space and the effects of Anderson localization. Applications
include interaction matrix elements in ballistic and diffusive quantum dots, as
well as energy transport in acoustic systems. (3) Vacuum Energy and Casimir
Forces in Non-Integrable Geometries: The PI will investigate the vacuum self-
energy in pseudointegrable and chaotic cavities in two and three dimensions. Of
particular interest are the validity of the semiclassical approximations; the
role of boundaries, edges, and corners; conditions under which divergences
cancel between the inside and outside of a thin shell; and the relationship
between the total self-energy and the local energy density. (4) Long-Time
Semiclassical Accuracy: A common thread linking the above themes is the accuracy
of the semiclassical approximation for long-time dynamics and eigenstates. The
PI has shown previously that semiclassics at long times is more accurate in
chaotic than in regular systems in two dimensions. He will apply these methods
to higher-dimensional and interacting systems, and to higher-order semiclassical
approximations, obtaining analytical estimates for the breakdown of the
approximation in chaotic systems. Semiclassical error results will be extended
to include caustics and diffraction effects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts of the project include: Undergraduate involvement in research, with
active participation of underrepresented groups, utilizing diversity-enhancement
programs such as LSAMP and development of research ties with Xavier University;
enhancing research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students through
direct stipend support, professional development through travel to conferences,
and active participation in external collaborations; development of a new course
in Chaos and Nonlinear Dynamics, targeted toward upper division undergraduate
and beginning graduate students, in collaboration with faculty in mathematics
and engineering; teaching of relevant introductory graduate courses in quantum
and classical mechanics, with emphasis on classical quantum correspondence; and
continuation of effective, highly rated teaching of physics for liberal arts
majors, with a focus on modern physics and applications.