* 1205596
* Early Career: Instrumentation and technical support for opening new frontiers in energy and environment research
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Shikha Sharma, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 265,542.00

This Early Career grant supports the acquisition of a GC-Isolink and two years
of dedicated technician support in the new Stable Isotope Laboratory in the
Department of Geology and Geography at West Virginia University (WVU). The
instrument adds new capability of isotope analyses of individual compounds
including hydrocarbons and dissolved natural gases. The instrument will be
connected to the Delta V Advantage Isotope ratio mass spectrometer via the low
flow outlet of Conflo IV device installed in the isotope laboratory. The award
will help the WVU Isotope facility to become a core center for advancing
research and training in the Earth Sciences with primary focus on the energy and
environment topics targeted in the NSF?s Science, Engineering, and Education for
Sustainability (SEES) program. Two areas of the PI?s research program that will
specifically benefit from this grant include 1) biogeochemical controls on black
shale deposition and environmental issues associated with shale gas extraction
and, 2) gas-fluid-rock interactions in CO2 sequestration and enhanced geothermal
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will enhance PI?s ability to capitalize
and meet goals of the Regional University Alliance (RUA) developed by the
Department of Energy and the National Energy Technology Lab to address the
emerging energy and environment issues. Acquisition of new instrumentation will
greatly strengthen the ongoing research within the Marcellus Shale Initiative,
Advanced Energy Initiative, and National Research Center for Coal and Energy;
the three campus-wide programs established at WVU for advancing energy research
in the region. Therefore, this award opens up new research frontiers across the
state and the region. In addition, research programs of a very talented and
diverse group of research faculty who are currently engaged and/or getting
involved in stable isotope research at WVU will be benefited. The combined
research, teaching and hands-on training will provide opportunities for students
to develop a better understanding of the isotope basics and its application in
several STEM disciplines while also contributing to the early career development
of the PI.