* 1205233
* EAGER: The relationship between microbial biogeography and ocean chemistry across a persistent oceanographic "hot spot" in the NE Pacific Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2013
* E. Virginia Armbrust, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 12/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

The oceans are undergoing dramatic changes. Currently, two largely independently
operating research communities -- geochemists and molecular ecologists --
examine potential biological repercussions of changes in ocean chemistry and
physics. Geochemists focus primarily on large-scale resultant chemical features,
with limited knowledge of underlying biological drivers. Molecular ecologists
focus primarily on biodiversity of microbial ecosystems, with few direct
linkages to process rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from this Early-
Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER), a marine molecular biologist
from the University of Washington, a marine inorganic biochemist from the
University of Southern California, and a marine trace metal geochemist from Old
Dominion University will conduct a multi-parameter exploratory survey cruise to
collect and analyze shared geochemical and molecular data to identify chemical
and physical drivers of distinct biogeochemical provinces in the sea. They have
targeted a well-defined gradient in biogeochemical properties in the northeast
Pacific where high nutrient, low chlorophyll waters limited by iron meet low
nutrient, iron-replete waters with the long-term goal of understanding the
sensitivity of province boundaries to climate change. The transition zone is a
surrogate for a geochemical province boundary and is characterized by high
biological activity and strong gradients in chemical parameters.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The team hypothesizes that the physical/chemical front creates a
distinctive biome with a disproportionate impact on the biogeochemistry of the
region, an attribute that may be a fundamental feature of province boundaries.
Accordingly, they will characterize multiple biological and chemical parameters
on a detailed surface to seafloor zonal survey across this zone. Biological
parameters include metagenomes and metatranscriptomes of the microbial community
from surface to seafloor at carefully selected stations and gene-focused surveys
at more broadly distributed stations. Chemical parameters at all stations
include nutrients and dissolved concentrations of Fe, Cu, Zn, Cd, Mn, Co and Ni,
key parameters in the GEOTRACES program. Shipboard work will include short-term
(12-24 hr) on-deck incubations to examine relationships between rate processes
and changes in community composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is well
suited to EAGER funding. The high risk associated with bringing these two
research communities together to synthesize resulting data in meaningful ways is
mitigated by the high reward associated with learning how to conduct
oceanographic work in entirely new ways, moving beyond correlations to
causations between biology and chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
This study is motivated by the results from an NSF-sponsored community workshop
that highlighted the transformative potential of bringing these two communities
together to address underlying drivers of geochemical provinces. The team will
invite cruise participation by a broad representation of the two communities,
with a central requisite that all participants are broad thinkers that will
readily share data in a timely fashion. Member of the U.S. Ocean Carbon and
Biogeochemistry (OCB) Scientific Steering Committee have encouraged submission
of a proposal for a post-cruise meeting to share successes and "lessons
learned". The results of this EAGER project will allow evaluation of the
feasibility of joint molecular/geochemical sectional surveys on the scale of
programs such as CLIVAR and GEOTRACES