* 1205229
* Workshop: Innovation in Steel Design, Research Needs for Global Competitiveness; Chicago, Illinois; March 28, 2012
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Andrea Surovek, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 06/30/2012
* USD 8,500.00

As the international construction sector continues to expand, US competitiveness
will depend on the flexibility to both design with and utilization of
construction materials, including steel, in innovative ways. Whether the future
includes automated construction, prefabricated or modular building components,
or entirely new section configurations is unclear at this point. Regardless,
innovation will require both fundamental and applied research in order to
understand and develop new approaches. The American Society of Civil Engineers
/Structural Engineering Institute (ASCE/SEI) Technical Activities Committee
(TAC) on Metals has planned one-day long workshop to develop a research and
innovations agenda for the design of steel structures with support from the
American Institute of Steel Construction (AISC). The primary objective of the
workshop is to develop a research agenda that will provide a direction for steel
design and construction research in areas of promise for both technical
advancement and global competitiveness with the input of a diverse group of
academics, industry leaders and engaged graduate students.

The workshop, through moderated discussions, will bring together leaders and
emerging talent in the academic and design communities to specifically address
the following: ? What are the most promising areas of steel design innovation to
increase US global competitiveness; and ? What fundamental questions about steel
structural behavior, including response to extreme loads and resiliency, need
answers? In addition to speakers from AISC and ASCE, academic and industry
leaders will facilitate discussions in breakout sessions in three designated
areas: Design for Rapid Construction, Sustainability and Resiliency, and
Response to Extreme Loads. A ?Wildcard? session will also convene to allow for
open discussion in any area related to steel design. The results of the
deliberations at the workshop will be disseminated to the stakeholders.