* 1205968
* Dynamics and Symmetry in Quantum Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Jonathan Engle, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2016
* USD 119,999.00

An important question facing fundamental physics is how the well-tested laws of
Einstein's theory of gravity and quantum mechanics become consistent at the
Planck scale -- the question of quantum gravity. This question is of central
importance in understanding the origin of our universe, the big bang. Most of
the remarkable progress on understanding the big bang has occurred in the
context of quantum cosmology: quantum models of highly symmetric, and therefore
highly simplified, universes. While these models have a structure guided by the
full theory of quantum gravity, they are not directly derived from it as a
quantum theory. The present award seeks to close this gap. This will solidify
confidence in the predictions of quantum cosmology and also permit its insights
to be used to guide future developments of quantum gravity itself. A second part
of this research aims to further understand the relation between the relatively
well-understood canonical formulation of quantum gravity and the Feynman sum-
over-histories formulation, in which space and time are treated in a more
unified way.

By allowing graduate students to participate in frontier physics, and to
interact with other research groups, this award will have a broad and long-term
impact on the development of future scientists. The results of the research will
be disseminated to the scientific community through peer reviewed publication
and scientific lectures, as well as to the general public through public
lectures and other means.