* 1205562
* FIA: Collaborative Research: Named Data Networking (NDN)
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Edmund Yeh, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2014
* USD 375,895.00

While the Internet has far exceeded expectations, it has also stretched initial
assumptions, often creating tussles that challenge its underlying communication
model. Users and applications operate in terms of content, making it
increasingly limiting and difficult to conform to IP's requirement to
communicate by discovering and specifying location. To carry the Internet into
the future, a conceptually simple yet transformational architectural shift is
required, from today's focus on where ? addresses and hosts ? to what ? the
content that users and applications care about. This project investigates a
potential new Internet architecture called Named Data Networking (NDN). NDN
capitalizes on strengths ? and addresses weaknesses ? of the Internet's current
host-based, point-to-point communication architecture in order to naturally
accommodate emerging patterns of communication. By naming data instead of their
location, NDN transforms data into a first-class entity. The current Internet
secures the data container. NDN secures the contents, a design choice that
decouples trust in data from trust in hosts, enabling several radically scalable
communication mechanisms such as automatic caching to optimize bandwidth. The
project studies the technical challenges that must be addressed to validate NDN
as a future Internet architecture: routing scalability, fast forwarding, trust
models, network security, content protection and privacy, and fundamental
communication theory. The project uses end-to-end testbed deployments,
simulation, and theoretical analysis to evaluate the proposed architecture, and
is developing specifications and prototype implementations of NDN protocols and
applications.