* 1205931
* Quantum Information Theory with Spatially Separated Parties
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Scott Cohen, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2016
* USD 105,293.00

Many of the most important phenomena in the field of quantum information involve
spatially separated quantum subsystems. These subsystems may be entangled,
correlated in a way that cannot be explained within classical physics. All
subsystems can communicate classical information with each other (LOCC, for
local operations and classical communication). Important examples of such
protocols include entanglement generation and manipulation, quantum
teleportation, quantum key distribution and cryptography, and certain proposed
implementations of quantum computing. A formal mathematical description
applicable in general to these situations is known to be rather complex and
difficult. Therefore, it is an important open problem to fully understand the
LOCC class of measurements, but progress along these lines has been limited up
to the present time. One important step will be to understand how LOCC differs
from the larger class of separable measurements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Principal Investigator (PI) has recently devised a novel method of determining
whether or not a separable quantum measurement can be implemented by LOCC. If it
can, the approach devises an LOCC protocol which does so. If successful, the
proposed work will extend this result to further understand how LOCC differs
from separable measurements, and will also address important questions about
LOCC itself, such as whether it is possible to bound the amount of communication
needed at each round. The aim will also be to extend the PI's recent results on
LOCC measurements to what is known as quantum operations, where the concern is
only about the overall statistics that emerge from all the outcomes taken
together. The proposed work will also contribute to our understanding about the
creation of entanglement between two spatially separated systems, in part as an
extension of the PI's recent results on the capacity of a bipartite unitary
operation to create entanglement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The PI
has long been involved in undergraduate and graduate education, and his
involvement in research has improved the quality of his teaching and deepened
his interactions with students, contributing to education at both undergraduate
and graduate levels through the PI's supervision of undergraduates in research
projects and collaboration with graduate students. The PI is a frequent seminar
speaker to a quantum information seminar series at a local university. The PI
has also published several pedagogical papers and is presently working on a new
one on the topic of quantum teleportation.