* 1205851
* Degenerate Diffusions on Manifolds with Corners
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Charles Epstein, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2016
* USD 343,086.00

Dr. Epstein's work concerns the analysis of Markov Processes that arise as
infinite population limits of Wright-Fisher-like Markov chains. Such models also
arise in Epidemiology and Mathematical Finance. These models are diffusion-like
processes, but with variables that are constrained to lie in certain regions of
space, e.g. the non-negative orthant for a Finance problem, or a simplex for a
Genetics problem. Hence the paths of these Markov processes must also remain
within the feasible part of space. This forces the generator to be an elliptic
operator whose leading part degenerates along the boundary. A distinguishing
feature of these processes is that, in the absence of an outside force, like
mutation, a typical path reaches the boundary of the feasible region in finite
time, but cannot cross it. This implies that the degeneracies are rather
different from any that have heretofore been successfully analyzed. While a
great deal is known about some classes of degenerate operators, very little is
known either about the class of operators that arise here, or about degenerate
PDEs on domains with boundaries as singular as that of a simplex or other
polyhedra. A principal focus of Dr. Epstein's research is to understand the
detailed analytic properties of the solutions to equations of this type. His
recent work, with Rafe Mazzeo, establishes the existence and uniqueness of
regular solutions for this natural class of equations, on a natural class of
domains, and lays the foundation for a detailed study of the qualitative
properties of these models. In applications one needs to solve equations that
these prior results show cannot have regular solutions. Thus Dr. Epstein will
now turn his attention to the analysis of the singular solutions that arise in
applications to Probability, Mathematical Finance and Population Biology, etc.
Amongst other things, this will entail an elaboration of the functional analytic
framework used to analyze regular solutions, to address the singularities that
arise in these applications. Combining these analytic techniques with methods
used in Probability Theory, he hopes to precisely describe the structure of the
heat kernel itself near to time zero, and along the boundaries of the feasible
region, where it can exhibit various types of singularities.



Mathematical models for many problems in Population Biology, Epidemiology and
Finance involve the time evolution of a collection of discrete variables under
both random and deterministic forces. These variables are frequently
constrained: for example a population with a given genotype, or the number of
people infected with a pathogen must be a non-negative integer, and the value of
a stock is usually assumed to be non-negative. The dynamical behavior of such
models is often described by a Markov chain. These are discrete models with "no
history," meaning that the statistical properties of the current generation
determine those of the next. Discrete models of this type are difficult to
directly analyze, and so they are often replaced by continuum limits that are
described by partial differential equations, which is also the language of
classical and quantum physics. While much work has been done to study such
models when there is a single variable, the purpose of this project is to
develop analytic and computational tools to study the qualitative behavior of
solutions to these equations when there are many, possibly interacting,
variables. In applications to Population Genetics, such tools can be used to
understand when random aspects of reproduction dominate the evolution of a
population, and when deterministic forces like natural selection dominate. The
investigator hopes to unravel the effects of fitness interactions among a small
group mutations on the evolution of simple organisms. Similar methods could be
applied to study the early stages of an epidemic, when it might be possible to
make a small intervention that could control the growth of the infected
population.