* 1205550
* Classical and Quantum Aspects of Black Holes, Horizons and Asymptotic Symmetries
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Andrew Strominger, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2016
* USD 250,940.00

The visible universe has edges, known as event horizons, which surround a black
hole or a region of the universe speeding away faster than light. The nature of
these edges has vexed physicists, beginning with Einstein, for nearly a century.
They are governed by an elegant and beautiful set of quantum laws discovered
four decades ago by Bekenstein and Hawking. These laws indicate that black holes
are at once the simplest and most complex objects in the physical universe. They
are simple because, according to Einstein's general relativity there is in
effect nothing inside - space ends at the horizon. They are complex because the
Bekenstein-Hawking laws imply that they must carry the maximal allowable
information. The coexistence of these dichotomous descriptions of black holes
underlies a deep paradox whose resolution is a focal point of modern physics.
While the basic paradox remains unsolved, much has been learned using a variety
of apporaches. Resolving the paradox is a central problem in modern physics and
will likely lead to profound new insights into the nature of our universe,
comparable to those following from quantum mechanics and
relativity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project we propose specific steps to
continue these fruitful investigations as well as more generally address
universal aspects of the paradox, in its many manifestations surrounding black
hole and other horizons. Our investigations will be informed by important
lessons learned in the process of studying string theory (a candidate for a
fundamental unified theory of nature), but we will concentrate on universal
aspects of large-scale observable phenomena which are independent of any
assumptions about the as yet-unknown completion of the fundamental laws of
nature. Here we pursue a bottom-up approach working from astrophysically
observed properties of horizons, the powerful symmetry -general covariance-
underlying Einstein's theory of general relativity, and basic physical and
mathematical consistency.