* 1205194
* JSU-UCSB Partnership For Research and Education in Materials Science
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,10/31/2018
* Dorothy Pak, Jackson State University
* Continuing Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 10/31/2018
* USD 3,424,365.00

The goal of the Partnership for Education and Research in Materials (PREM)
between Jackson State University (JSU) and the University of California, Santa
Barbara (UCSB) is to establish a permanent and collaborative research
environment and educational structure in the area of biomaterials science. A
well-defined target is to increase recruitment, retention and degree attainment
of JSU students-especially in doctoral degree programs. This PREM project will
build upon an existing and growing relationship between JSU and the UCSB. One of
the most exciting and outstanding features of the PREM is the development of a
truly synergistic relationship between Jackson State and UCSB. As a result, the
impact of the PREM on the MRL at UCSB and the greater UCSB campus will be as
great as the PREM's impact on the developing area of materials research at JSU.
The PREM will allow JSU to become a leader in materials research, while at the
same time establishing strong educational ties between JSU and UCSB. In terms of
human resources, the PREM program will provide an opportunity for the Materials
Research Laboratory at UCSB to engage with some of the best minority students in
the country and through exposure to the research and teaching environment at
UCSB, inspire the students to doctoral degrees in Materials. The materials
research objective will focus on the development and application of new
materials. Specifically, they will focus on three research subprojects that are
characterized by cutting-edge world-class research and a highly collaborative
research environment between JSU and UCSB. The mission of this project is to
develop: 1) Magnetically/Mechanically-Active Hybrid Biomolecular Gels, 2)
Multifunctional Nanostructured Materials, and 3) Theoretical and Experimental
Understanding of Biophysicochemical Interactions at the Nanobio Interface. The
research is of fundamental scientific interest as well as a crucial component in
the development of state-of-the-art devices and sensors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Critical to the success of this PREM will be the
establishment of infrastructure for the education, training and mentoring of
minority students and postdoctoral fellows through formal courses, workshops and
laboratory rotations. The spectrum of activities planned in this collaboration
include the development of a Two-year Masters program at JSU which a strong
focus in Materials coupled to a Bridges to the Doctorate at UCSB program.
Establishment of a collaborative undergraduate Materials Science Interns program
as well as active and hands-on undergraduate and graduate courses to prepare
minority students for future generation scientist will also be a major focus.
This PREM will also play an important role in the larger framework of the JSU
College of Science, Engineering, and Technology by attracting students from
School of Engineering and other departments and by promoting inter-departmental
collaboration between faculty members. The PREM will continue its community
outreach program, Nanodays, at both the Mississippi Museum of Natural Sciences
and the Memphis Zoo.