* 1205919
* How Network Constituents Influence Temporal Pattern Formation Within In Vitro Neural Networks
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Rhonda Dzakpasu, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2016
* USD 477,663.00

In this project, the PI will study how the diversity of the constituents
influence the principles of self-organization that underlie network phenomena.
As the fraction of inhibitory neurons within a network of excitatory and
inhibitory Neurons changes, the PI hypothesizes that one can elucidate the
underlying functional rules that are present despite the absence of native
anatomy. Using multi-electrode arrays the PI will characterize network dynamical
function to generate new testable hypotheses. This project will address a
fundamental question: How does modulating the excitatory/inhibitory (E/I) ratio
influence synaptic tuning to adapt while maintaining a stable state? In this
project the PI will vary this ratio by adding striatal cells (inhibitory) to
single cell suspensions of hippocampal (excitatory) neurons and record
spontaneous electrical network activity. The excitability will be increased by
using a pharmacological paradigm for long-term potentiation, a mechanism
believed to be the cellular basis of learning and memory. Immunostaining and
confocal microscopy imaging studies will assess the distribution of synapses for
these ratios. The proposed study will not only increase our understanding from
an experimental perspective of how robustness and adaptability can coexist in
networks of neurons, but results will provide a framework that can be used to
develop realistic computational models. These techniques and concepts will be
disseminated to a broader audience to students from Howard University as well as
underrepresented minority students at the Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL) in
Woods Hole, MA. Undergraduate and graduate education will be impacted through
the teaching of the Research Modules for the Cognitive Science undergraduate
program and the Neurons in Action 2 summer workshop that encompasses graduate
students from Howard University and incoming Georgetown University graduate
students in the Interdisciplinary Program in Neuroscience.