* 1205077
* National Convergence Technology Center
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2019
* Jon Hardesty, Collin County Community College
* Continuing Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 07/31/2019
* USD 5,322,826.00

The National Center for Convergence Technology (CTC) builds upon its partnership
with businesses and educational institutions in North Texas and the network of
partner and mentored colleges developed as a regional center. The reach of the
National Center is expanded to at least sixty community colleges nationwide by
working through five partner colleges that mentor community colleges in their
geographic region to implement high-demand convergence degree and certificate
programs in the emerging technologies associated with the networking IT
infrastructure, including mentoring feeder high school and four-year university
programs in a 2+2+2 pathway. The regional Business Industry Leadership Team
(BILT) is expanded nationally to provide job task analyses to guide the
nationwide network of community colleges to prepare their students for high-
wage, high-demand jobs in IT infrastructure including mobile networks, cloud
computing, mobile device integration, storage and network virtualization, and
video integration. These are all expansions of convergence technology: voice,
video, image, and data over a secure network. The Center provides e-books and
interactive on-line tools to support delivery of courses and professional
development of faculty. The Center focuses on increasing the number of degree/
certificate completers ready to meet workforce needs and on implementing
nationally-known best practices for recruiting, retaining, and graduating
underserved students. A set of stackable certifications is created to expand
career potential and allow for rapid reemployment. An evaluation measures the
effectiveness of the Center in developing mentored colleges that implement
courses and programs that provide regional business with workplace ready
employment candidates that have content skills to meet the latest changes in the
industry as well as employability skills that ensure effective workplace
behavior. The evaluation also measures the effectiveness of the professional
development of faculty and the content knowledge and employability skills of the
students. The methodologies include gathering numbers data, interviews, and
surveys of students, faculty and BILT members.