* 1205501
* II-NEW: Collaborative Research: COMET: A Web Infrastructure for Research and Experimentation in User Interactive Event Driven Testing
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Atif Memon, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2016
* USD 391,896.00

User interactive event driven software is pervasive today. End users interact
with applications by pointing, clicking or touching the interface, and as this
happens, the programs respond. Ensuring the dependability of these systems
through software testing is paramount, because insufficient testing techniques
currently cost the US economy billions of dollars annually. Yet the flexibility
of these systems, which make them appealing to users, also increases the
difficulty of testing them. This difficulty has fueled a large body of research
on user interactive event driven testing, but the newly developed techniques are
often evaluated using isolated case studies and experiments. The user
interactive event driven testing community lacks a common set of benchmarks and
tools for evaluating their new methods, leading to experimental mismatch; the
results of one study are difficult to compare with another. The lack of common
benchmarks also means that we cannot easily combine results of multiple studies
to build a larger body of knowledge.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project reduces
the mismatch and is advancing user interactive event driven testing research by
developing a shared research and experimentation web infrastructure called
COMET. An initial proof of concept for COMET was developed through earlier
support from NSF. Factors that contribute to the mismatch include the
development of platform specific test methods, test harnesses that require
customizations for each test subject application and each operating system, and
models that are incompatible with one another. The research will devise new
techniques to control the testing environment, contextualizing factors that may
affect experimental outcome and will allow for evolution and change of the
artifacts over time. It is building a shared and extensible web infrastructure
of benchmarks, tools, models and test artifacts that will enable scientific
discovery in the state-of-the-art of user interactive event driven testing.
COMET is a public resource that will be available to a broader community. Its
impact will extend not only to the user interactive event testing research
community, but also to others that work with user interfaces such as those who
study usability, and to industry and the software testing community at large.
The project work will involve both graduate and undergraduate students.
Artifacts from the COMET website will be utilized for educational purposes in
the classroom.