* 1205481
* Reducing Coating Thermal Noise in Gravitational Wave Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2015
* Gregory Harry, American University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 05/31/2015
* USD 165,000.00

Direct detection of gravitational waves has been a major challenge in gravity
and astrophysics research for nearly 50 years. Successful detection of
gravitational waves is expected to provide insight and information on neutron
stars, supernova explosions, black holes, and the earliest moments after the Big
Bang that is not available to electromagnetic telescopes. It will also provide
an experimental test of Einstein's General Theory of Relativity which can help
determine if there are missing elements to our understanding of gravity and
cosmology. The detection of astronomical gravitational waves requires extremely
precise optical measurements. Coating thermal noise in the optics is a limiting
noise source in the most sensitive frequency band of second generation
gravitational wave detectors. This project is on the study and improvement of
coating thermal noise through novel measurements of the mechanical loss in
optical coating materials. Measuring two sources of dissipation (from bulk and
torsional motion) in coating materials can give valuable information for low
thermal noise coating design as well as insights into the causes of thermal
noise in coating materials.

Improvements in coating thermal noise will have applications beyond
gravitational wave detection. Frequency stabilization, quantum mechanics
experiments, and other precision optics applications are encountering the same
coating thermal noise limitation as gravitational wave detection. Some of these
have commercial and industrial applications, especially frequency stabilization
and precision timing. In addition, this proposal helps to develop an
experimental physics program at American University that will include
undergraduate researchers. This will help expose American students (many of whom
aspire to careers in public policy) to experimental science and cutting edge
research.