* 1205026
* San Antonio College Server Virtualization Center Project
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Ronald Carswell, San Antonio College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Erlinger
* 08/31/2015
* USD 284,819.00

The San Antonio College (SAC) Department of Computer Information Systems (CIS)
is developing an Enhanced Skills Certificate in Server Virtualization to
increase the number of technicians who enter the workforce with competencies in
server virtualization and cloud computing. Students learn how to use Microsoft
Hyper V and VMware software, open-source virtualization software, SQL Server
2008 and SharePoint 2010. In addition to addressing the growing need for
virtualization technicians across Texas and the nation, this project allows SAC
and Texas A&M University at San Antonio and St. Mary's University to establish a
pathway to BAAS degrees at both universities through articulation agreements for
all courses within the proposed certificate. The PIs are developing curricula
and laboratory activities with input from a nine-member industry Advisory Board.

In addition to providing industry-responsive virtualization curricula and
laboratory activities for replication, widespread dissemination of project
evaluation results is contributing to the nation's knowledge of how to best
develop technician education programs in collaboration with industry and four-
year institutions, how to best train faculty who educate technicians and how
career and technical programs at two-year colleges can work with four-year
institutions to establish seamless transfer pipelines.

As a Hispanic-Serving Institution, SAC is poised to broaden participation of
Hispanics in the IT workforce through this project. This project is also
improving SAC's infrastructure by strengthening its ties to industry through the
SVC Project Advisory Board, increasing student transfer opportunities through
new articulation agreements with universities and expanding faculty's
professional networks through dissemination efforts.