* 1205991
* Fundamental Studies of the Proton Spin in QCD
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2016
* Renee Fatemi, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 04/30/2016
* USD 479,999.00

This award will fund experimental efforts to probe the quark transversity
distributions via measurements of Collins asymmetries in mid-rapdity jets
reconstructed in the STAR detector at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider. It
will support efforts to further constrain the gluon contribution to the spin
puzzle via measurements of dijet asymmetries in proton-proton collisions at
center-of-mass energies of 500 GeV. These funds will also support manpower for
the installation and commissioning of the Forward Gem Tracker, the STAR detector
upgrade designed to measure the parity violating asymmetries of W production
that are sensitive to the flavor separated anti-up and anti-down quark spin
distributions in the proton. This award provides the unique opportunity for the
University of Kentucky graduate and undergraduate students to learn and develop
the software tools and analysis techniques necessary for jet reconstruction,
while simultaneously contributing to the installation and commissioning of a
state-of-the-art detector at the world's only high-energy polarized proton
collider.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The protons and neutrons that serve as
building blocks for our visible universe are constructed from smaller, more
fundamental particles called quarks and gluons. These point-like particles, or
partons, are confined inside nucleons due to the nature of the strong force
which governs their interactions. Consequently, the abundant, stable and easily
manipulated proton has served as an experimental "partonic laboratory" for over
half a century. The underlying mechanisms of Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), the
formal theory of strong interactions, are illuminated via investigations into
how the proton mass, charge and spin manifest from partonic degrees of
freedom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spin, a type of angular momentum inherent to all
fundamental particles, is a purely quantum mechanical observable and therefore
serves as a particularly sharp probe into the nature of QCD. The "spin puzzle"
is an outstanding question in QCD physics and can be stated simply: How does the
spin and orbital angular momentum of the quarks and gluons combine to form the
total proton spin of 1/2? Two decades of experiments have constrained the total
quark spin contribution to be ~1/3 of the sum. However, the surprisingly small
value motivates experiments designed to measure the quark and gluon spin
distributions and partonic orbital angular momentum pieces of the spin puzzle.