* 1205989
* The Nanomechanics of Cellulose and Cellulose Synthesis
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Tobias Baskin, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2017
* USD 485,291.00

In this project the PI will develop detailed understanding of cellulose
synthesis and the physical properties of cellulose microfibrils. Cellulose
synthesis will be observed both in vitro and in vivo with single-molecule
sensitive imaging techniques. In addition, the mechanics of individual cellulose
microfibrils will be probed using optical imaging and manipulation, so as to
elucidate their structure and dynamics. This work will provide the first direct
observations of individual cellulose microfibril synthesis and flexibility. The
specific objectives of this work are to (1) observe the detailed mechanics of
cellulose-synthesis in vivo with single-molecule sensitive imaging; (2) measure
the nanomechanics of individual microfibrils from an in vitro cellulose
preparation; (3) observe cellulose synthesis in vitro, and measure microfibril
dynamics during synthesis; and (4) develop a novel in vitro cellulose
preparation based on Arabidopsis thaliana, a plant in which the genetics of
cellulose synthesis is the best understood and most readily manipulated. The
project will provide observations and measurements needed to create and validate
physical models of a fundamental biological process and the material created by
it. Similar models may be adapted to describe other naturally occurring fibers
and the hierarchical structures built from them. The work will also provide new
approaches for understanding the physical properties of nanoscopic fibers. These
approaches will be useful in elucidating the mechanics and assembly of
biological and manmade fibers that have defects or twists in their structure.
Better understanding cellulose synthesis will also enhance plant science. A
better understanding of cellulose synthesis will lead to better control and
characterization of novel materials, such as nanocrystalline cellulose whiskers,
that are recovered from bulk plant cellulose. Cellulose nanowhiskers are high-
aspect ratio crystalline nanoparticles that are chemically stable and carbon
neutral; their physical and chemical properties make them desirable in
applications as diverse as electronics and drug delivery. Their material
properties depend on their assembly in vivo, and yet the relationship between
naturally occurring microfibrils and recovered nanocrystals has not been well
established. The PI will introduce students at all levels and with many
backgrounds to interdisciplinary research and single-molecule sensitive
biophysical techniques. Recruitment and retention of the best students from the
broadest possible pool of applicants will be facilitated by activities in
conjunction with the Northeast Alliance for Graduate Education and the
Professoriate (NEAGEP) and with a local support group for women and minority
members in physics.

This project is being jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems program
in the Division of Physics and the Cellular Processes Program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.