* 1205454
* Control of Ultracold Dynamics and Decoherence Using Optical Frequency Combs
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Svetlana Malinovskaya, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 02/29/2016
* USD 197,214.00

Intellectual Merit: The project is devoted to theoretical investigations of the
optical frequency comb's interaction with ultracold atomic and molecular
systems. It is aiming at the development of quantum control methods to
manipulate dynamics in ultracold gases, to create and control ultracold
molecules and mitigate the attendant decoherence. A semiclassical theory of
ultrafast, phase-locked pulse train interaction with multilevel systems will be
developed, taking into account the decay and collisional dephasing in the
framework of the Liouville von Neumann equations with relaxation. The objective
is to understand the mechanisms of light-matter interaction at ultracold
temperatures that involve two-photon Raman transitions, and to implement them in
preparing desired superposition states and controlling ultracold dynamics, e.g.,
vibrational ladder climbing. The newly developed methods will contain elements
that mitigate or prevent decoherence in the system. The focus will be on the
studies of polar molecules, such as the KRb molecule, and atomic systems,
e.g.,Rubidium-85 and Rubidium-87. The amplitude and phase modulation will be
applied to the pulse trains that form optical frequency combs. Dressed state
analysis will be performed to uncover the mechanisms of modulated combs'
interaction with ultracold atoms and molecules, and to gain insights on quantum
control of the dynamics, including the case when decoherence is present in the
system. The completion of these investigations will advance knowledge about
light-matter interactions at ultracold temperatures and will provide new methods
of quantum control that are robust for experimental
realization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Newly developed ultracold
control methods are expected to advance and broaden fields of applications, from
ultracold chemical reactions, to quantum information and quantum computation, to
metrology. Graduate students will get involved in the proposed investigations
through developing theoretical models, programming, collecting and interpreting
data of numerical calculations. New findings on applications of optical
frequency combs will be incorporated into the material of the graduate course
"Methods of Quantum Control" which the PI has developed and teaches every other
year. Within this course, students learn about the advanced quantum control
methods based on the latest developments of laser technologies. All of this
broadens opportunities for their career development. Collaboration with
experimental groups at Stevens Institute of Technology and other universities
will be initiated, aiming at implementing newly developed control methods in
experimental investigations.