* 1205560
* CT-ISG:  Percolation Processes and the Design of Highly Resilient Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Edmund Yeh, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 06/30/2012
* USD 1,401.00

This project establishes a fundamental analytical and design framework for
highly resilient wireless networks based on the study of the qualitative and
quantitative properties of the largest connected component. The essential
mathematical basis for this study comes from the theory of percolation. Building
on recent results in continuum percolation, the project designs network
structures to greatly enhance the resilience of large-scale wireless networks to
node and link failures resulting from attacks, natural hazards or resource
depletion. Expected results from the project include (1) deeper understanding of
percolation processes and resilience in large-scale wireless networks with
multiple transmission power levels and channel fading, (2) analysis of network
resilience to degree-dependent and cascading node failures, (3) design of
wireless networking structures which maximize resilience to random node and link
failures, (4) understanding of percolation and resilience in wireless networks
described by signal-to-interference-plus-noise-ratio models and directed graphs,
and (5) percolation and resilience in mobile wireless networks. This project
will (1) have direct and long-term impact on the reliability and security of
wireless network architectures used in national&lt;br/&gt;security, commercial
enterprise, scientific exploration and research, health services, and other
important social projects, (2) impact undergraduate and graduate education
through a planned course, (3) enhance research and education infrastructure
through partnering with other university departments, government research
institutions, and industry, and (4) enhance scientific and technological
understanding through publications as well as participation in multi-
disciplinary conferences and workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;