* 1205426
* II-NEW:  Infrastructure for Research and Education in Machine Perception and Sensory Motor Learning for Home Health Care
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Gary Holness, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2015
* USD 298,226.00

This project provides infrastructure to support research concerning the
investigation, design, and integration of reusable sensory-motor services that
proactively monitor patient health status and provide flexible tools for
intervention. The shortage of skilled allied healthcare professionals and their
finite capacity prevents the continuous monitoring of patient vital statistics.
Leveraging an aging population?s preference to remain at home while managing
chronic illness, this project enables research into the use of machine
perception and sensory motor learning for recognition and intervention of
degrading health status in a home care environment.

The investigators are building a new infrastructure consisting of compute nodes,
robotic platforms, sensing systems, and novel service framework for research and
education in Machine Perception and Sensory Motor Learning for healthcare
applications at Delaware State University. By factoring perceptual systems and
making them accessible services on the network, a robot becomes a virtual
assemblage that recruits arbitrary resources at run-time. Such service
compositions provide a richer suite of perceptual and robotic services because
it draws from the power-set of available sensory-motor apparatus. Service
compositions include methods, such as ensembles in machine learning, that
construct high fidelity models for pattern learning by combining a number of
simpler component models.

The infrastructure built from this project enables research in many areas, such
as perceptual computing, robotics, and machine learning. The broader impact of
the project includes more proactive tools for detection and intervention in
healthcare and training of undergraduate and graduate students (including
underrepresented students in STEM) in interdisciplinary research.