* 1205795
* Mechanochemical Models of Cellular Adhesions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Sean Sun, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 12/31/2016
* USD 401,606.00

In this project, the PI will develop basic models of cell-substrate and cell-
cell adhesions, connecting essential molecular scale properties of adhesion
molecules with cellular scale observables. The models will focus on generic
features and reveal the essential physics of adhesion systems at the cellular
scale. The project will explore the dynamics of cellular adhesions using
continuum theory, simulations and mechano-chemical modeling. The approach will
connect the properties of molecular components in biological adhesions with
measurable dynamic phenomena at the cellular level. The work will identify
principles that organize cell-substrate and cell-cell adhesions, and mechanisms
behind processes such as cell mechanosensation and cell-cell signaling. The
project will use a mechanical view of biological components, and will combine
mechanics with chemistry at the molecular level. This work is also essential for
a systems understanding of cellular components in achieving important biological
function. The project will connect to graduate training programs at Johns
Hopkins, the Institute for NanoBioTechnology (INBT) and Physical Sciences in
Oncology Center (PSOC) where the PI is a participating faculty. A new graduate
course will serve as the primary computational methods course for the INBT
students. The work will also integrate both academic and ethnic diversity, and
interface with a student exchange program established between the investigator
and Morgan State University. The PI will host summer minority undergraduate
students from Morgan State to gain valuable research experience in the
laboratory.