* 1205748
* CI-ADDO-EN: Enhancement and Operation of the California Social Science Experimental Laboratory - CASSEL
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Hugo Hopenhayn, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2014
* USD 373,998.00

The California Social Science Experimental Laboratory (CASSEL) is perhaps the
world's most advanced research laboratory devoted to experimental work in the
Social Sciences. CASSEL has been and continues to be used for research and
training by faculty and graduate students from UCLA (Departments of Economics,
Political Science and Anthropology, Anderson Graduate School of Management,
School of Law) and Caltech (Division of Humanities and Social Sciences) and many
other institutions both nearby and far away, including Brown University,
Claremont Center, UC Irvine, and the University of Beijing. The Division of
Social Sciences at UCLA has made a long-term commitment to support CASSEL,
providing space, maintenance, operating funds. In this proposal the PI is asking
NSF to provide funds for major equipment upgrades (server, subject computers,
and ancillary equipment) in order to continue and expand CASSEL's vital role in
experimental work in the Social Sciences. Equipment in CASSEL is in need of
upgrade for a number of reasons: 1) Computers are due for replacement as they
are close to the end of their normal useful lives (current subject computers and
servers are not fast enough to carry out the computation necessary to conduct
some experiments); 2) In order to run large experiments, the method of subject
signup and payment needs to be expedited (to do this, the lab needs to set up
electronic signup and payment systems); 3) Current equipment does not permit
monitoring of communications between subjects or the monitoring of such
communications; 4) CASSEL?s outreach capabilities need to be enhanced so that
experiments can be run remotely; and 5) Ancillary equipment in CASSEL including
projectors, copiers, etc. is reaching or has already exceeded its normal useful
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Experiments are used to
develop and improve the organization and performance of private and public
institutions. The requested funds will yield a high return on investment
because, as documented in detail in the Project Description, CASSEL is
extensively used by a large number of students and researchers from a wide range
of institutions. The proposed enhancement will maintain and expand the usability
of CASSEL for broadly-based communities of researchers and educators that extend
well beyond our institution, so that it becomes the premier social science
research laboratory in the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;CASSEL is organized around the "shared resource" principle. It
provides a user-friendly facility enabling researchers without laboratory access
to become involved in experimental research, and enabling all researchers to
engage in large-scale experiments. It is both an interdisciplinary and an inter-
university facility. One indication of the lab's outreach is that in the last
two years over 50% of the usage was by non-UCLA researchers. Research conducted
at CASSEL broadens our understanding of decision-making, markets and
institutions. This research leads to advances in theoretical models and in the
connection of those models to empirical data, and to advances in experimental
methodology. In addition, CASSEL is an important training ground for graduate
student researchers, and hosts large numbers of freshmen seminars using
experimental methods. Finally, CASSEL plays an important role in developing and
testing of new experimental software (such as Multistage and jMarkets) and
recruiting/scheduling software that is used in many other experimental
laboratories and serves to facilitate experimental research in social science.