* 1205475
* CI-ADDO-NEW: Collaborative Research: A Repository for Annotating Multilingual Code Switched Data
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,11/30/2014
* Thamar Solorio, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 11/30/2014
* USD 372,341.00

Linguistic code switching (LCS) is the practice of switching back and forth
between the shared languages of bilingual or multilingual speakers. This
phenomenon is particularly prevalent in geographic regions with linguistic
boundaries or where there are large immigrant groups. Various levels of language
(phonological, morphological, syntactic, semantic and discourse-pragmatic) may
be implicated in LCS in different language pairs and/or genres. Computational
algorithms trained for a single language quickly break down when the input
includes LCS. A major barrier to research on LCS in computational linguistics
(CL) has been the lack of large, accurately annotated corpora of LCS data. In
this project, a large repository of LCS data is collected and a large annotation
infrastructure is developed. It is consistently annotated in different
modalities (speech and text), at various levels of linguistic granularity, and
across different language pairs reflecting different linguistic typologies
(Standard Arabic and Dialectal Arabic, Arabic-English, Spanish-English, Chinese-
English, Hindi-English). The focus of the effort is on intra-sentential
LCS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This infrastructure and unified large LCS data
resource is eagerly awaited by the CL research community, since annotated LCS
data provides a natural test-bed for adaptive learning algorithms and the
handling of diverse data sources, as well as a framework for genuine
multilingual processing. It will also be of benefit to sociolinguistic and
theoretical linguistic researchers, and provide a platform for collaborative
interdisciplinary research. Finally, research on LCS helps overcome biases
against multilingual speakers by demonstrating the creativity of such speakers
in exploiting their verbal repertoires. Such a result is particularly important
for K-12 education and testing policies in the USA with its diverse immigrant
population.