* 1205721
* CI-ADDO-NEW: FPGA Accelerator Research Infrastructure Cloud (FAbRIC)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Derek Chiou, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2018
* USD 800,000.00

Reconfigurable hardware has tremendous potential in terms of performance and
power efficiency. However, the high cost of tools needed to program such
systems, and need to program at a very low level together put such systems out
of reach of most researchers. The FAbRIC (FPGA Research Infrastructure Cloud)
project will acquire and maintain such systems and their tools in the Texas
Advanced Computing Center for open use by all researchers. In addition, the PIs
will port our own reconfigurable hardware "operating systems" to the platforms
to dramatically improve their usability and our own applications to serve as
starting points for future work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Having an
open, shared resource of this kind makes some of the highest performance
computational power available to all researchers, regardless of their location
or their ability to purchase and maintain such systems. The project team will
run distributed classes for students and researchers to learn how to use such
platforms. In addition, the default usage model of "open source to play" enables
anyone who agrees to let the team open their source codes to use the facility
free of charge. Such a shared platform with free industrial-strength tools and
open sourced code finally enables true reproducibility of research results and
the ability to leverage other work.