* 1205309
* Transient and steady-state properties far from equilibrium
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Michel Pleimling, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
and education on interacting many-particle systems far from equilibrium. The PI
will combine advanced analytical and numerical techniques and explore novel
aspects of transient and steady state properties far from equilibrium. Two main
research thrusts will be pursued. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first thrust focuses
on relaxation processes far from equilibrium. Aging phenomena in systems with
logarithmic growth remain poorly understood, even though many important
disordered systems are expected to display this type of slow growth in the long
time limit. The PI seeks to gain new insights into aging through the study of
paradigmatic models, amenable both to numerical and analytical methods.
Motivated by recent experiments on aging in artificial antiferromagnets, the PI
plans to extend the study of relaxation to layered Ising systems with increasing
complexity. A better understanding of aging processes in these systems should
help establishing artificial antiferromagnets as the new paradigm for the
experimental study of non-equilibrium processes in non-disordered systems. The
PI aims to build on recent work that showed the existence of a duality between
aging phenomena and gravitational physics in order to further open the field of
non-equilibrium physics to string theoretical techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second thrust focuses on non-equilibrium phase
transitions that take place in inhomogeneous systems where the effects of
surfaces and boundaries cannot be neglected. The PI will study phase transitions
in two different inhomogeneous systems with energy input at a surface or a
boundary: (1) bounded systems with magnetic friction and (2) systems with
conserved dynamics where different sectors are in contact with different heat
baths. The observed results, ranging from novel surface phase transitions to the
emergence of convection cells and temperature driven transitions between striped
phases, warrant an in-depth study in order to fully understand phase transitions
in systems with local energy input.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Due in part to the
ubiquity of non-equilibrium processes in nature, this research has potential to
have impact across disciplinary&lt;br/&gt;boundaries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is designed so that both undergraduate and graduate students can
contribute in a substantial and meaningful way, using a large variety of
methods. This training through research approach allows students to be involved
at every level in cutting-edge research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research and education on phenomena that occur in
systems of many interacting particles far from the steady state of equilibrium.
Non-equilibrium phenomena are all around us and range from weather patterns to
life itself. Two important aspects of systems out of equilibrium are: (1)
stationary states, wherein the system will remain if not pushed from the
outside, and (2) the relaxation towards these stationary states. Gaining a
better understanding of both the stationary properties and the relaxation
processes are needed in order to fully understand the world around us, and to
develop new ways to manipulate these processes to tailor the properties of
materials and other systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of interacting
systems of many particles far from equilibrium poses challenges, on both the
fundamental and the practical level. While there is a well established
theoretical framework for equilibrium systems, a similar comprehensive framework
remains elusive for non-equilibrium systems and processes. The PI will exploit a
variety of theoretical and computational techniques to advance our understanding
of non-equilibrium phenomena. The PI aims to develop new interdisciplinary
approaches, that combine statistical physics with advanced theoretical
techniques from other areas of physics, and to advance understanding of the
influence surfaces and interfaces on non-equilibrium processes. The PI aims to
investigate aging phenomena through the study of model systems that are
representative of large classes of condensed matter systems. Aging phenomena
have been exploited since prehistoric times to optimize some materials so that
they achieve desired properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed
so that both undergraduate and graduate students can contribute in a substantial
and meaningful way, using a variety of methods. This training through research
approach allows students to be involved at every level in cutting-edge research
projects.