* 1205439
* II-NEW: mHealth - Computing Infrastructure for Mobile Health and Wellness Monitoring
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Emil Jovanov, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2015
* USD 232,723.00

Healthcare systems are facing an imminent crisis precipitated by the confluence
of current social, economic and demographic trends. According to the United
States Census Bureau our total expenditures on healthcare reached $2.5 trillion
in 2009 and are projected to reach 20% of the nation's Gross Domestic Product in
2020. These statistics suggest the need to seek more scalable and affordable
healthcare solutions. A focus on proactive management of wellness / prevention,
on early detection of disease, and on optimal maintenance of chronic conditions
has the potential to reduce healthcare costs while increasing quality of life.
Recent technological advances in sensors, integration and miniaturization of
low-power electronics, wireless networking, mobile computing, and cloud
computing allow us to modernize and change the way health care services are
deployed and delivered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mobile health monitoring systems
that integrate wireless body area networks (WBANs) with a range of intelligent
and miniature sensors, personal devices like smart phones, and servers that can
be accessed over the Internet emerge as a promising technology for real-time,
unobtrusive health and wellness monitoring of individuals during normal daily
activities. Unprecedented proliferation of personal computing devices and smart
sensors makes such solutions practical and affordable. But further research is
needed to explore the design space and create optimal solution for a given
application, and also to understand the full scope of the opportunities offered
by the new technology while addressing the challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide funds to create mHealth, a new computing infrastructure to
support research and education in computer systems for mobile health and
wellness monitoring at the University of Alabama in Huntsville. The mHealth
infrastructure consists of: a) A variety of wearable wireless sensors for
monitoring users' physiological signals, body movement and activity levels,
along with general environmental conditions; b) Personal devices that collect
data from the sensors, analyze it, compile personalized health status
information, and upload data over the Internet to a server; and c) An mHealth
server running databases and services for logging and analysis of health records
from multiple users. The mHealth infrastructure will directly support several
research efforts conducted by the investigators, their students, and their
collaborators at the University of Alabama in Huntsville's College of Nursing,
at the Mayo Clinic, at the University of Alabama at Birmingham's School of
Health Sciences, and at the Lakeshore Foundation in Birmingham. In addition,
mHealth will be used in a senior design course sequence and two graduate courses
at the University of Alabama in Huntsville to improve the student academic
experience and to help with recruiting efforts through outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The mHealth
infrastructure will enable the investigators to pursue the following research
goals: 1) Exploring critical design issues in the next generation of wireless
wearable body area networks for health monitoring including their functionality,
reliability, and energy-efficiency; 2) Creating annotated public data
repositories with vital signs and physical activity parameters during normal
daily activities to promote further research in WBANs for health monitoring; 3)
Building WBAN research prototypes and developing algorithms, firmware and
software artifacts for applications such as monitoring and managing physical
activity in people with spinal cord injury (with UAB, Lakeshore), monitoring and
managing ambulatory rehabilitation of people with coronary disease (with Mayo),
health status assessment of people with coronary disease (with Mayo), and
monitoring of the occupational stress of nurses (with UAHuntsville
Nursing).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of the
mHealth infrastructure will help the investigators and their collaborators
pursue research in several multidisciplinary areas. If successful, these efforts
promise to improve our understanding of the design space of wearable ubiquitous
platforms for health monitoring, to improve quality of life of people with
disabilities, to promote healthy behaviors through use of technology in the
general population, to enable affordable solutions for ambulatory
rehabilitation, and to enable early detection of health conditions. The mHealth
infrastructure will also be used directly for education and training in several
graduate and undergraduate courses.