* 1205458
* CSR-DMSS,SM:   Cooperative Activity Analysis in Wireless Smart-Camera Networks (Wi-SCaNs)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/30/2011,08/31/2012
* Senem Velipasalar, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 08/31/2012
* USD 120,838.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;With the advances in the hardware technology and ever-
decreasing cost of imaging circuitry, cameras have become&lt;br/&gt;ubiquitous
in our lives. The large amounts of video data generated by multiple cameras
necessitate automatic&lt;br/&gt;analysis of activities from video. With the
introduction of smart cameras, it has now become viable to
install&lt;br/&gt;many spatially-distributed cameras interconnected by wireless
links. A smart camera is a stand-alone unit that&lt;br/&gt;not only captures
images, but also includes a processor, memory and communication interface. This
project&lt;br/&gt;takes a holistic view of the problems that need to be solved
to build scalable, battery-powered wireless smart-&lt;br/&gt;camera networks
(Wi-SCaNs). It focuses on providing a unifying solution to perform tasks
distributively, and&lt;br/&gt;communicate in a P2P fashion over wireless links
while making e±cient use of limited resources, such as energy&lt;br/&gt;and
bandwidth. This research explicitly considers the challenges of wireless
channels, and addresses the issues&lt;br/&gt;of scarce resources, P2P protocol
design and channel usage priorities simultaneously. The expected outcomes
of&lt;br/&gt;this project include light-weight vision algorithms that are
portable to embedded smart cameras, characterization&lt;br/&gt;of the energy-
bandwidth-delay tradeo®s in Wi-SCaNs, e±cient resource allocation strategies,
and P2P wireless&lt;br/&gt;communication protocols that leverage the knowledge
of the wireless channel conditions. The outcomes will have&lt;br/&gt;an
important positive impact, because they will fundamentally advance the automatic
activity analysis solutions&lt;br/&gt;by providing installation of any number of
cameras anywhere, and will ¯nd wide-ranging applications
including&lt;br/&gt;surveillance in military, commercial or public scenarios,
elderly care and wildlife monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;1