* 1205276
* Collaborative Research: Model Diagnostics in Regression and Tobit Regression Models with Measurement Errors
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Weixing Song, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2015
* USD 140,000.00

Statistical modeling for relationships between a collection of predictors and a
response is often implemented by regression analysis. In the classical
regression model, both predictors and response variables are assumed to be
directly observable. In measurement error regression models, predictors cannot
be observed directly, instead, some surrogates are observed. In Tobit regression
models, the response variable is observed only when it is above some threshold.
The development of useful and optimal inference procedures in the presence of
measurement errors in regression and Tobit regression models is of major concern
in theoretical and applied statistics. Despite this need, the study of goodness-
of-fit and lack-of-fit tests in the measurement error regression models and
Tobit regression models with/without measurement errors has lagged behind. In
this project, the investigators analyze goodness-of-fit tests for the
distributions of the random components of errors-in-variables and Berkson
measurement error regression models, and some nonparametric estimators of
regression functions in Tobit regression models with or without these
measurement errors. Furthermore, the investigators develop and analyze lack-of-
fit and goodness-of-fit tests in Tobit regression models with these measurement
errors. The investigators make available some new, useful, and optimal inference
procedures in these models with an in-depth understanding of their theoretical
properties to a wide professional audience in statistics and related
disciplines. This project is at the cutting edge of model checking in the
presence of measurement error in predictors in regression and Tobit regression
models. It advances and enriches the statistical theory and methodology, thereby
helping to fill a significant void and well recognized theoretical gap that
exists in statistics.

Measurement errors are very prevalent in the health sciences, physical sciences,
economics, and the social sciences. For example, when investigating the effect
of diet on breast cancer, one of the predictor variables studied for predicting
breast cancer is the long-term saturated fat intake which cannot be measured
precisely. Instead, the surrogate of a 24 hour diet recall for each patient is
often used in this type of investigation. Similarly, the exact amount of
radiation a person is exposed to when studying the effect of radiation exposure
on humans is often measured with error. In labor studies, when investigating the
relationship between women's working status and their background information,
such as age, education and working experience, the effect of measurement errors
is present in the education variables (such as mother's and father's education
experience). Tobit regression models, which are used in these types of studies,
often suffer from the measurement error problem. Most empirical studies
involving Tobit regression models tend to ignore the measurement errors, which
usually leads to biased and inefficient statistical conclusions. The research
focus of this project, which helps in assessing the accuracy of a regression
model or of a model for the distributions of random components in the presence
of measurement errors, helps to develop more accurate statistical inference for
these and other similar examples.