* 1205007
* Youth Technology Academy: Pathway to Technology Degrees
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Austin Melton, Cuyahoga Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2016
* USD 874,552.00

This project builds on the results and findings of the previously funded
Robotics Corridor Collaborative Project (0603427), which demonstrated that after
school robotics and math programming is highly successful in motivating high
school students to pursue technical and engineering studies. Yet once students
who participate in such programming graduate from high schools and enroll in
post-secondary institutions, they often lose interest and drop out due to lack
of adequate support. The primary deliverable of this project is a pre-
engineering experience, coursework, and project based instruction that includes
strong, technical training with additional math preparation, enabling high
school students to successfully pursue post-secondary science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) studies as soon as they arrive in college
rather than being delayed by remedial coursework. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project has five goals: (1) provide training for incumbent workers and
professional development for teachers who work with students; (2) increase the
number of students pursuing technical and engineering degrees upon graduation
from high school; (3) reduce the need for remedial math coursework among
students matriculating from high school to the college; (4) increase the number
of post-secondary students successfully completing technical and engineering
degrees or certificates at the college; and (5) develop 2+2+2 articulation
agreements with school districts and four-year institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary target population consists of at risk and
underrepresented Cleveland Metropolitan School District high school students and
community college students. The project involves enrollment of Cleveland
students in coursework and after school activities that include math, robot
programming, work readiness training, and other technical training. These high
school and college students are being taught and mentored by high school
teachers and industry experts hired as college faculty and mentored and tutored
by student mentors from the college. Students also participate in a summer camp
developed by the college, Kent State University, and VisualEdge. The project is
mapping out a clear pathway for students to follow in pursuing their technical
and engineering degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Building on
the findings of prior work, this project is improving STEM education for
underrepresented students and providing them with a strong support system to
ensure their successful completion of post-secondary STEM education and entry
into the engineering and engineering technology workforce. The project has the
potential to be a student success model for underrepresented youth. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The college has a track record of working with a
diverse cross section of society, especially with underrepresented and at risk
urban populations. Industry representatives participate in the advisory board
that helps develop curriculum for training students in the transferable work
skills required in technical jobs. Project results and findings are being shared
with colleagues at regional and national conferences and on the project web
site.