* 1205107
* SAgE Collaborative: Sustainable Agriculture Education for the Puget Sound Bioregion
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Grace Sparks, Edmonds Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2016
* USD 899,897.00

This collaborative project is developing a regional and comprehensive education
program by expanding on a previously funded "urban" sustainable agriculture
program at Seattle Central Community College (SCCC). Together with Skagit Valley
College, SCCC, and Washington State University, Edmonds Community College is
developing educational initiatives to increase the number and quality of
sustainable urban and small farm agriculture technician professionals.

Intellectual merit: The program is preparing and training students as
technicians in sustainable agriculture, an emerging and ecologically important
agricultural sector in the region's economy. Moreover, the program is helping
the region develop expertise in securing the basic food needs of our growing and
urbanizing populations. By providing research, service-learning, and internship
opportunities for students, the program is serving as the cornerstone of
contemporary curricula at various institutions to develop needed and advanced
training to the regions students that includes hands-on experience, private
sector partnerships, and the use of spatially-appropriate innovative
technologies.

Broader impacts: This proposal is providing educational and training
opportunities for students to be more competitive for green-collar jobs in
agricultural production, processing, distribution, and retail, a growing and
ecologically sustainable sector of our agricultural economy. Particular to urban
and suburban environments, opportunities exist for merging the education and
career fields of horticulture and landscaping with sustainable agriculture as
entrepreneurial businesses in edible landscape design, installation, and
maintenance in response to residential and commercial demand.