* 1205537
* RUI: Neutron Physics from 4HE to the Edge of the Dripline
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,12/31/2015
* Sharon Stephenson, Gettysburg College
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Hicks
* 12/31/2015
* USD 144,802.00

Exotic nuclei are short-lived, barely stable systems rich with neutrons -
Oxygen-24, Lithium-12, Beryllium-13. Studies of such nuclei are a key component
to the international long-range plan for nuclear physics. These nuclei provide
us with new information about the structure of the nucleus. The US commitment to
this work can be seen in the construction of the future Facility for Rare
Isotope Beams (FRIB) at the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory
(NSCL). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to support the work of the MoNA
collaboration, a group comprised of research scientists, faculty, postdocs,
graduate students, and undergraduates. We study the structure of exotic nuclei
with a unique experimental system designed specifically for this kind of work,
the Modular Neutron Array (MoNA), the new Large-area Multi-Institutional
Scintillator Array (LISA), and the Sweeper charged-fragment detector system,
using the rare isotope beams at the National Superconducting Cyclotron
Laboratory (NSCL) and the future beams at the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams.
We work to better understand unbound states in light but neutron-rich nuclei.
Through both knock-out dynamics and Coulomb dissociation, nuclear structure
questions, especially how nuclear structure changes as a function of nuclear
stability, are addressed. Our experimental campaign informs the astrophysics
community, since our work helps determine the gamma-neutron rates in stellar
processes.