* 1205296
* Regularization for High Dimensional Inference and Sparse Recovery
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Jelena Bradic, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2015
* USD 120,000.00

This proposal aims at answering pertinent questions to identifying sparse
subsets of high dimensional covariate spaces, in the context of regularization
methods, when simple least square loss functions are not well suited. The broad
goal is to understand the fundamental interactions between nonlinear and/or
censored structure of the statistical model, the regularization scheme and the
intrinsic dimensionality of the problem. Specifically, the PI aims at (1)
Identifying new statistical problems and regularization schemes, with complex
nonlinear and time-to-event structure with high dimensional covariate space that
are tuned to the characteristics of the data; (2) Developing novel non-
asymptotic oracle bounds on the behavior of regularized estimators where
techniques of random matrix theory, especially high probability bounds on
various matrix norms, and approximation theory, will be utilized to enhance
understanding of the effects of dimensionality on the non-asymptotic properties;
(3) Investigating new non-asymptotic bounds on risk of semiparametric methods
where the statistical model is possibly misspecified; (4) Analyzing and
developing models that use special interplay between censoring rate, sample size
and dimensionality of the problem and importantly (5) Introducing new algorithms
that optimally and efficiently solve the investigated large scale
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Explosion of microarray technologies
has lead to vast number of large-scale genome-wide association studies where
simultaneous analysis of a large number of SNPs is pertinent to discovering
genetic identification of complex diseases. Presence and importance of time to
event component calls for significant advances in statistical methodology for
both NP dimensionality and censored structure. This research proposal aims at
developing innovative and effective statistical methods for such complex data
with special impact in genetic, public health and bioinformatic sciences, where
censoring and vast number of gene interactions make identification of
misbehaving genes very difficult. Moreover, the developments of this inter-
disciplinary project will enhance new scientific discoveries, make new
collaborative connections with practitioners and will promote teaching and
training of graduate students on the contemporary state-of-the-art machine
learning techniques applied to semiparametric models and censored data. To
promote the progress of science, PI will make explicit collaborations of
department of Mathematics, Biostatistics division of the Medical School at UCSD
and Supercomputer Center in San Diego. Through dissemination of the results of
this proposal, PI plans to expose biology to mathematics majors and promote
science among underrepresented groups and women in mathematics.