* 1205573
* CI-P: Collaborative Research:  Large-Scale FPGA-Centric Computing with Molecular Dynamics
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Herman Lam, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2014
* USD 47,317.00

Together with theory and experimentation, computer simulation now constitutes
the ?third pillar? of scientific inquiry, enabling researchers to build and test
models of complex phenomena that cannot be replicated in the laboratory. The
method of Molecular Dynamics simulation in particular is critical: applications
range from the practical, e.g., drug design, to basic research in understanding
disease processes. The overall goal is to give the Molecular Dynamics user
community the compute capability to conduct transformative research via
scalable, cost-effective, high-performance, general-purpose systems built from
off-the-shelf components. The objective of this research is to bridge the many
orders-of-magnitude gap between the largest current simulations and the
potential physical systems to be studied.

Three fundamental issues limiting performance are (i) computational efficiency
per chip area, (ii) power density, which is reaching the limit of economical
cooling methods, and (iii) the bottleneck between processing and communication
devices. All three are addressed by Large-Scale Reconfigurable Computing using
Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs). FPGAs are commodity integrated circuits
whose circuitry can be configured, or programmed, in the field. Their
reconfigurable architecture gives them the ability to obtain maximum efficiency
for a particular application while at the same time drawing less than a quarter
the power of a conventional processing device. And because FPGAs are the core
components in internet routers, they are built to handle flexible high-
throughput communication.

This planning award is to investigate the novel system design to use the same
FPGAs for communication and for computation. This approach has several
advantages. First, it mitigates the critical bottleneck caused by the separation
of functions among multiple devices. Second, FPGA-based communication gives the
flexibility either to use standard protocols, or to use innovative application-
aware routing that enables important patterns, such as the Fast Fourier
Transform, to be routed congestion-free. Finally, FPGAs are well-suited for
Molecular Dynamics computation allowing the hierarchical data-movement to be
addressed through innovative routing, load-balancing, and arithmetic.