* 1205232
* EAGER: Characterizing biological function across a persistent oceanographic "hotspot" in the NE Pacific Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Anitra Ingalls, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 12/31/2012
* USD 299,991.00

Intellectual Merit: Every cubic centimeter of oceanic water is home to millions
of single celled organisms that are the engines of the majority of biological
activity in the ocean. These organisms form functional communities that are key
to our understanding of how the ocean benefits us through providing ecosystem
services and hinders us through disease and harmful algal blooms. The underlying
causes that shape the distribution and activity of organisms remain elusive,
resulting in impaired predictive ability. This project will bring oceanographic
research into the post-genomic era by joining genomics and transciptomics with
state of the art tools in proteomics, metabolomics and trace metal analyses to
understand the causes for observed biogeography and biological activity. The
project is a multi-faceted study of the structure and function of microbial
communities along a transect in the Northeast Pacific that crosses an
oceanographic "hotspot" that results from the mixing of high nutrient low
chlorophyll waters with coastal iron rich waters. This project is appropriate as
an EAGER award due to the high risk associated with combining numerous cutting
edge techniques carried out by a highly multidisciplinary team for the first
time. The team includes individuals in the geochemistry community that are
accustomed to viewing the end result of biological activity on a large spatial
and time integrated scale, and molecular ecologists who interrogate organisms
and communities for their evolutionary roots, metabolic capabilities and
physiological status. The project is a test bed for an integrated study that
includes a complete set of "omics" data along with cell quotas for trace metals.
The project will generate a large data set that will be shared with the broader
community as well as analyzed by the PIs. Cells in the environment carry out
their metabolic processes in the context of a chemical environment. By
interrogating cellular functions in the form of the proteome, metabolome and
metallome, the investigators are asking the cells to tell us what they sense in
the environment and how they respond to what they are sensing. These findings
will represent a major step toward redefining how we do oceanography such that a
complete understanding of microbial communities can lead us to predictions of
how the ocean will respond to ongoing change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This project follows on an ocean carbon and biogeochemistry
workshop that discussed how molecular ecologists might collaborate with
geochemists to better understand biogeochemical processes in the world oceans.
It is expected that successful completion of this proof of concept cruise will
lead to larger interdisciplinary program with the ongoing U.S. Geotraces
program. This particular project will demonstrate how using -omics approaches,
in conjunction with metagenomic and geochemical sampling, can provide the key to
linking structure with function across ocean biomes. As part of this project
there will be training for the next generation of oceanographers to work in a
multidisciplinary community. Undergraduate students will participate on the
cruise and will be entrained in research projects using the data generated. A
large data set will be made available to the entire oceanographic community, so
that participation will be considerably larger than the small group of
investigators participating in the cruise.