* 1205828
* RUI: Multimode Quantum State Tomography of Stored Photons
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Andrew Dawes, Pacific University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2015
* USD 167,955.00

Quantum information can be transferred from a beam of light to a cloud of atoms
and controllably released at a later time. This process forms the basis of many
important quantum memory devices that are fundamental to the future of quantum
information science, quantum computing, and quantum communication. Prior
experiments have stored light in a variety of systems, including cold atom
clouds, warm atomic vapor, solid state materials, and optical fibers. To extend
these successful investigations, the goal of this program is to carry out a full
characterization of the quantum states of stored-and-retrieved multimode
light.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Dawes at Pacific University applies techniques
developed for quantum state reconstruction to experimental stored-light systems.
The result is a more complete understanding of the quantum state of light before
and after storage. Prior detection schemes cannot distinguish between losses in
the retrieval process and losses in the detection process. In particular,
single-mode detection suffers from losses if the spatial mode chosen by the
detector differs from the spatial mode carrying the retrieved light. Array
detectors measure all spatial modes simultaneously. This capability can be used
to maximize the number of retrieved photons and allows for computation and
optimization of the retrieved spatial mode. Array detection therefore recovers
more information on the quantum state of light than previous methods. Array
detection is also used to compare multiple retrieved modes, and to explore
correlations between modes. The importance of this new information is that it
reveals fundamental properties of the quantum memory
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific promise of this project is that it
will create a new understanding of stored light processes based on the
characterization of stored quantum states. Since these processes are fundamental
to quantum memory devices, devices which are widely studied, this promise is of
considerable value. Results from these studies in atomic vapor systems will
inform future research in multimode quantum memories using solid state
materials. But more than the immediate advances in the research arena, this
program also trains undergraduates and inspires them to consider careers in
science. Undergraduate researchers participate in every step of the project, and
gain experience with experiment design, data collection, analysis, and
dissemination. The technical skills acquired during this experience, combined
with attentive mentoring in a supportive research community, create the best
form of scientific incubator to prepare students for successful science careers.
Attendance and presentations at regional and national conferences provide
students with further insight into the scientific profession, as well as an
opportunity to expand their network of peers. Additionally, students participate
in a new five-school consortium of atomic, molecular, and optical physics
research groups in the Pacific Northwest.