* 1205287
* 2012 Colloidal Macromolecular and Polyelectrolyte Solutions GRC
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Norman Wagner, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2012
* USD 20,000.00

The Division of Materials Research and the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems contribute funds to this award.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports participation of students and junior
investigators at the 2012 Colloidal, Macromolecular &amp; Polyelectrolyte
Solutions Gordon Research Conference that will be held February 5-10. This
conference will bring together a diverse group of recognized leading researchers
to exchange ideas on the topics of surface lubrication, application of ion-
containing polymers in areas of energy technology, solution properties of
polymers in ionic liquids, biological and polymeric networks and gels,
nanoparticle application in science and technology, electrostatic induced
assembly, and rheology and microrheology of colloids and gels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advancements in biotechnology, nanotechnology,
energy and soft materials have generated great interest in colloidal and polymer
science. The Gordon Research Conference on Colloidal, Macromolecular &amp;
Polyelectrolyte Solutions explores the frontiers of research on complex
solutions of charged, macromolecular and colloidal systems and their interfaces.
This conference has a strong interdisciplinary tradition bringing together
materials scientists, engineers, physicists, and chemists. The conference
attracts industrial, governmental and academic scientists from around the nation
and the world. The program highlights the impact of colloidal, macromolecular
and polyelectrolyte solutions on materials and especially advanced
nanostructured materials and nanocomposites. The conference will present the
latest exciting results of top researchers in the colloid, polymer and
polyelectrolyte fields. Fundamental problems within these fields and their
application to the other relevant disciplines will be discussed. The impact of
these fundamental ideas on specific applications in areas such as formulations,
battery design, lab-on-a-chip development, materials design and separation of
biomacromolecules with application in drug delivery and other therapeutics will
be highlighted through specific speakers and involvement of industrial
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference seeks to gather people in the
field and to foster interactions among them and with graduate students and post-
doctoral researchers in an effort to generate and disseminate new ideas across
the community. Participants from both academia and industry will ensure that
discussions range from fundamental aspects to practical applications. The
program for this meeting includes representation of female, African American and
Hispanic speakers and discussion leaders. The organizers will strive to ensure
that during the selection of participants to the meeting, a diverse audience
including many students, postdocs and young faculty from US institutions will be
achieved.