* 1205758
* Collaborative Research: Cultural Epistemologies and Science-related Practices: Living and Learning in Relationships
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Megan Bang, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2015
* USD 463,567.00

The objective of this project is to examine the role of culture in the
development of children's knowledge of and reasoning about the natural world.
This project builds on previous work that found cultural differences in science-
related practices such as observation, hypothesis formation, and explanation. It
also extends design research to preschool contexts with both Native and
European-American children, with the goal of finding ways to design rigorous
science learning environments for young children. The study populations include
both urban and rural Native-American and (mainly) European-American children.
The studies include adults and children of different ages, with tasks tailored
to each sample. This will achieve a more comprehensive view of the development
of understandings of nature. The project is a collaborative effort between TERC,
the American Indian Center of Chicago, the Menominee Tribe of Wisconsin, and
Northwestern University. The overall goal is to improve science learning by
bringing informal, out-of-school learning to bear on more formal, school-based
science learning.

The project employs an integration of multiple methods and measures to conduct
three sets of studies. 1. Studies of input conditions and learning in everyday
contexts. 2. More formal cognitive science studies of children's learning and
conceptual organization. 3. Community-based design experiments focused on
science learning. In different ways, each of these methods allows the project to
further develop, test, and examine the educational implications of proposed
theories of how culture affects science learning. This research project offers
extensive cross-cultural, cross-disciplinary research opportunities for pre- and
post-doctoral research trainees. Members of Native American communities have
increasingly become involved on related project as PIs, research assistants, and
graduate fellows. An important aspect of this project is resource development
and capacity building in Native-American institutions.

This research should have strong impacts on theories of cognitive and conceptual
development, especially those pertaining to how children's and adults' existing
knowledge is shaped by culture and experience. It should also promote an
expansive view of cultural practices, including contact with the natural world,
community forms of engagement, and parent-child interactions. The project
develops classroom practices that, if successful, have excellent potential for
scaling up and generality. Moreover, this project will provide a deeper
understanding of the developmental processes underlying cross-cultural
similarities and differences in science learning. This will serve as an
essential resource in national and local efforts to advance the education of
children enrolled in US schools, including the increasing number of children
from diverse linguistic and cultural backgrounds.