* 1205528
* II-NEW: Collaborative Research: Image Processing Cloud (IPC): A Domain-Specific Cloud Computing Infrastructure for Research and Education
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Xiaoming Li, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2016
* USD 149,999.00

The image processing domain is experiencing rapid increases in data size and
algorithm complexity. These increases in data size and algorithm complexity
demand large amounts of computing and storage power. However, modern computer
architectures have evolved to be extraordinarily complex, and frequently become
a challenge rather than a help for general researchers and educators who work in
image processing technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to fill the gap
between complicated modern architectures and complex applications, and to
support the research and education of image processing, the PIs are developing
an integrated image processing research environment within a computing Cloud
infrastructure. This infrastructure includes: 1) an open image processing
computing Cloud to support researchers and students to conduct image processing
research, share knowledge and research results, and stimulate education
materials among three universities: Prairie View A&amp;M University, University
of Houston, and University of Delaware; 2) a high-level domain specific language
designed to provide an abstract and productive programming model for image
processing applications; 3) a general compiler optimization framework with the
capability to tune into image processing applications at various levels starting
from high-level representations to low level transformations in the Cloud
environment.