* 1205965
* Probing the Wave-Like Nature of Cell Migration and Collective Behavior
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* John Fourkas, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

In this project, the PIs will investigate the consequences of recent
observations that the dynamics of the cell scaffolding is wavelike in many
biological processes - from amoeboid chemotaxis to development. The PI's goal is
to elucidate how this wave-like characteristic of the motility machinery affects
navigation of cells in complex environments, and collective behavior of cell
groups. The PIs will use D. discoideum as a model organism that exhibits both
individual and collective cell migration behavior, and that exhibits wave-like
protrusive activity even when cells are suspended without any surface contact.
The specific goals are: 1. Wave-surface coupling: The PIs will analyze how waves
interact with surfaces to generate forces and motion using micro-fabricated
local adhesion patches and lines. The aim is to understand how patterns of
adhesivity may direct migration and to integrate this insight into stochastic
simulations of collective cell migration. 2. Cell-cell coupling: The PIs will
measure how waves propagate through groups of cells that are in contact and
integrate this finding in simulations. The aim is to elucidate mechanical
aspects of cell-cell signaling and group migration. 3. Triggering waves and
resonances: the PIs will use the strengths of their team in nonlinear dynamics,
microfabrication, and quantitative studies of amoeboid cell migration, to
achieve these goals. The PIs will carry out the proposed work through the
combination of expertise in controlled 3D microfabrication and surface
functionalization of local adhesion patches, systematic shape dynamics
quantification, and stochastic modeling of collective dynamics. To make their
findings broadly accessible, the PIs will also develop a series of videos for
YouTube that will highlight wavelike cell migration and cell-cell communication
as a jumping point to introduce different scientific topics at a level that is
suitable for the general public. The PI will train women and underrepresented
minorities in this research program. All students will receive highly
interdisciplinary training involving elements of biophysics and materials
science.