* 1205015
* Career Education in Renewable Energy Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Barbara Anderegg, Madison Area Technical College
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 08/31/2017
* USD 854,471.00

Madison Area Technical College (MATC), in collaboration with the Consortium for
Education in Renewable Energy Technology (CERET), offers Train the Trainer
Academies for high school and two-year college instructors in renewable energy
technologies, and Renewable Energy Certificates to students through online and
face-to-face courses. This project strengthens and expands the current model by
developing new professional development offerings and certificates in both
bioenergy and advanced solar photovoltaics. The primary project goal is to
provide renewable energy expertise to two-year college and high school
instructors around the country, while creating model career pathways that give
students broad skill sets and flexibility in tough and unpredictable labor
markets. New courses and certificates in second and third generation biofuels
and advanced solar photovoltaics will be the primary products of this effort.

This three-year project addresses a critical need for community college and high
school faculty professional development in renewable energy technologies to meet
the growing student interest and demand for training in these job growth areas.
Participating faculty enhance their content knowledge and skills related to
renewable energy technology through hands-on training. As part of the biofuels
training, participants learn about second and third generation biofuels, produce
biodiesel fuel, perform tests on fuel samples, measure emissions on petroleum
and biofuels and discuss and share techniques for teaching about biofuels. In
the Advanced Photovoltaics Academy, participants practice installation,
inspections, trouble-shooting, repair, and decommissioning of solar electric
systems. Concurrent development of new, renewable energy certificates in these
two areas provides current students the opportunity to specialize in renewable
energy within traditional employment fields and provides incumbent workers in a
variety of technical fields the opportunity to retool and become more
competitive in green energy occupations.

To enhance the impact of the Train the Trainer model, the project targets
faculty from campuses that lack the resources for professional development such
as: from small institutions, from remote geographic areas, and from schools that
serve minorities, economically disadvantaged, and other underrepresented groups.
Communication and collaboration between high school and two-year college faculty
participating in the Academies, in turn, helps to build career pathways for
students as they transition from high school to college to the workforce.

This faculty professional development model and certificate program helps to
meet the growing demand for renewable energy technicians in the biofuel and
solar electric industries. The new courses and associated materials are
available through CERET and other renewable energy organizations so that other
schools can cultivate renewable energy courses on their campuses, even during
lean budget years.