* 1205469
* Emergent Quantum Phenomena in Layered Ruthenates and Iron Chalcogenides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Zhiqiang Mao, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2016
* USD 334,999.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Emergent quantum phenomena in correlated
electron materials not only show promise for use in advanced applications in
energy and information technologies, but also challenge current knowledge in
condensed matter physics. This project will focus on two correlated material
systems, i.e. layered ruthenates and iron chalcogenides. Both material systems
provide remarkable opportunities for observing novel quantum phenomena due to
complex interplay between the charge, spin, lattice and orbital degrees of
freedom. For ruthenates, the project aims at searching for a novel quantum phase
related to the quantum Griffiths phenomena and elucidating the mechanism for
various unusual magnetic phase transitions. For iron chalcogenides, the goal is
to seek emergent magnetic phenomena and unconventional superconductivity. This
project will bring together a wide range of expertise including crystal growth,
property characterization, neutron scattering and optical spectroscopy to enable
comprehensive understanding of emergent quantum phenomena of correlated
electrons. This project will be integrated with education activities through the
following efforts: a) involving graduate and undergraduate students in the
research, b) developing senior design projects for students majoring in
Engineering Physics, and c) guiding students from a local high school in an
independent research project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt; Materials with strong electron-electron correlation are
commonly believed to hold the key for developing the next generation of
electronics. The objective of this project is to search for novel quantum
phenomena and investigate their underlying physics in two correlated material
systems, i.e. layered ruthenates and iron chalcogenides. Both material systems
have been found to show various exciting properties, such as metal-insulator
transitions and unconventional forms of superconductivity and magnetic ordering.
One of the remarkable characteristics of these materials is that their
properties are sensitive to external stimuli and their properties can be tuned
by magnetic field, pressure and chemical substitution; this provides wonderful
opportunities to study the novel physics associated with complex phase
transitions of correlated electrons. This project will bring together a wide
range of expertise to enable comprehensive understanding of emergent quantum
phenomena of correlated electrons. This project will be integrated with
education activities through the following efforts: a) involving graduate and
undergraduate students in the research, b) developing senior design projects for
students majoring in Engineering Physics, and c) guiding students from a local
high school in an independent research project.