* 1205393
* Fundamental Neutron Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Timothy Chupp, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2016
* USD 540,000.00

This project is devoted to research by the University of Michigan Fundamental
Neutron Physics Group on two fundamental-neutron-physics measurements: 1)
measurement of the neutron lifetime with precision of approximately one second
using a cold-neutron beam at the NIST Center for Neutron Research (NCNR) and 2)
measurement of the beta-neutrino correlation with the Nab/abBA/PANDA
spectrometer at the Spallation Neutron Source (SNS) at the Oak Ridge National
Laboratory (ORNL). These are two of the five highest priority experiments
identified in recommendations by a recent NSAC review of the field. The physics
has broad impact across the fields of nuclear and particle physics and
astrophysics. Both efforts enjoy strong collaborations and the support of the
community as well as the scrutiny of critical reviews. The University of
Michigan group has key technical and leadership roles in both efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At NIST, we will perform an absolute calibration of the
neutron-flux monitor used in the proton-trap measurement of the neutron
lifetime. The proton-trap apparatus was used the most recent beam-lifetime
measurement with the result for the lifetime of (886.3 +/- 1.2 (stat) +/-
3.2(sys)) seconds, where the systematic error is dominated by uncertainties
related to the neutron-flux monitor calibration. The flux-monitor calibration
campaign includes two independent calibrations using a monochromatic neutron
beam at NIST and thick targets of Boron-10 or liquid Helium-3. For the Boron-10
approach, alpha particles and gamma rays are counted, and a set of measurements
has recently been completed that demonstrated internal consistency and precision
that would reduce the systematic error to about 0.5 sec. For the Helium-3
approach, the heat generated by the charged particles in the 3He(n,p)3H reaction
is measured calorimetrically and converted to a neutron flux. The calorimeter
approach, originally developed by our group, has been shown to be capable of
measuring the flux to 0.1 % with 10 hours of integration. A number of
improvements specifically related to the challenges of the liquid Helium-3
target have been completed at the University of Michigan, and the device will be
moved to NIST with the aim of completing the calibration campaign by 2013 and
undertaking the new proton-trap lifetime measurement on the new NIST NGC beam
line in 2014.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Nab spectrometer and experiment is to
measure the beta-neutrino correlation at SNS. The magnetic-field-expansion
spectrometer is designed to measure proton-electron coincidences using proton
time-of-flight spectroscopy to extract the a parameter. It may also be possible
to extract the Fierz interference b from electron spectroscopy in silicon
detectors. The envisioned continuing physics program with the Nab spectrometer
and polarized neutrons (abBA/PANDA) is extremely rich with the ability to over
constrain V-A parameters for neutron decay and thus probe physics beyond the
Standard Model. The University of Michigan group is responsible for all aspects
of neutron polarization and polarimetry beginning, for Nab, by measuring the
neutron polarization of the unpolarized FP-13 beam with sensitivity to the
polarization of less than 0.01%.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The neutron is a sub-
atomic particle that comprises more than half of the matter in the world. Within
the nuclei of most atoms, the neutron remains stable, but when freed from the
nucleus, it is unstable. Free neutrons are an important tool for study of sub-
atomic physics, because the decay and interactions of free neutrons reveal the
interactions of its constituents and decay products. Neutrons also have spin,
the quantum mechanical property of the most fundamental pieces of matter that
distinguishes two states called spin-up and spin-down. Spin is responsible for
the nuclear magnetism exploited, for example, in NMR and MRI. The spin states
also affect the decay and interactions of neutrons, and so the control of
neutron spin becomes useful for more detailed study of sub-atomic interactions.
This project envisions a program to incisively and carefully advance both the
precision and the accuracy of the neutron lifetime and the correlation of
electron and neutrino momenta in neutron decay. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
neutron lifetime is a measured fundamental quantity that impacts physics from
the formation of the elements to the solar energy cycle to the structure of the
Standard-Model of the weak interaction. Discrepancies among recent measurements
have actually led to reduced confidence in the value of the neutron lifetime,
and a new measurement using different techniques is essential to resolving the
discrepancies. The measurement of the neutron lifetime using a cold neutron beam
will provide a different approach, and accurate measurement of the neutron flux
is crucial to the experiment. The neutron flux will be measured with a detector
that has sensitivity that scales in the same way as the detection of neutron
decays, but which must be calibrated by an absolute method. Absolute calibration
will be achieved by measuring the heat produced when the neutrons are absorbed
by Helium-3 in a cryogenic target at two degrees above absolute zero. The goal
of this calibration is to provide an accurate neutron-flux measurement and
determine the neutron lifetime with one-second
precision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The angle between the electron and neutrino
produced in neutron decay is sensitive to the fundamental strength of the weak
interaction when combined with the neutron lifetime. A broader class of
measurements using polarized neutron can be used to probe beyond the Standard
Model of particle physics. A new spectrometer designed to measure both the
proton and electron energies in neutron decay will first measure the electron-
neutrino correlation and then be used with polarized
neutrons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work probes deep intellectual questions
about the most fundamental pieces of matter. The aim is to collect data that
will help complete the picture of elementary particles and their interactions.
The techniques have much broader impact. Laser polarized Helium-3 used to
polarize neutrons has applications to materials science, and quantum information
research. This project is a remarkable training ground for undergraduate and
graduate students and post doctoral fellows. The technical challenges combined
with the deep intellectual issues provide motivation and develop technical
skills. Undergraduates will gain research experience working along with graduate
and post doctoral fellows. Graduate students emerge broadly capable and move on
to prepare for faculty or national lab positions as well as interdisciplinary
research. This work has also led to development of new courses for non-physics
majors, to a set of public lectures on Nuclear Magnets and Neutrinos and
leadership in communicating science to the interested general population. In the
context of probing fundamental problems of physics, exciting in its own right,
the hardest problems produce the most innovative solutions with spin-offs
unimaginable at the outset. Atomic clocks, enhanced MRI, and experiments that
probe the origin of matter all follow from the control of nuclear magnetism and
neutron spins.