* 1205752
* Engineered Grain Boundaries and their Properties in Crystalline Organic Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Alberto Salleo, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2015
* USD 380,000.00

Technical Description: The goal of this research project is to unravel
structure-property relationships at the grain boundaries of crystalline organic
semiconductors. Such fundamental understanding is expected to lead to materials
or processing techniques that mitigate the effect of grain boundaries. In order
to study grain boundaries, engineered microstructures are fabricated using
shear-coating or capillary force lithography. These techniques allow to form
grain boundaries across which the molecular misorientation can be controlled and
characterized accurately using synchrotron-based X-ray diffraction. Charge
transport across these well-characterized grain boundaries is studied using
field-effect transistors. Furthermore, the presence of trap states in the
bandgap of the semiconductor is assessed using ultra-sensitive sub-bandgap
spectroscopies. The correlation of transport data and the sub-gap absorption
data helps to elucidate the nature of transport bottlenecks across grain
boundaries. In addition to transport, the effect of grain-boundary structure on
the electronic stability of the semiconductor and the role of polar molecules
adsorbed from the atmosphere in tuning the electronic properties of grain
boundaries is studied. By conducting these studies as a function of grain-
boundary structure, a complete picture of the role of structure in governing the
electronic properties of grain boundaries is made to
emerge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: Organic semiconductors
are already finding applications as light emitters in the display industry. The
versatility of this family of electronic materials, which can be synthesized and
functionalized to exhibit a broad range of properties, promises the realization
of entire electronic circuits with organic semiconductors as well as solar cells
and chemical sensors. Because these materials are held together by weak
intermolecular forces however, they suffer from the presence of imperfections or
defects. This research project aims at elucidating how defects affect the
electronic behavior of organic semiconductors. In particular this project
focuses on the boundaries between crystals that form in the film, which often
limit the performance of the electronic material. By fabricating model systems,
where these boundaries are well controlled, the effect of the structure of these
boundaries on electronic properties is revealed. The societal impact of the
research is amplified by outreach activities. For instance, remote optical and
electronic microscopy, where high-school students are engaged to study materials
at the micro and nanoscale, provide a direct link between structure (as observed
in the microscope) and properties.