* 1205034
* The College of Lake County Regional Photonics Initiative Phase II
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Lynn Wiechert, College of Lake County
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2016
* USD 897,054.00

PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATIONS:&lt;br/&gt;Lake County High Schools Technical Campus
(LCHSTC)&lt;br/&gt;Indian Hills Community College in Iowa&lt;br/&gt;National
Center for Optics and Photonics Education (OP-TEC)&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;The College of Lake County
(CLC) is developing a regional Photonics program for a Laser/Optics/Photonics
Associates degree in Applied Science (AAS). The program offers innovative
instruction, delivery and scheduling; relying on a modular curriculum that is
delivered through a hybrid, early entry/early exit system to reduce the time a
student needs to complete a degree. It seeks to solve the problem of student
recruitment into technical workforce education by creating a new pipeline of
students from Lake County High Schools Technical Campus, which is located on the
college campus. Students are able to complete a Photonics Certificate at their
high school in two years (obtaining full college credit), also having a career
pathway built into the AAS degree at CLC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This initiative
first provides students with a hands-on experience with Class 1, 2 and 3 lasers
until they are able to operate them in a safe environment. Students are then
trained on class 3b and 4 powered lasers for applications such as
interferometry, holography, and spectroscopy, and finally on high powered lasers
used in the military and manufacturing applications. They are exposed to lasers
using different lasing media and are provided with opportunities to explore
biomedical applications to understand the context of laser utilization. The
effort is creating an integrated pipeline from technical high school to
community college and from community college to four-year institutions, all with
emphasis on completion of degrees and certificates achieved through
unconventional and innovative delivery methods. In addition, the project is
examining the possibility of creating an AB degree with 4-year transfer
institutions that support such an
option.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER SIGNIFICANCE&lt;br/&gt;This
project takes advantage of the co-location of a technical high school and a
community college to add value to both, creating a pathway to high-wage, high
growth technical jobs for high school and community college students. The CLC
Photonics Initiative provides a pathway to available jobs in the area hardest
hit by the economic downturn by offering an innovative approach to STEM
education. The project offers broad applicability for the nation and Midwest,
particularly in preparing students for Photonics careers. The team is creating a
Regional Photonics Program in collaboration with Indian Hills Community College
and OP-TEC. CLC is also part of OP-TEC's Photonics College Network, which can
obtain community equipment that would be difficult for one school to purchase
alone - offering students access to state-of-the-art equipment (e.g., a fiber
laser and articulating robot). The program offers a model that can be replicated
elsewhere, further providing widespread access to high-tech education and
training.