* 1205868
* Single Photon Emission by Atomic Ensembles: Collective, Virtual and Non-Local Effects
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Anatoly Svidzinsky, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 06/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

The collective nature of light emission by many atoms can yield radiation
speedup or light trapping even if a single photon is stored in the atomic cloud.
This project will investigate how emission and absorption of virtual photons
occurring on a very short time scale, and retardation caused by the finite value
of the speed of light, affect emission of electromagnetic radiation by atomic
systems. The influence of those effects on evolution of fast and slow decaying
collective states will be calculated for various shapes of the atomic cloud.
Quantum features of photon emission by atomic ensembles and interplay between
superradiant and stimulated processes will be investigated. The project will
advance the understanding of collective interaction between light and atoms at
the quantum single-photon level, and it will yield deeper insights into quantum
electrodynamics in general.

This project could have important practical implications beyond the intellectual
interest. The research can be useful in various applications of the entangled
atomic ensembles and the generated quantum states of light, for optical quantum-
state storage, quantum cryptography, quantum communication and quantum
information. The program will involve education and training of graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers and will give them an opportunity to work
on problems which lie at the interface of modern quantum optics and many body
physics.