* 1206763
* Renormalized Insulators: On the Verge of Magnetism
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* John DiTusa, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2016
* USD 370,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to extend
knowledge of strongly correlated electron systems into the regime of strongly
interacting, or highly renormalized, insulators on the verge of magnetism.
Previous investigations by the PI and collaborators have indicated that this is
a very rich vein of research because of the importance of both semiconductor
physics and magnetism. The competing interactions inherent in these carefully
characterized chemically substituted small band-gap insulators often lead to
quantum phase transitions in the presence of strong correlations and disorder.
Typical systems that will be investigated include iron-based non-magnetic
insulators, such as FeSi, FeS2, and related materials, where a transition from a
strongly correlated-insulator-to-magnetic metal transition can be accessed by
doping. The goals are to discover what novel phenomena exist when carriers are
doped into these strongly correlated insulators placing them in the unique
regime where low carrier density, disorder, magnetism, and, in some cases,
finite size are all important aspects. In addition we will be exploring the
nucleation, imaging, and control of the magnetic Skyrmion phases that have
recently been discovered in the mono-silicide and -germanide materials having
the FeSi crystal structure in thin films of these materials. Students on many
levels, as well as high school teachers will explore these materials searching
for novel transport, magnetic, thermodynamic, and optical properties that may be
exploited in future technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;In order to accelerate the technological revolution that
has placed high speed computation and information storage at our fingertips
almost anywhere on Earth, new ideas are essential. One pathway for progress in
semiconductor device design, known as spintronics, seeks to make use of the
magnetic degrees of freedom to the same extent that charge degrees of freedom
are used in present day silicon technologies. As scientists have sought to
control or manipulate the electron spin, the intrinsic magnetic property of
electrons, they have recognized the utility of materials that are both magnetic
and semiconducting. This work seeks to extend our knowledge of magnetic
semiconductors by investigating a series of compounds composed of transition
metals and silicon or germanium where both semiconducting and magnetic behavior
are known to emerge. The chemical flexibility that these systems offer while
maintaining a common crystal structure allows enormous control over their
physical properties making them ideal for discovering new behaviors at the
intersection of semiconductor physics and magnetism. Also, the unusual symmetry
of the underlying crystal structure of one family of these compounds has been
shown to induce ~100 nm sized toroidal shaped magnetic structures, known as
magnetic Skyrmions, for a range of temperatures and magnetic fields. This
project investigates the necessary elements for nucleating, imaging, and
controlling these novel magnetic structures both as a fundamental exploration
and to assess their possible relevance for future technologies. Students on many
levels, as well as high school teachers, will be exploring magnetic, electric,
optical, and thermodynamic properties of these magnetic semiconductors in
crystalline, thin film, and nanowire form.