* 1206270
* Time-Resolved Studies of Orbital Angular Momentum
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* James Kikkawa, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 360,000.00

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** Over the past 15 years, optical tools to study the
time evolution of electronic spin angular momentum have made central
contributions to the development of spintronics, a field of study aimed at
exploiting the spin degree of freedom of delocalized electrons for classical and
quantum information processing and storage in the solid state. But recent times
have brought accelerating interest in new classes of materials for which orbital
angular momentum becomes the central player. In this proposal the PI introduces
an analogous class of ultrafast optical spectroscopies aimed at probing the
dynamics of orbital angular momentum in solids. Using optical vortex beams
carrying orbital angular momentum, superpositions of these beams, and
holographic gratings to manipulate and separate their spatial character, the PI
will construct experiments to study the dynamics of optically-excited orbital
angular momentum. If successful this project will introduce a valuable tool for
studying the salient dynamical features of an emerging class of orbitally
coherent materials such as graphene and topological insulators. In addition to
training graduate students in advanced optical techniques, this project will
also strive to increase the participation and visibility of underrepresented
scientists as mentors in a shared equipment facility.

****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT**** It is no surprise to most people that when a wire
is connected across the terminals of a battery, electrical current will flow.
And secondary school physics courses teach students that when a magnet is waved
nearby a closed loop of wire, current flows in the loop. Electrical generators,
for example, utilize this effect to convert mechanical energy into electricity.
But when electrical circuits become very small, another entirely different
behavior is possible, which has its origins in the wave nature of the electron.
Similar to the way quantum mechanics forces atomic orbitals to have discrete
energies, nanoscale puddles of electrons in a material cannot occupy an
arbitrary configuration. If the puddle is sufficiently small, then the quantum
mechanical wave of an electron must smoothly connect to itself in going around
the puddle. As a result, the puddle carries small quantum mechanical currents
even when the relative position and orientation of an external magnet is held
stationary. In this project, the PI will introduce an entirely new type of laser
spectroscopy that excites such quantum mechanical currents in a solid and
monitors their time evolution. If successful, this project will use these
responses to identify solid state materials capable of storing quantum
mechanical information in the rotary motion of electrons, with applications to
classical and quantum mechanical devices. In addition to training graduate
students in advanced optical techniques, this project will also increase the
participation and visibility of underrepresented scientists as mentors in a
shared equipment facility.