* 1206447
* Exploiting Enhanced Polarization from Optically-Pumped NMR of Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Sophia Hayes, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 07/31/2016
* USD 360,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** A new type of spectroscopy combining optical-pumping
of electrons with NMR detection, termed OPNMR, is being developed and applied to
a series of important classes of direct-gap III-V semiconductors. OPNMR exploits
the optically-oriented electrons, which couple to surrounding nuclear spins;
enhanced NMR signals can then be observed. Defect sites and dopants related to
optically-relevant defects will be spectroscopically identified. Polarization
transfer schemes, whereby signal enhancements in one region travel via nuclear
spin diffusion to other regions will be explored, opening up the possibility of
new applications of OPNMR. Theory and experimental work will be closely coupled
in this project with calculations of the bandstructure and spin-dependent
optical transitions, and an industrial partner will assist in selection of
heterostructure devices for analysis. Ancillary benefits of this research will
include models of OPNMR phenomena for these methods to be applied to II-VI and
Group IV semiconductors. Graduate students will be educated and trained in
cutting-edge spectroscopy techniques, which enables them to pursue careers in a
variety of areas including lasers, semiconductor devices, NMR/MRI spectroscopy,
and it builds both knowledge and experience in chemistry, physics, and
engineering. Experience working with an industrial partner will be invaluable to
help students make informed career choices and to provide contacts for future
research opportunities.

****Non-technical Abstract**** Cutting-edge spectroscopic tools are being
developed that combine lasers with nuclear magnetic resonance, or NMR (a
technique that is closely-related to MRI's used in medicine), to study
semiconductors. Semiconductor materials are of enormous economic and industrial
importance because these form the basic building blocks for electronic
components and equipment. Semiconductors are a type of material that act as a
"pipeline" for electrons, controlling where and how electrons flow inside the
material, such as in computer chips or the pixels in digital cameras. By shining
laser light onto the semiconductor, electrons are generated. Understanding how
these photoexcited electrons behave is important to device performance, and the
laser+NMR techniques are used to monitor the electron spins through their
interactions with the surroundings. In this project, graduate students will be
educated and trained in these advanced technologies, which enables them to
pursue careers in a variety of areas (i.e., lasers, semiconductor devices,
NMR/MRI spectroscopy), and it builds knowledge and experience in chemistry,
physics, and engineering. The collaborative team includes an industrial partner
thus offering real-world experience for our students, and a broader
commercially-focused perspective to the senior (academic) personnel on this
project.