* 1206271
* NEESR: Tsunami Run-up and Withdrawal Dynamics on a Sloping Beach with Discontinuous Macro-Roughness
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Jennifer Irish, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2018
* USD 686,373.00

Tsunamis are a leading natural threat to coastal communities, and events such as
the 2011 Japan, 2010 Chile, and 2004 Indian Ocean tsunamis caused widespread,
crippling damages to coastal infrastructure. Yet, these events also revealed the
role of mangroves and other vegetation as sustainable mitigation against tsunami
hazard. The overarching goal of this research is to develop a quantitative
understanding of tsunami inundation in regions with coastal forests. This
project combines detailed fluid dynamics modeling with physical experiments to
study tsunami inundation in the presence of discontinuous coastal forest. The
transformative nature of this research lies in studying the effects of multi-
scale processes on the large-scale tsunami inundation dynamics relevant for
improving tsunami mitigation and preparedness. Laboratory experiments will be
used to study inundation in discontinuous forest, represented by circular
patches of cylinder arrays. Measurements will be used to quantify mean flow and
turbulence statistics, the spatial flow field between two forest patches, runup
speed, and large-scale flow structures during withdrawal. Numerical analysis
will be integrated with the experimental campaign to expand the parameter set
for analysis and to assess the impact of temporal changes in forest
characteristics. The research team from Virginia Tech will use the George E.
Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) tsunami
laboratory facility at Oregon State University. Data from this project will be
archived and made available to the public through the NEES Project
Warehouse/data repository (http://www.nees.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
from this award will lead to better quantification of tsunami hazard reduction,
or amplification, as a function of coastal forest density and layout,
topographic slope, and tsunami wave form. Additionally, this research will lead
to better quantification of the impact of coastal forests in regional-scale
numerical models for tsunami inundation. Both of these outcomes will enable more
accurate prediction of tsunami inundation and the resulting water force on
homes, commercial buildings, and other infrastructure onshore. Ultimately, these
advances will lead to more effective evacuation plans, more resilient building
and infrastructure design, and more effective design of protective, sustainable
forest features. These measures will help to reduce tsunami mortality, community
displacement, and economic losses. The broader scientific impacts are in the
applicability of the research outcomes to other coastal problems like tsunami
wave propagation over coral reefs and storm surge propagation through wetlands,
mangroves, and upland forests. This award is part of the National Earthquake
Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP).