* 1206757
* Digitization TCN: Collaborative Research: Digitizing Fossils to Enable New Syntheses in Biogeography - Creating a PALEONICHES-TCN
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* James Beach, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2018
* USD 600,000.00

Museum collections of fossils, along with their associated locality data,
provide millions of records representing data on the temporal and geographic
distribution of species in deep time. However, to reach their greatest
scientific potential, these collections data need to be available on-line and in
a format that facilitates quantitative biogeographic analyses. We will enter
information about the age and precise location of fossil specimens from parts of
several key paleontological collections into electronic databases. During this
process improvements to computer programs for collections will be enhanced to
allow paleontological specimens to be integrated with modern specimen data,
thereby benefiting research on distribution of organisms over time. Our efforts
will digitize nearly 450,000 specimens belonging to 900 species from several
museums throughout the U.S. and will focus on three different time periods in
the history of life: the Ordovician, Pennsylvanian, and Neogene. We will create
on line digital atlases illustrating and describing these fossils and providing
maps showing where they can be found. We will also create an 'app' so these
atlases can be used on handheld devices out in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The museum collections and fossils provide large
amounts of data useful for studying what causes species to migrate, go extinct,
or evolve over long time periods. They are of great relevance for considering
how global change has and will continue to affect life on this planet. Our study
will make these data available on line and accessible to scientists,
facilitating many scientific analyses. The on-line and portable device digital
atlases will be useful for educating amateur paleontologists and K-12 students
about fossils both in classrooms and in the field. We will also provide training
to students and scholars. This award is made as part of the National Resource
for Digitization of Biological Collections through the Advancing Digitization of
Biological Collections program and all data resulting from this award will be
available through the national resource (iDigBio.org).