* 1206681
* RUI: Ultrafast Acoustics and Heat Transport in Nanostructures, Thin Films, and Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Brian Daly, Vassar College
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 06/30/2016
* USD 225,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award will support experimental
condensed matter physics research at Vassar College in Poughkeepsie, NY, an
undergraduate institution. This project will seek to answer fundamental
materials research questions that are also of technological relevance. Ultrafast
optical techniques will be used to study thermal and acoustic phenomena thin
films, crystals, and nanostructures. In particular, the project will include
studies of novel phononic bandgap structures made from silicon, amorphous
hydrogenated films (a-Si:H and a-SiC:H), and bulk crystals (GaAs, GaN, SiC, and
AlN). The project is expected to contribute answers to long-standing questions
regarding the contributions of long-wavelength phonons to thermal transport and
phonon attenuation mechanisms in amorphous and crystalline structures. The
results contributed by this project will have an impact on a number of
technologies including microelectronics, solar cells, and thermoelectric
devices. The NSF award will support undergraduate student research at one of the
nation's premier liberal arts colleges. 6 summer research students will be
funded during the three-year project and many other students will benefit from
the expansion of laboratory equipment provided through the
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This NSF
award will support experimental materials physics research at Vassar College in
Poughkeepsie, NY, an undergraduate institution. This project will seek to answer
fundamental questions that are of technological relevance to the semiconductor
and nanotech fields. Ultrafast lasers (which produce pulses less than a
millionth of a millionth of a second in duration) will be used as a tool to
study heat and ultrasound in novel, nanoscale structures made from silicon and
other technologically important materials. A better understanding of the way
heat and ultrasound transport energy in these materials will benefit ongoing
research in a number of fields including microelectronics, solar energy, and
thermoelectrics. The NSF award will support undergraduate student research at
one of the nation's premier liberal arts colleges. 6 summer research students
will be funded during the three-year project and many other students will
benefit from the expansion of laboratory equipment provided through the award.