* 1206512
* Microscopy of Hierarchical 2-D Interface Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Alex Zettl, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 960,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** The purpose of this project is to fabricate low-
dimensional interface structures that enable the creation of new types of matter
and the observation of new nanoscale phenomena. Such phenomena include
interactions between atoms, molecules, and nanocrystals in low-dimensional
environments defined by the interfaces between 2D layers of graphene and boron
nitride (BN). This program will employ newly developed techniques for
manipulating single layers of graphene and BN in order to fabricate low
dimensional interface structures and to characterize them using scanning
tunneling microscopy and transmission electron microscopy techniques. Interface
structures will be decorated with a combination of atoms, molecules, and
nanocrystal elements deposited via vacuum deposition and solvent-based spin-
coating techniques. These structures will allow the exploration of completely
new transmembrane chemical bonding and tunable electromagnetic behavior at the
nanoscale. Graduate students, undergraduates, and postdoctoral researchers will
be engaged at every level of this research, and will obtain training in state-
of-the-art nanofabrication and microscopy techniques. High school students will
be offered internships in this program to promote recruitment into the sciences.

****Non-Technical Abstract**** This project is aimed at characterizing new types
of microscopic structures made by trapping atoms and nanometer-sized particles
between two-dimensional layers of graphene and boron nitride (BN). Because the
graphene and BN layers can be made only one-atom-thick, particles on either side
of these membranes will interact strongly with one another, thus changing their
overall properties in ways that have not been previously observed. Particles
trapped at the interfaces between such membranes will be visible to different
types of high-resolution electron microscopy, allowing their detailed behavior
to be measured. This will allow the creation of new types of two-dimensional
materials whose properties can be tuned into useful regimes that have never
before been accessible (including, for example, their optical, electronic, and
magnetic behavior). Such materials are expected to be useful in future
electronic devices and also for creating new surface coatings with highly
desirable properties. Graduate students, undergraduates, and postdoctoral
researchers will be engaged at every level of this research, and will obtain
training in state-of-the-art nanostructure fabrication and microscopy
techniques. High school students will be offered internships in this program to
promote recruitment into the sciences.