* 1206053
* Precision Electroweak Measurements using Parity-Violating Polarized Electron Scattering
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2016
* Wouter Deconinck, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 04/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

This grant supports efforts to measure to a very high precision a fundamental
property of the proton and the electron. By comparing our measurements with
predicted values we can test the Standard Model of particle physics, our current
best theory of fundamental particles and their interactions. Deviations from the
predictions will point to new physical processes that are not included in the
Standard Model. The Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility, or Jefferson
Lab, is the world's leading laboratory for parity-violating electron scattering
experiments. In two large collaborative experiments at Jefferson Lab, we will
measure the 'weak' charge of the proton and the electron by scattering energetic
electrons off a liquid hydrogen target. The weak charge is a property analogous
to the well-known electric charge, but mediated by the weak force that is
responsible for some radioactive decays. The Qweak experiment started in May
2010 and will collect data until May 2012. This experiment will measure for the
first time the weak charge of the proton. Our group will use the new Compton
polarimeter to measure the electron beam polarization, and we will develop the
track reconstruction software for the determination of the reaction kinematics.
The MOLLER experiment is expected to run after 2014, and will measure the weak
charge of the electron. Our group is taking a leading role in the development of
a novel type of electron beam polarimeter based on electron-electron scattering
in polarized atomic hydrogen gas. This will allow for the measurement of the
electron beam polarization to the required precision. This new polarimeter will
demonstrate technology that can be applied at other
accelerators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the quest to understand the fundamental
structure of matter, most physicists have taken a reductionist approach by
breaking matter down to its elementary constituents: electrons, quarks, gluons,
etc. In addition to the known elementary particles that constitute the Standard
Model of particle physics, there may exist as-of-yet-undiscovered heavier
elementary particles. At the energy frontier, ever more powerful accelerators
(such as the Large Hadron Collider) aim to create those heavy particles
directly. In contrast, at the intensity frontier we make very precise
measurements at moderate energy scales. Jefferson Lab is at the forefront of
precision measurements using the technique of parity-violating electron
scattering, which exploits the small differences between reactions and their
mirror image. The development of accelerators, particle detectors, and data
analysis techniques has found many applications in industry, from radiation
treatment for cancer and medical imaging to financial analysis. At the College
of William &amp; Mary, a PhD-granting liberal arts university within 30 minutes
of Jefferson Lab, we present our graduate students with excellent career
prospects, and we actively involve undergraduate students in the frontiers of
research and train them to become the next generation of innovators.