* 1206868
* Statistical mechanics of DNA-protein interactions and chromosome organization
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* John Marko, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 330,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research in the
general area of statistical-mechanical theories of biopolymers and complexes
composed of biopolymers. The focus of the research will be on DNA-protein
interactions and studies of physical mechanisms underlying the organization of
large DNA molecules into folded and functional chromosomes. The PI will use
equilibrium and non-equilibrium statistical mechanics to describe single-
molecule biological physics experiments carried out in vitro, and to develop
models for chromosome dynamics in vivo. The research will be aimed at three
thrusts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Developing theoretical models for the structure
of double-stranded DNA under tensile and twisting stress as studied in single-
molecule micromanipulation experiments, where there is a rather complex
competition between formation of writhed "supercoiled" states, and structural
reconstructions of the double helix into alternative conformations, denatured
"L"- and "P"-DNA states. The same general methods will be used to develop
theories of "braided" double helix DNAs, which are key substrates being used for
studying DNA topoisomerases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Studying the self-
organization of proteins along DNA, as occurs in vivo in chromosomes, and in
vitro in single-molecule experiments on protein-DNA interactions. A major
objective will be development of a theory for recently observed "protein
exchange" dynamics, whereby off-rates are controlled by solution-phase protein
concentration. The PI will also build on his recent work on models of nucleosome
dynamics, including effects of post-translational modification of nucleosomes,
and competition of nucleosomes with transcription factors. The PI will examine
the role played by boundary conditions on chromosomal domains, and in single-DNA
experiments on DNA conformational fluctuations that may affect enzyme rates
through modulation of DNA conformational fluctuations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3.
Developing models to establish higher-order chromosome structure, especially by
the action of Structural Maintenance of Chromosome protein complexes, and
studying how the folding of DNA by those complexes can generate the topological
simplification of chromosomes, their spontaneous disentanglement, that is
observed to occur during cell division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award also
supports graduate student training. Their training, in highly interdisciplinary
research at the boundaries of theoretical condensed matter and materials
research and molecular biology, will be of interest to biologists, physicists,
materials scientists, chemists and engineers. In addition, high school and
undergraduate research experiences will be provided as part of the educational
activities of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&amp;#8195;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education focused on the understanding of the fundamental mechanisms that
underlie the organization of the very large DNA molecules that carry all genetic
information in living cells. The large "chromosome" DNAs found in micron-sized
bacterial cells are millions of base pairs - millimeters - in length, while
those found in human cells are hundreds of millions of base pairs - centimeters
- in length. The problem of organizing these unwieldy molecules is magnified by
the requirement that they be replicated and separated from one another with
near-perfect fidelity - for a cell to successfully divide. Broken or erroneously
segregated chromosomes can lead to death of a cell, or worse, erratic cell
behavior that can lead to organism-endangering diseases such as cancer. This
award is focused on understanding how DNA molecules can be organized in the
cell, by the action of a variety of protein molecules that interact with the
double helix so as to fold it up, and to pass it through itself to disentangle
it. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Single-molecule" technologies have made possible
precise, quantitative experiments to study interactions of biological molecules.
These types of experiments turn out to be most naturally studied from the point
of view of statistical mechanics which deals with the random motion and
collective behaviors of atoms and molecules. This project will also focus on how
the double helix alone behaves when placed under mechanical stress, as can be
precisely controlled in such experiments. Finally, this project includes work on
transferring the models developed to describe single-molecule studies of
protein-DNA interactions in the "test tube" to describe biomolecule behavior in
living cells. One of the overarching objectives of the project will be to try to
understand how the small protein molecules along a DNA are able to effect
separation of large and potentially entangled DNA molecules from one
another.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the education of graduate
students working closely with the PI. The work done by this group will be the
main research training of the graduate students which leads to their Ph.D.
theses; they will be educated to take methods from theoretical condensed matter
physics and to apply them to problems of biological materials and biology. In
addition, younger students will be involved in the research project, exposing
them to research frontiers at an early stage in their scientific training.