* 1206422
* Development of Technologies to Enable High Contrast, High Resolution, Low Emissivity Imaging at Visible and Thermal Wavelengths with the Magellan Adaptive Secondary AO System
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Laird Close, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Gaume
* 05/31/2015
* USD 489,494.00

Astronomical adaptive optics systems can be classified into two basic types: 1)
a standard telescope equipped with an adaptive optics bench that includes
transfer optics, wavefront sensors, filters, and one or more deformable mirrors,
and 2) a system that incorporates an adaptive secondary mirror (ASM) directly
into the telescope itself, reducing the number of reflections and preserving a
clean optical system all the way to the instrument focus. The latter scheme is
in some ways more difficult and expensive to achieve, but has demonstrated the
highest on-telescope image quality, as well as providing far better performance
in the infrared.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sole example of installed ASM
technology in the southern hemisphere is the 585 actuator secondary installed by
Dr. Laird Close and collaborators from The University of Arizona and Arcetri
Observatory (Italy) on the 6.5m Clay Magellan telescope at Las Campanas, Chile.
With the mirror now in place, Dr. Close is planning instrumental upgrades to
make use of the greatly sharpened images. Two improvements are proposed: 1)
enhanced electronics and a ?smart?, high-speed shutter that will limit exposure
only to intervals of excellent correction and thereby enable high-resolution
imaging in the optical (wavelengths of ~0.6 nm), and 2) precise coronagraphic
masks and vibration control to allow 1-5 micron imaging and spectroscopy of
sources in the AO-sharpened field with a bright central object obscured. Initial
science to be performed with these systems includes high-contrast imaging of
reflected visible light from mature giant exoplanets (a key step towards
discovering true Earths), the mass-loss from evolved stars, structures of
ionized gas regions around hot stars, surfaces of solar-system asteroids and
moons, and high-contrast L and M band (3.5 and 5 microns) imaging/spectroscopy
of newly-discovered young dusty exoplanets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Close has
demonstrated an excellent history of mentoring and collaborating with students
and young faculty, and his current activities are no exceptions. The new
adaptive optics detector systems will also be made available to others with
access to the Magellan telescopes, and hopefully to the general astronomical
community when public access to privately-funded facilities is
renegotiated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for the development of new imaging
and spectroscopic capabilities for the Magellan telescope adaptive optics
systems is being provided by NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences through its
Advanced Technologies and Instrumentation program.