* 1206200
* GOALI: Creating Novel Graphene-Based Metematerials through Nanopatterning
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Zhihong Chen, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 06/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Technical Description: This GOALI project aims to create a robust and
reproducible bandgap in graphene. To achieve this goal, superlattices of various
geometries are studied, tailoring the band structure, the effective mass,
carrier group velocity and other electronic properties of the metamaterials. The
project involves collaboration between academia (Purdue University) and industry
(IBM T.J. Watson Research Center). One of the experimental approaches is to use
a nano-patterning mask to create graphene superlattices with aggressively scaled
lattice dimensions and true periodicities. Another approach involves utilizing
an external potential with a superlattice periodicity imprinted onto graphene. A
comparison of the electronic properties of periodically patterned graphene
metamaterials and gated graphene enables an in-depth study of the impact of edge
states on the band structures of the metamaterials. The success of this research
project can provide a general solution to fabricating superlattices in two-
dimensional materials by nano-scale patterning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical Description: This research project addresses one of the most pressing
challenges in the graphene field: how to create a robust and reproducible
bandgap to enable practical uses of graphene in analog and digital electronics.
Through a joint study between Purdue University and IBM, novel patterning
methods are investigated in order to achieve the periodic and reproducible
features required for bandgap creation. In addition, this project provides
opportunities for the training of graduate and undergraduate students in
materials science, nano-patterning, and device engineering. The PI is also
committed to participate in and contribute to educational outreach programs at
Purdue University.