* 1206519
* Pressure Tuned Quantum Phase Transitions in Model Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Thomas Rosenbaum, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 04/30/2016
* USD 400,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;There has been enormous activity devoted to
quantum phase transitions in fascinating but complicated materials, most often
disordered and almost all involving indirect probes of the order. Ideally, one
would like to tune a simple, stoichiometric material to its quantum critical
point and directly measure the disappearance of its order parameter, the effects
of the quantum fluctuations, and the potential emergence of competing order.
This project combines diamond anvil cell technology at cryogenic temperatures
with synchrotron x-ray scattering, magnetotransport, and magnetic susceptibility
in a set of model systems to attempt to isolate the key physical parameters and
mechanisms at quantum phase transitions. These include the onset of modulated
spin order in an elemental antiferromagnet, the fundamental quantum magnetism of
spin singlets arranged on a square lattice, the ordering of charge and its
interplay with superconductivity, and the transition from insulator to metal in
a correlated material. The wide array of techniques, from x-ray scattering to
magnetotransport, should train students well for careers in industry, the
national laboratories, or academia. Advances in diamond anvil cell technology
should influence condensed matter physicists and geophysicists alike. Helping
guide a new program to train math and science teachers for urban schools is a
personal priority.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Phase transitions at the absolute zero of temperature
involve fundamentally different physics than their finite temperature analogues.
This can include the optical response of materials, the electronic character of
devices, or the magnetic capacity of storage materials. In the limit of very low
temperatures, quantum mechanics plays a central role, altering the universal
response that has been mapped out for classical transitions. This project will
probe the unique quantum characteristics in four related arenas: the onset of
magnetism, the interplay of magnetism and superconductivity, the ordering of
electronic charge, and the way in which an insulator can be transformed into a
metal. In each we take advantage of the ability of diamond anvil cell technology
to access pressures outside of everyday techniques and to transmit high energy
x-rays. The wide array of techniques, from x-ray scattering at a synchrotron to
electrical measurements in the laboratory, and the necessity to apply physics,
chemistry and materials science to these studies, should train students well for
careers in industry, the national laboratories, or academia. Bringing research
perspectives to education is another emphasis, including public lectures, course
development for both science and non-science majors, and a leadership role in
developing a national database for science education outreach.