* 1206562
* Developing a New Generation of Perovskite Oxides Based Composite Materials for CO2 Conversion into Fuels
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Alexander Orlov, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2016
* USD 368,235.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The efficient conversion of carbon dioxide into fuels
has an enormous potential to address both greenhouse emission issues and
sustainable energy challenges. Significant challenges exist in producing
materials, which can facilitate this conversion by utilizing solar energy,
especially the visible part of the solar spectrum. A limited number of known
materials exhibit very low quantum efficiency for carbon dioxide conversions,
while being activated only by ultraviolet (UV) light. If successful, this
project can significantly impact energy and environmental areas by using green
routes for producing valuable chemicals. It will reduce carbon dioxide emissions
by utilizing sustainable sources of energy, such as
sunlight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The major obstacle to progress
in this scientific area is a lack of understanding of the relationship between
synthetic method, micro- and nano-architecture and nanostructure, and the
resulting physico-chemical and reactivity properties. Achieving this
understanding and developing entirely new fabrication methods, applicable on an
industrial scale, are major challenges that must be met before these new
functional properties can find actual practical application. Accomplishing these
two objectives, one scientific and the other technical, would correspond to a
major breakthrough that would make possible a whole range of new applications.
This project focuses on synthesis of perovskite-based nanostructured films and
powders modified at the nanoscopic level by a variety of techniques that allow
chemical doping, control of crystal structure, defect concentration and
imposition of unusual new morphologies. This research undertakes an entirely new
direction for achieving photocatalytic conversion of carbon dioxide into
valuable chemical products. This project aims at exploring several strategies to
establish a link between reactivity and physicochemical properties of these
materials through both bulk and surface sensitive characterization techniques.
This project also seeks a better understanding of the role of dopants in carbon
dioxide interfacial reactions when the dopants are introduced in the correct
oxidation state, concentrations and location where they can lead to significant
increase in catalytic activity. An unusual part of this research is the
utilization of doped nanostructured films, where both particle size and
composition can be precisely controlled by a new nanofabrication method.
Additionally, this project aims at exploring morphological control of perovskite
oxides to increase their surface area and light trapping capabilities. Finally
this project expands the teaching curriculum and research opportunities at both
the graduate and undergraduate levels with significant inclusion of
underrepresented students.