* 1206957
* Shape Memory Biomaterials Possessing Independent Photo and Thermal Switches for Dual and Triple Shape Memory
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Valerie Ashby, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2015
* USD 420,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1206957 PI: Ashby, Valerie ORG: University of North
Carolina&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Shape Memory Biomaterials Possessing
Independent Photo and Thermal Switches for Dual and Triple Shape
Memory&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Shape memory polymers (SMPs) are
proving to be an attractive, novel tool in biomedical applications including
self-tightening sutures, self-deploying stents, and drug delivery vehicles. The
transition in dual SMPs is characterized by a change from shape A to shape B
upon direct or indirect triggering typically by heat and more recently by light.
Triple shape polymeric materials (TSPs), first developed in 2006, have received
increased attention in biomedical research due to their ability to perform
complex movements (for example, shape A to B to C). In spite of the unique
mobility properties of both systems, there remain significant challenges.
Specifically, for dual shape memory polymers in many of the proposed
biomaterials applications, the transition temperature (T-trans) should be near
body temperature (37 °C). However, because the T-trans is altered by several
factors (molecular weight, crosslink density, functionality), it is often
challenging to target specific transition temperatures, as any change in either
property results in a T-trans shift. Triple shape materials often take advantage
of multiphase polymer networks with two phase-separated domains, and therefore
two independent transition temperatures. As a result, the transition temperature
and property control challenges seen in dual shape memory are even more
pronounced in the triple shape system. To address these issues, novel polymeric
biomaterials that possess two independent transitions (photo and thermal) within
a single temperature range will be designed. For the polymers that possess
transitions between room and body temperature, the thermal shape memory
properties will be characterized and combined with light-induced shape memory to
form unique triple shape materials. Finally, using a modified PRINT (Pattern
Replication in Non-Wetting Templates) fabrication method, multi-functional shape
memory polymers with the ability to shape shift on the macro and micro/nano
scales will be created. To our knowledge, there are no examples of polymeric
biomaterials that possess independent thermal and photo switches that can be
combined for triple shape memory. At the end of three years these materials will
have been developed, their unique properties elucidated and insight gained into
their potential as unique multifunctional biomaterials. Potential fields of
application include those that require materials capable of complex movement,
such as minimally invasive surgery, where multifunctional stents, catheters, and
valves could prove to be significant advances in the next generation of smart
medical devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The understanding of
shape memory biomaterials will be advanced, while teaching and training will be
promoted . Graduate students will learn how to solve problems by starting with
polymer design and synthesis and continuing through materials characterization
and applications. Undergraduates and high school student researchers will be
presented with intriguing, relevant problems that can be answered in the
laboratory using organic synthesis, analytical chemistry, and biological
techniques. The interdisciplinary interaction will also be an educational
opportunity for all students, as they will be active participants in the
collaborative research. Additionally, it is expected that the research results
will be incorporated, where appropriate, into the teaching of undergraduate
organic chemistry and graduate polymer science to help students appreciate the
utility of basic concepts. All students will be encouraged to present their
research at conferences and publish their research in the appropriate journals.
The PI will mentor underrepresented high school, undergraduate and graduate
students, as well as junior faculty in various workshops, presentations and
research experiences. Finally, the PI will utilize her role as UNC NSF AGEP
Director to continue the mentoring of undergraduates interested in pursuing
doctoral degrees in STEM fields and graduate students in doctoral programs in
STEM fields who are interested in research and teaching careers.