* 1206096
* Analytical and numerical studies of novel fractionalized phases and unusual phase transitions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Olexei Motrunich, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/29/2016
* USD 307,280.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on fractionalized spin liquid phases in frustrated quantum magnets.
The research is stimulated by recent discoveries of several candidate spin
liquid materials with spins residing on two-dimensional and three-dimensional
lattices. The PI aims to expand the available toolbox of wave functions for such
fractionalized phases using a parton approach. In this approach, the microscopic
spin or boson operator is split into auxiliary quark-like fields, which are
taken to be deconfined in mean field and are then glued together by a projection
recovering the physical Hilbert space. Besides popular Gutzwiller-projected
slave fermion states, the PI will also use projected Schwinger boson wave
functions that are strong candidates near magnetically ordered phases, as well
as novel wave functions motivated from Majorana slave fermion approaches that
can further enrich the pool of states with gapless spinons. Another interesting
direction is possible combination with novel entanglement-based numerical
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a separate thrust, the PI will work to
develop a better understanding of gapless fractionalized phases where the
emergent gauge fields are also gapless, which are some of the most challenging
cases where analytical approaches are not under full control. The PI will build
upon an example of an Exciton Bose Liquid phase in models with pure ring
exchanges, where the parton-gauge approach can be brought to completion and also
compared with non-parton approaches. The study will address a number of open
questions in the Exciton Bose Liquid theory and will use these to learn about
gapless parton-gauge systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will also explore
unusual phase transitions in statistical mechanics problems with topological
terms, combining analytical duality approaches and numerical Monte Carlo
techniques in a powerful way. The focus will be on models with particles that
have mutual statistical interactions. Such models arise in studies of
topological phases and their phase transformations and also in effective field
theories of frustrated quantum antiferromagnets. The research will help to
understand unconventional quantum phase transitions of much recent
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research and education focusing on unusual quantum
states of matter that show a kind of fractionalization phenomenon. In a sense,
electrons are like tiny spinning tops quantified in the term spin. They also
carry a unit of electric charge. Fractionalization results when electrons appear
to behave as though they were split into two independent particles, one that has
electric charge but has no spin and one that has spin but no charge.
Fractionalization was discovered experimentally for electrons constrained to
move in a plane in a semiconductor interface and exposed to strong magnetic
field. Similar phenomenon had long been conjectured to occur naturally in
materials. Recently several candidates were found. This project aims to develop
theoretical and computational toolbox to discover and characterize
fractionalized quantum phases in models and experimental materials. It will also
study transformations that can occur among such states that lie outside the
standard theory of phase transitions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of new
quantum states of electronic matter in materials may lead to new technologies.
The manipulation of some quantum states of electronic matter may lead to a new
way to do computation, quantum computing, that would be potentially more
powerful than existing computers.