* 1206155
* EAGER: Study of Casimir Force Engineering by Modeling and Implementing Novel Three-dimensional Structures
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Hooman Mohseni, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 07/31/2014
* USD 152,001.00

The objective of this program is to study the change of Casimir force, due to
variation of density of vacuum fluctuation. We will develop very accurate
measurement methods to dynamically evaluate the Casimir force with a high
spatial and temporal resolution. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the
proposed work are that it can lead to new and unexplored areas of surface
science, and the emerging field of Casimir force engineering. Also, experimental
and theoretical work in this area is immediately applicable to technological
areas such as energy storage and nano-electro-mechanical systems (NEMS).
Finally, numerical methods developed during this effort would be published and
help advance fields where surface effects are prevalent from NEMS to
NanoBioMechanics. &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts are through incorporation of
some of the results of this research in the photonics courses and an advanced
course on quantum field theory. Also, an open-source simulation tools that will
be developed in this research effort will become publicly available through the
literature and shared with other researchers in this field. Finally,
undergraduate and graduate students from under-represented and minority groups
will be encouraged to take part in this research. The PI plans to take advantage
of AGEP (Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professorate) program at
Northwestern University in this regard.