* 1206267
* Coherent Dynamics of Spins Placed in Quantized Electromagnetic Fields and Studied Using Superconducting Device
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2012,01/31/2016
* Irinel Chiorescu, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 01/31/2016
* USD 330,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The present proposal is focusing on
implementing techniques closely related to quantum optics in solid-state systems
containing diluted, highly coherent spins. The control of dynamics of spins in
solid-state materials has direct implications at both fundamental and applied
levels. Research topics, in particular quantum computing, rely heavily on both
complex control techniques and long spin coherence times to achieve intricate
and robust information control. One aspect of this proposal is to identify new
supramolecular structures with long spin coherence times. A natural way of
driving spin orientation is by using electromagnetic fields (photons) and it can
be done either as a classical rotation or by entanglement with the field itself.
The studies are to be performed at very low temperatures, using on-chip,
superconducting devices (planar cavities and micro-squids). The present program
will train undergraduate and graduate students, sustain PI's involvement in the
Research Experience for Undergraduates and Teachers programs, and in the
development of scientific demonstrations at outreach events in the FSU and NHMFL
campuses&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Modern
technological applications are aiming closer and closer to a limit where quantum
mechanics is the main theoretical tool. Often, electronic chips and small
components are involved in such applications. At the same time, an impressive
amount of research has been done in the case of atoms in dilute gases, since
such systems are governed purely by Quantum Mechanics. Here, we propose to
implement techniques of quantum optics into the field of solid-state physics, to
develop new experimental tools. Also, we will search for new supramolecular
materials capable of sustaining for long times quantum information, for on-chip
applications like Quantum Computing. The studies are to be performed at very low
temperatures, using on-chip, superconducting devices (planar cavities and micro-
squids). This research is intrinsically connected to the act of teaching: if we
teach our students well, we will have top scientists in the future. The present
program will train undergraduate and graduate students, sustain PI's involvement
in the Research Experience for Undergraduates and Teachers programs, and in the
development of scientific demonstrations at outreach events in the FSU and NHMFL
campuses. Moreover, through association with the NHMFL, a broad condensed matter
community (users, visitors, and students) will interact closely with the
proposed research.