* 1206459
* From Micelles to Membranes: Advanced Block Polymer Ionic Liquid Composites
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Timothy Lodge, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 04/30/2017
* USD 760,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to advance a new class
of functional nanostructured materials by combining ionic liquids with block
copolymers. Ionic liquids exhibit many appealing properties, including chemical
and thermal stability, vanishing vapor pressure, tunable solvation, high ionic
conductivity, and high dielectric constant, that render them appealing as
potential 'green' solvents, and as key ingredients in plastic electronics,
batteries, fuel cells, gas separation membranes, and actuators. To realize these
properties in advanced materials applications, it is necessary to solidify the
material, and/or to confine the ionic liquid within a desired nanostructure.
Block copolymers offer unprecedented flexibility to direct self-assembly over
lengthscales from 1-100 nanometers, while simultaneously providing mechanical
integrity. Three different sub-projects are envisioned that address fundamental
issues in polymer materials science, and each exploits a unique aspect of
nanostructured copolymer/ionic liquid mixtures. First, a quantitative
understanding of the rate of chain exchange in block copolymer micelles will be
established, by utilizing time-resolved small-angle neutron scattering on
isotopically labeled micelle mixtures. By virtue of the wide usable temperature
range of ionic liquids, and the ease with which critical micellization
temperatures can be tuned predictably by blending homologous imidazolium
cations, the crossover from 'ergodicity' to 'non-ergodicity' will be delineated
systematically. Second, the recent discovery of ionic-liquid-filled vesicles
dispersed in water will be extended to nanoreactor applications, whereby the
catalyst is confined to the vesicle interior, and may be recovered easily. The
aqueous matrix mitigates the severe cost and mass transfer restrictions of ionic
liquid reaction media, while the vesicle membrane will regulate the rate of
reactant and product partitioning between aqueous and ionic liquid phases. Last,
an ABC triblock terpolymer approach is proposed to prepare crosslinked bi- and
tri-continuous membranes with conductive, ionic-liquid-rich nanochannels, with
the goal of accessing unprecedented combinations of high mechanical toughness
and ionic conductivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Composite materials prepared from polymers and room
temperature ionic liquids are under active consideration for many advanced
technologies, including biomass modification, gas separation membranes, plastic
electronics, ion batteries, and fuel cells. Success in any of these areas would
have profound societal impact in terms of energy conservation, sustainable
plastics, and portable energy storage. Simultaneous optimization of diverse
properties, such as high ionic transport, mechanical integrity, and facile
processing, can best be achieved through structural control at the nanometer
scale. Thus, the combination of structure-directing block copolymers and
functional ionic liquids will accelerate the development of advanced materials.
Graduate students will acquire a broad suite of skills in polymer synthesis and
characterization, light, x-ray and neutron scattering, fluorescence
spectroscopy, and electron microscopy. They will also have extensive
opportunities to present technical talks and posters to external audiences, as
well as to mentor talented undergraduates in research. High school students from
the greater Twin Cities, particularly women and underrepresented minorities,
will be exposed to polymer science through "Polymer Day: You Make It, You Break
It", a hands-on component of a broader "Exploring Careers in Science &amp;
Engineering" summer camp.