* 1206534
* TeV Studies of Supernovae Powered Regions using Advanced Shower Analysis Techniques with the VERITAS Gamma-Ray Observatory
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Geza Gyuk, Adler Planetarium
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 474,628.00

Intellectual Merit VERITAS is currently the most sensitive VHE gamma-ray
observatory in the world. Operating at the basecamp of the Fred Lawrence Whipple
Observatory in Arizona, the VERITAS project expands the Imaging Atmospheric
Cherenkov Telescope technique pioneered by its precursor, the Whipple 10m
Telescope, to include an array of four 12m telescopes with a multitelescope
trigger for an order-of-magnitude improved sensitivity over the previous
generation. VERITAS probes the extreme physics of sources such as the jets of
Active Galactic Nuclei, Supernovae Remnants, and microquasars and provides an
important complement to the Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope. This award will
provide support for the VERITAS science and collaboration service efforts of the
Adler Planetarium & Astronomy Museum researchers. The Adler group will lead the
development and optimization of advanced gamma-ray analysis methods to increase
the performance of VERITAS and play a leading role in calibration efforts. The
Adler's science efforts will utilize the improved array performance in the study
of extended supernova remnants and pulsar wind nebulae focusing on the case of
the Crab Nebula, particularly in light of the recent discovery of the rapid
bright synchrotron flares detected by Fermi.

Broader Impact The Adler serves as the lead institution for VERITAS Education
and Outreach efforts. Beyond the management aspects of the VERITAS EPO effort,
the Adler VERITAS scientists will engage in a variety of efforts including
hosting undergraduate interns from collaborating VERITAS institutions,
participating in the daily 'Astronomy Conversations' held at the Adler
Planetarium's Space Visualization Laboratory, investigating the feasibility of a
Citizen Science project to distinguish gamma rays from cosmic rays, and
providing planetarium expertise to the VERITAS project office to develop a
VERITAS-themed show.