* 1206276
* Stochastic Analysis:  Theory and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Krzysztof Burdzy, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2016
* USD 465,001.00

The PI's will study foundational questions that arise in the study of
mathematical models inspired by applied science and mathematical research.
Reflected Brownian motion with inert drift can be used as a mathematical model
for some physical phenomena such as Archimedes' principle. Reflected Brownian
motion with oblique reflection can be used to model queuing networks under heavy
traffic and to solve partial differential equations with mixed boundary
conditions. Brownian motion with darning arises naturally in the study of
boundary theory of Markov processes. This class of diffusion processes are an
effective tool in the study of conformal mappings and Komatu-Loewner equations
in multiply connected planar domains. The PI's will develop the mathematical
theory of such systems and processes. New approach to invariance principle of
random walks in distorted medium and stochastic homogenization in domains will
be explored. Models of light reflected on rough surfaces and billard scattering
will be investigated. The PI's will study shy couplings and some Fleming-Viot-
type models. Boundary Harnack principle for stable-like processes and sharp two-
sided Dirichlet heat kernel estimates for rotationally symmetric Levy processes
will be systematically investigated.

The PI's will disseminate the information on their advances in stochastic
analysis in various ways. The existing very active Department of Mathematics
probability seminar at the University of Washington attracts highly diverse
audience - researchers in mathematics, statistics, applied mathematics,
representatives from a research group at a private corporation, post-doctoral
trainees and graduate students. There is a significant participation of women in
the seminar, both as speakers and attendees. Once a year, the Northwest
Probability Seminar, a one-day conference, brings together interested people
from Oregon, British Columbia and Washington. Again, the participation of women
in this annual event is significant. The PI's are strongly involved in the
organization of the International Conference on Stochastic Analysis and its
Applications, an annual event that has been held regularly (almost every year)
since 2006. It brings experts in stochastic analysis and related fields from all
over the world to survey the field, exchange ideas and to foster future
collaborations. Participation of young researchers and Ph.D students is
significant. The University of Washington has established a Program in
Computational Finance. Both PI's plan to participate in the program to help
disseminate the knowledge of the stochastic analysis, including the most recent
advances in the field, to non-mathematical audiences, with stress on students.
In the past, the program attracted students from diverse departments, such as
Mathematics, Statistics, Economics, Finance, Electrical Engineering, Physics and
Computer Science. The PI's have four doctoral students at the moment, including
one woman and two non-white students. All doctoral students currently are or are
expected to be actively involved in the research outlined in this proposal.