* 1206553
* Strongly Correlated Electron Phenomena in Rare Earth and Actinide Intermetallics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* M. Brian Maple, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2018
* USD 915,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This award supports experimental research
on strongly correlated electron phenomena in novel rare earth and actinide
(f-electron) intermetallic compounds. These phenomena, which include, for
example, heavy fermion behavior, quantum criticality, non-Fermi liquid behavior,
Kondo insulator behavior, unconventional superconductivity, and exotic forms of
magnetic order and quadrupolar order, constitute a formidable challenge to
current paradigms of condensed matter physics. The ground states of strongly
correlated f-electron materials can be "tuned" by varying an external control
parameter such as chemical composition x, pressure P, and magnetic field H,
resulting in rich and complex temperature T vs. x, P, and H phase diagrams. The
objectives of this research program are to characterize the extraordinary
electronic phases found in these materials, determine the conditions under which
they are formed, identify underlying microscopic mechanisms, and test relevant
theories. This project will provide support for the education of a postdoctoral
scholar and a graduate student who will gain expertise in a broad range of
technical skills available in the laboratory, including the operation of state-
of-the-art equipment for physical properties measurements at low temperatures.
The study of strongly correlated electron phenomena serves to train the next
generation of condensed matter and materials physicists who will contribute to
the government, industrial, and/or academic domains in their careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports experimental research on strongly correlated electron phenomena in
novel rare earth and actinide (f-electron) intermetallic compounds. Strongly
correlated electron phenomena include, for example, high temperature
superconductivity, magnetism, and other exotic quantum phases that present a
formidable challenge to the current understanding of solid matter. By improving
the basic understanding of correlated electron phenomena, the results obtained
from this experimental research program have the potential to impact important
problems relevant to applications. For example, there is a myriad of
applications of high temperature superconductivity, including low-loss
electrical power lines, electrical generators and motors, sensitive magnetic
field sensors, magnetic resonance imaging, and magnetically levitated trains.
This project will provide support for the education of a postdoctoral scholar
and a graduate student who will gain expertise in a broad range of technical
skills available in the laboratory. The study of strongly correlated electron
phenomena serves to train the next generation of condensed matter and materials
physicists who will contribute to the government, industrial, and/or academic
domains in their careers.