* 1206106
* PoLS: Direct Calorimetric Measurements of Metabolism and Thermogenesis of  C. Elegans and Other Model Organisms
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Paul Sternberg, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2016
* USD 474,516.00

In this project, the PIs will directly measure the metabolism and thermogenesis
of nematode soil worm Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans) and other model
organisms by recording the heat production of the organisms by a microfluidic
calorimeter. The calorimeter is based on the microfluidic calorimeter platform
developed at Caltech and will have superior performance, including a power
resolution at 2% of single worm power generation, a response time of 0.5s and
on-chip worm incubation enabling continuous monitoring of a worms activity for
over 48 hours. C. elegans will serve as the major target because it is an
important model organism that has been extensively used in biological research.
In this program thermogenesis in these manipulated worms will be employed to
differentiate metabolic pathways and study longevity. First, a number of small
molecule inhibitors specific to different biochemical pathways, such as
Cyclohexamine (targets Ribosomes) and Actinomycin D (targets RN Polymerases I,
II &amp; III), will be used to investigate the contribution of these pathways to
metabolism, which will provide a clearer picture of the relative contribution of
several important biochemical pathways to overall metabolism in C. elegans.
Next, the effect of diet and starvation on the metabolism of adult worms will be
studied during their development. Finally, the relation between metabolism and
longevity for worms with life-extending genetic mutations will be investigated.
The PI and co-PI are committed to dissemination of the technology, outreach and
education. The Kavli Nanoscience Institute at Caltech is capable of moderate-
scale production of devices. The PI and Co-PI have actively participated in
Caltech's Summer Undergraduate Research Program (SURF) and Minority
Undergraduate Research Program (MURF) for the past two decades. The co-PI has
also has a track record of mentoring high school students, a number of whom have
been included as co-authors on papers in top journals based on their summer and
after-school research.