* 1206005
* Creation of POLS-SAVI Node at the University of Maryland
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Devarajan Thirumalai, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2017
* USD 679,085.00

Project: This is a project to create a POLS-SAVI node at the University of
Maryland (UMD). This node, which was conceived during the early stages of the
newly created Student Research Network and is vastly expanded under Science
Across Virtual Institutes (SAVI) initiative, will also bring in two leading
institutions. One is the Technical University of Munich (TUM), which is one of
the leading centers in Biophysics in Germany. The other is the National Center
for Biological Sciences (NCBS) in India, which enjoys a preeminent stature in
the biophysics in the country. These three institutions will add greatly to the
POLS-SAVI network both in scientific expertise as well as in the educational
aspects. The faculty in the three institutions who will join the POLS-SAVI
network bring to bear expertise in a number of areas in biological physics.
Among the faculty there is considerable expertise in the basics of equilibrium
and non-equilibrium statistical mechanics, which are becoming increasingly
important in tackling problems in single molecule force spectroscopy, a tool
that is being used to discover the role of mechanical forces in biology. Methods
in these areas are key in understanding fluctuation effects in finite systems
including various metabolic and gene networks. On the experimental side both in
TUM and UMD a variety of problems probing the response of forces from single
molecule to cellular level are being performed using a variety of techniques.
Research is also being carried out to understand interactions between proteins
and how such interactions are involved in signaling networks. The three
universities also focus on functions of molecular machines, mechanics of
cytoskeletal networks, the role of membranes in biological functions, and gene
networks. Thus, from a scientific perspective UMD, TUM, and NCBS are involved in
researches covering the gamut of temporal and length scales. These topics add to
and enhance the scope of issues that are being covered by other participating
institutions. All three institutions are also deeply involved in educating
students in this new emerging area. The collective experience gathered in the
three continents will also be useful as the institutions in the network prepare
to develop new curriculum. The major scientific benefit of leveraging the entire
resources of the network will enable the participants to vastly expand their
ability to conduct research by learning from the expertise available in the
network rather than be limited by the tools available in one's home institution.
In addition, the proposed video conferencing throughout the year between the
students and the annual meeting in different venues add to invaluable
educational experience in enhancing the scope of training in the POLS. Third,
the international scope of the proposed network will have a world-wide impact on
the scientific aspect by fostering many potentially powerful collaborations. The
three institutions will aid in achieving the basic mission of the POLS-SAVI
network, which in turn will have substantial impact on the development, use and
application of quantitative methods in biological problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being supported jointly by the Physics of
Living Systems Program in the Physics Division and by the Molecular Biophysics
Program in Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.