* 1206338
* Synthesis and Characterization of Zeolite-Like Mixed Conductors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2018
* Victoria Soghomonian, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2018
* USD 290,153.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This experimental project addresses discovery of new
materials through synthesis, and development of the materials for innovative
uses through characterization of their structural and physical properties. The
class of materials investigated is zeolite-like mixed electrical conductors, a
largely unexplored yet transformative subject. Zeolites and zeolite-like
materials are characterized by nanoscale pores that give rise to their well-
known technologically important properties: separation, ion-exchange, and
catalysis. Mixed electrical conductors, supporting both ionic and electronic
conduction, have impacted technological advances in many electrochemical systems
- electrode materials, sensors, energy conversion and storage. The combination
of the functionalities of zeolites with mixed electrical conduction yields
multifunctional materials and presents new directions in electrical energy
storage, separation sciences, and in energy conversion sciences, a timely
scientific and technological activity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:
The project advances the fundamental understanding of charge transport and
charge transfer in nanoporous zeolite-like mixed ionic-electronic conductors. In
particular, the interrelated roles of ionic mobility, pore size, framework
electronic conductivity, and chemical composition are studied. Thus, this
research impacts the understanding of the solid-state chemistry and physics of
materials, of solid-state electrochemical processes, and of the solid-state
physics of conduction mechanisms in novel materials. Yet, as these
multifunctional zeolite-like mixed electrical conductors are enabling materials,
they impact other areas, e.g. catalysis and separation. The materials synthesis
approach of this project lends itself to scale-up capabilities, and would allow
the research results to be translated to industrial efforts. The project
combines synthesis, structural characterization and electrical characterization,
resulting in a cohesive cycle that allows for the focused synthesis of materials
guided by their relevant properties, resonating with the goals of the Materials
Genome Initiative - accelerating the pace of materials discovery and their
applications. The students involved in the project obtain interdisciplinary
training in a timely topic, with scientific, societal and economic
ramifications.