* 1206839
* Symmetry and the Dynamics of Complex Networks and Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Kevin Bassler, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 320,450.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and
education to understand the role that symmetry has in the dynamics of systems
containing many interacting elements, especially of complex networks, and how
symmetry may be used to understand their behavior. Three sets of fundamentally
important problems in will be addressed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first set of
problems concerns using symmetry to understand and characterize the adaptive
dynamics of complex networks in which the topology of the network and the
dynamics on the network simultaneously evolve in response to each other.
Evolutionary Boolean network models are studied as prototypical examples with
simple, yet nontrivial, adaptive dynamics. The role of symmetry in evolutionary
development of robustness and adaptability in complex systems will also be
examined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second set of problems focuses on the
effects of symmetry on the eigenvalue spectra of complex systems. Specifically,
we will identify and analyze the effects of graph symmetry on the spectrum of
the Laplacian of complex networks, and on the extreme value behavior of leading
eigenvalues. The PI will also apply ideas of random matrix theory to
systematically analyze and characterize the dynamics of complex networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third set of problems involves developing efficient
algorithms for the proper sampling of network ensembles defined by various types
of constraints. These algorithms are important because they are widely needed in
order to properly make statistical studies of many network ensembles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will be both computational and analytical. Tools
and methods of statistical and mathematical physics will be used throughout. The
results will be important and transformative to the physics community because
they will answer fundamental questions about collective behavior in complex
systems. They will also be important to the broader scientific community because
the proposed problems are at the heart of many of the technological and
scientific questions investigated by of other
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the on-going multi-
disciplinary efforts at the University of Houston in both Computational and
Network Science. Related to this initiative are recently added core requirements
in the graduate physics curriculum, for which the PI has developed and teaches a
series of research-based courses to satisfy those requirements. Additionally,
the PI will develop and teach a new multidisciplinary graduate course to more
broadly educate students about recent advances in Network Science. The award
will also be used to support graduate students who will be trained in broadly
applicable analytic and computational skills. This work will be done
collaboratively with a diverse international group of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education with a focus to develop the principles that govern phenomena that
emerge in networks with application to biological systems and materials. A
network is an abstract concept that enables the representation and analysis of
diverse complex interacting systems. Common examples include the power-grid,
phone lines, the Internet, and social networks, such as those describing
acquaintanceships, collaborations, and terrorists. Many biological systems and
materials and physical systems can be viewed to be structured as networks
leading to deeper insights into their fundamental nature. The PI will focus on
the role of symmetry in the dynamics of networks that will connect diverse
physical systems. Symmetry plays an important role as an organizing principle
for a wide range of natural phenomena. The PI will focus on problems at the
interface of condensed matter physics and biology and more traditional topics of
statistical physics to achieve this goal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will be
both computational and analytical, and the problems that will be addressed range
from ones that are fundamental to those that arise in the analysis and
application of the ideas to real world experimental data. Throughout, tools and
methods of statistical and mathematical physics will be used. The results will
be important to the broader scientific community because the proposed problems
are at the heart of many of the technological and scientific questions
investigated by of other disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also
supports the on-going multi-disciplinary efforts at the University of Houston in
both Computational and Network Science. Related to this initiative are recently
added core requirements in the graduate physics curriculum, for which the PI has
developed and teaches a series of research-based courses to satisfy those
requirements. Additionally, the PI will develop and teach a new
multidisciplinary graduate course to more broadly educate students about recent
advances in Network Science. The award will also be used to support graduate
students who will be trained in broadly applicable analytic and computational
skills. This work will be done collaboratively with a diverse international
group of scientists.