* 1206656
* The Influence of Charged Interfaces on the Enhanced Photochemical Reactivity of Composites
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Paul Salvador, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2016
* USD 639,635.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Hydrogen is an attractive fuel for energy production
because it has a high energy density and its combustion generates only water
vapor, leaving no carbon bearing or radioactive by-products. However, unlike
fossil or nuclear fuels, it cannot be mined from the earth; hydrogen must be
synthesized. Photolysis, or light-driven water-splitting, is a promising
renewable method to synthesize hydrogen. However, the best currently available
processes are inefficient and, because of this, they are not competitive with
conventional fuel sources. One of the fundamental problems is that no single
material possesses the combination of properties needed to efficiently split
water. This project is based on the idea that a composite, that combines
materials with synergistic properties, will be able to catalyze water photolysis
more efficiently and currently available
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This project aims to test the
hypothesis that by controlling charges at interfaces in oxide heterostructures,
it is possible to build in mechanisms to separate photogenerated electron-hole
pairs and thereby increase the efficiency of photolysis (water-splitting). The
project builds upon recent discoveries of the composite catalyst effect for
enhanced photochemical reactivity and has the ultimate goal of developing a
sustainable fuel source. The hypothesis is being tested by studying a
combination of planar oxide heterostructures, ideal for controlled measurements,
and heterostructured oxide powders that would be required for any practical
implementation. Fe2O3 and TiO2 films will be supported on a variety of ABO3-type
substrates (for example, LaAlO3, SrTiO3, BaTiO3, PbTiO3, BiFeO3, and FeTiO3); by
choosing the appropriate phase and orientation, it is possible to control the
spectral range of absorption, the carrier type, and whether or not there is a
potential difference at the interface deriving from ferroelectricity, polar
terminations. The effects of band offsets will also be explored in compounds in
the pseudo-binary Cu2O-Fe2O3 system. Cross sectional scanning potential (Kelvin
probe) microscopy is being used to map potential differences at the buried
interfaces and these measurements are being compared to photoelectrochemical
measures of reactivity and efficiency. Experiments are also being conducted to
examine the effects of length scale on the properties of the heterostructures.
The research will be an integral part of the education of graduate and
undergraduate Materials Science and Engineering students.