* 1206919
* Global Strain-Free III-Nitride Heterostructures: Growth, Structure and Near-Infrared Optical Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Oana Malis, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 05/31/2016
* USD 390,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The main objective of this project is
to establish the relationship between growth, atomic structure and optical
properties of lattice-matched and strain-balanced AlInN/(In)GaN multi-quantum
well structures. In order to correlate the growth modes with microstructure and
near-infrared optical properties, AlInN/(In)GaN heterostructures are grown by
plasma-assisted Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE) on extremely high quality quasi-
bulk GaN substrates, the atomic structure of the semiconductor materials is
characterized in detail using high-resolution x-ray diffraction and transmission
electron microscopy, while the near-infrared optical properties of the materials
are examined experimentally using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. This
project advances the understanding of MBE growth of strain-free III-nitride
materials for complex infrared optoelectronic devices. Basic mechanisms of
material growth such as adatom kinetics and impurity incorporation on polar and
non-polar GaN substrates are studied in detail and compared. The goal is to
achieve adequate understanding and control of the growth process, resulting
microstructure and infrared optical properties in order to realize the
theoretical potential of this material system. The fundamental and practical
limitations for MBE growth, in particular for metal-modulated epitaxy, of
complex nitride heterostructures are established. &lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
description: This project investigates a new class of semiconductor materials
for infrared light sources and detectors that has the potential to enable new
practical applications (infrared spectroscopy, infrared imaging, and
telecommunications) with broad benefits to society. This research also increases
the learning opportunities for students of all ages, inside and outside the
traditional classroom by integrating interdisciplinary research with broader
physics and engineering education and training. In particular, the students
involved in this project have the opportunity to acquire hands-on experience
with the latest materials fabrication and characterization tools and techniques.
The excitement of scientific discovery is conveyed to students through
collaborations with several research groups in academia, industry, and national
laboratories. The interaction with scientists in industry and a federally funded
laboratory offers the students a different view of the scientific pursuit, as
well as a better understanding of their career options. The PIs and students
also will participate in outreach activities organized either in-house or at
local schools to increase exposure of K-12 students and the general public to
modern scientific topics at the border between physics, material science, and
engineering through Purdue?s highly popular Physics on the Road Project.