* 1206310
* Bioactive Scaffolds with Elastomeric Properties for the Engineering of Mechanically Active Tissues
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* John Rabolt, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 07/31/2016
* USD 420,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials Program in the Division of Materials Research to
the University of Delaware aims to develop synthetic scaffolding materials with
robust mechanical properties and defined biological activities for use in the
engineering of mechanically active tissues. The investigators will accomplish
this goal using chemically modified poly (epsilon-caprolactone) as the base
material and multiblock alternating copolymers of peptides and poly(ethylene
glycol) for bio-functionalization purposes. Novel electrospinning protocols will
be developed for the fabrication of fibrous, elastomeric scaffolds that
facilitate the infiltration and attachment of stem cells, and at the same time
mediate their lineage-specific differentiation. The proposed hybrid systems
overcome the major limitations of existing scaffolding materials and are
conducive to the successful engineering of mechanically active tissues. The
proposed research program integrates well with the University's effort to
establish a new biomedical engineering department, providing a fertile
biomaterials training ground for undergraduate and graduate students at Univ. of
Delaware. It will also allow the investigators work with teachers at the Newark
Center for Creative Learning to advance science education and experimental
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tissue engineering is a fast-growing field that
aims to create artificial tissues or organs to replace damaged or diseased ones.
In healthy tissue, cells reside in a three-dimensional matrix that provides
proper mechanical support and developmental guidance. To create artificial
replacement tissues, one must recreate the environment in which the cells
originally live. The artificial scaffolds must be highly porous, display
important biological signals and be able to sustain repetitive mechanical
deformation without breaking down. The purpose of this research is to develop
such materials that can be used to coax cells to grow, communicate with each
other and to produce their own matrices with the correct composition, structure
and function. This will be accomplished by combining a base material with the
desired mechanical properties with an engineered, protein-like macromolecule
that contains repetitive segments of synthetic polymers and natural peptides,
through a novel electrospinning process to create matrices with fibers at the
nanometer length scale. This work will enable the creation of sophisticated
biomaterials to improve human health, thus justifying the public support. The
outreach and education efforts with this award will help maintain the global
competitiveness of United States. Efforts with this award will include the
establishment of a biomedical engineering department at Univ. of Delaware, the
training of undergraduate and graduate students, the mentoring of
underrepresented minority students and the development of learning tools for a
local elementary school.