* 1206768
* Stressed-Induced Nanopatterning of Surface Reactions on Metal Oxide Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Richard Osgood, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 05/31/2015
* USD 390,000.00

Technical Description: This project examines the use of controllable nanoscale
local strain to chemically pattern metal-oxide-crystal surfaces. It investigates
and exploits local stress formed by careful, low-energy surface implantation of
rare gases to controllably vary surface reactivity. Thus a high-resolution
nanoscale template of nanometer-scale buried-atom clusters creates the needed
patterned strain in the surface layers of metal oxides. Strain-induced reactions
or change in surface reactivity is observed in several systems of interest to
the materials chemistry of electronic materials or even more generally, for use
in oxides for catalysis. While the main focus of the research project examines
the use of this effect as a method of nanoscale chemical patterning on the oxide
surface, the project has the broader implication of enhancing our knowledge of
oxide, nanoscale surface chemistry and its control.

Non-technical Description: This project is in the general areas of
nanopatterning and complex-oxide surface chemical reactions; this is an area of
broad impact for many technologies including surface functionalization for
advanced sensors in medical and biological science, and patterning for
nanosystem devices. The research is integrated into the education mission of
Columbia University. First, the project enables initiation of a new hands-on
early graduate student program: entitled Jump-Start; this program provides an
opportunity to learn via mentoring, material preparation, and teaching the
advanced techniques need for modern experimental research in oxide materials.
Second, the project has concrete plans and procedures to seek out recruitment of
diverse students. Recruitment is done via outreach talks to undergrads at
Columbia and via active participation in the undergraduate research
opportunities program (UROP) at Columbia. Third, the project enables students to
collaborate, via extended visits and shorter trips, with a major US and an
Italian national laboratory, i.e. the new Brookhaven Center for Functional
Nanomaterials and the ELETTRA synchrotron source in Trieste.