* 1206940
* Surface Termination and Shape Effects on Surface Induced Magnetism in Quantum Dots
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Robert Meulenberg, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 06/30/2016
* USD 377,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program, will
take advantage of ligand exchange processes in quantum dot materials to induce
intriguing new physics in these systems: namely magnetism without the use of a
chemical dopant. Focus will be placed on targeting strong-field ligands which
can lead to unpaired electrons on the quantum dot surface. In addition, how the
shape of the particle can affect the induced magnetism due to changes in
magnetocrystalline anisotropy will be investigated. Using a host of materials
characterization including synchrotron radiation techniques (x-ray absorption,
photoemission, and circular dichroism), magnetometry, electron spin resonance,
photoluminescence, electron microscopy, UV-Vis spectroscopy, and x-ray
diffraction, correlations between ligand field strength and induced magnetism
will be observed. A comprehensive understanding of ligand exchange chemistry on
quantum dots, including surface coverage and effects of ligand type on exchange
processes, will be obtained. The general mechanisms related to surface induced
magnetism in quantum dots will lead to new quantum dot based magnetic materials
which can lead to new magneto-optical devices based on UV lasers.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Nanomagnetism represents a new potential marketable use for nanotechnology, a
field of research and technology heavily discussed by the popular media.
Breakthroughs in this research venture could lead to smaller, more efficient
magneto-optical materials. This project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program, will greatly increase our understanding of how the
manipulation of surface chemistry can lead to unexpected and unique magnetic
properties in quantum dots. This project will find ready applications in
technology sectors including magneto-optic devices. This research will take
place within the Laboratory for Surface Science and Technology (LASST), an
interdisciplinary center that brings together researchers from Physics,
Chemistry, Electrical & Computer Engineering, and Chemical & Biological
Engineering. This research program provides advanced graduate training in the
fields of physics, chemistry, and materials science, and specifically in both
UHV surface science and magnetometry. This project will leverage the NSF funded
Maine Physical Sciences Partnership for outreach to both middle and high school
students. An upper division undergraduate laboratory on advanced instrumentation
is planned that will prepare the next generation of physicists, chemists,
materials scientists, and engineers for both industrial and academic settings.
In addition, the research laboratory, which will be housed in LASST, will be on
display via tours and will introduce many underprivileged students, including a
substantial Native American population, to cutting edge instrumental tools.
Information collected from the instrumentation will be disseminated via many
outlets, including academic publications and presentations, descriptions on
UMaine websites, and public tours of LASST and the Physics Department (attended
by many middle school students and teachers).