* 1206707
* Ordering and Phase Transitions in Supercooled Metallic Liquids and Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Kenneth Kelton, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 08/31/2016
* USD 444,768.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Bulk metallic glasses (BMGs), which can be formed under
similar processing conditions as the familiar silicate glasses, are finding an
increasing number of technological applications. Why a few metallic liquids form
BMGs, while the majority of metallic liquids do not, remains unclear. Previous
studies by us and by others have demonstrated that metallic glasses contain
medium-range and short-range structural order, with icosahedral short-range
ordering (ISRO) being most common. We have demonstrated that this structural
ordering originates in the high temperature liquid far above the glass
transition temperature, and is often accompanied by chemical ordering. Since
ISRO is incompatible with crystal periodicity, it raises the nucleation barrier
for the crystal phases, thereby enhancing glass formability in some cases.
Molecular dynamics studies indicate that this ordering influences the atomic
motion underlying viscous behavior, which also plays a key role in glass
formation. Additionally, fine-scale phase separation has been observed in many
glasses; whether this occurs in supercooled liquids, where it would also impact
glass formation, has not been investigated previously. Investigations of these
issues require that the liquids be processed in a containerless environment,
eliminating heterogeneous nucleation on container walls and increasing the
amount of supercooling. This group has pioneered the use of electrostatic
levitation techniques to make X-ray structural studies of deeply supercooled
metallic and semiconductor liquids. Under this grant, those studies will be
extended by making wide and small angle synchrotron X-ray and elastic neutron
scattering studies, and correlating those with measurements of the densities,
viscosities and crystallization of metallic glass forming liquids. The insights
gained from this research will lead to improved control of glass formation and
nanostructure development during controlled devitrification.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Silicate glasses are familiar materials, used for
thousands of years to produce decorative and practical objects. Metallic glasses
are much less familiar. First discovered in 1960, they typically require that
the liquids from which they form be cooled at rates approaching one million
degrees per second, significantly limiting their technological usefulness. A few
metallic glasses are now known that can be fabricated using much slower cooling
rates, comparable to those used to produce silicate glasses. These novel
materials are often stronger than steel, extremely hard and resistant to
corrosion. Further, they can be molded into complex shapes that cannot be
obtained with conventional metals. These glasses are now used in pressure
sensors, micro-geared motors, transformer cores, biomedical components and
sports equipment. However, it remains unclear why a few metallic liquids will
form these glasses, while most will not. The research that will be carried out
under the support of this grant will address this key question. This group has
pioneered the use of electrostatic levitation for containerless studies of
liquid structures, and has demonstrated that metallic-glass-forming liquids
develop significant topological short and medium-range order. The scattering of
X-rays and neutrons from these liquids will be measured to determine the
chemical ordering and to investigate possible liquid phase separation on the
nanometer scale, which may accompany the structural ordering. These data will be
correlated with measurements of key physical properties important for glass
formation, including the liquid density, viscosity, and resistance to
crystallization. In addition to their relevance to improved basic understanding,
the results of these studies will lead to refined methods for metallic glass
formation and for the control of nanostructure development during glass and
liquid crystallization. The research will provide scientific training to both
graduate and undergraduate students. Simple and practical materials science
experiments and demonstrations inspired by this research, will constitute a
series of workshops for secondary high-school teachers, led by the PI and his
students, to help teachers convey scientific principles and the excitement of a
scientific career to high school students.