* 1206518
* Non-Stoichiometric Ferroelectrics and their Associated Thermoelectric Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,04/30/2018
* Susan Trolier-McKinstry, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 04/30/2018
* USD 509,288.00

NON-TECHNICAL: The research in this project opens up new research strategies for
sustainable high performance thermoelectrics that could have major societal
impacts on energy savings, CO2 reduction and the environment. This investigation
explores the interface between two unusual classes of functional materials:
ferroelectrics and thermoelectrics, for low cost ¡V high efficiency energy
harvesting. There are major economic advantages with a lower cost thermoelectric
materials solution for generators; as an example, every automobile, household
furnace, and factory exhaust chimney could have heat exchangers equipped with
thermoelectric devices and these new enabling thermoelectric materials and
strategies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is an important educational outreach
activity with local schools (Park Forest and Mount Nittany Middle Schools),
engaging students in grades 6-8 in material science. Under this project, a
materials classification exercise is being designed to test previous perceptions
and prejudices of the children towards selecting metals and insulators through
¡§show and touch. The same materials are being introduced to introductory
materials classes at Penn State University to see how opinions differ from those
of the younger children. The theoretical basis of this concept underpins the
technical part of the advances used in transforming ferroelectric materials to
thermoelectrics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on preliminary data, the core
intellectual property for Penn State University in the ferroelectric-
thermoelectrics area has already been protected. Across this project, activities
range from local education to global energy-environment-economic benefits in
terms of its impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL: This investigation
explores the interface between two unusual classes of functional materials:
ferroelectrics and thermoelectrics. The aim of this work is to provide a broader
understanding of highly non-stoichiometric ferroelectric materials near the
critical electronic carrier concentration separating semiconducting and metallic
conduction, the so-called Mott criterion. Initial observations of thermoelectric
properties in non-stoichiometric perovskite BaTiO3-d and &lt;001&gt; tungsten
bronze (Sr,Ba)Nb2O6-d ferroelectric materials shows attractive properties, and
this project will establish: (1) general structure-thermoelectric property data
for various ferroelectric compositions and structures, (2) quantification and
modeling of electrical conductivity, Seebeck coefficient, and thermal
conductivity, identifying the materials physics controlling the transport, (3)
insights into the "best" ferroelectric-thermoelectrics, (4) the relation between
the nature of the ferroelectric phase transition behavior and the semiconductor-
metallic transition in different materials, and (5) analysis of the optical band
edge behavior, quantifying phonon¡Velectron coupling, and structural
modifications in the highly non-stoichiometric ferroelectrics across phase
transitions. Tetrahertz spectroscopy measurements of the non-stoichiometric
ferroelectrics produced under this project are used to establish detailed
understanding of the phonon dynamics in the transition region and could open up
a new sub-field by challenging the understanding of phase transitions in
ferroelectric materials under these unique conditions. The research
collaboration with the Czech Institute of Physics will expose the Penn State
University students involved in this investigation to the importance of the
global network of science and collaboration with groups with unique and world-
class facilities and expertise.