* 1206056
* Parity Violating Electron Scattering Measurements at Jefferson Lab
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Hicks
* 06/30/2015
* USD 124,821.00

The main thrust of the research program of the Louisiana Tech (LaTech) Particle
Physics Group (PPG) involves parity violating electron scattering, a program of
which will challenge our understanding of nucleon structure, probe the dynamics
of QCD symmetry breaking, and provide precision tests of the Standard Model.
Four parity violating electron scattering programs at Thomas Jefferson National
Accelerator Facility (TJNAF), the G0, Qweak, PVDIS and a future Moller
measurement after the 12 GeV TJNAF upgrade, represent parity violation
measurements covering a broad range of momentum transfers from 0.03 - 2.0
(GeV/c) squared. These measurements will investigate ground state nucleon
properties and properties of the nucleon during its transition to excited
states, provide precision tests of the Standard Model, and constrain weak quark
couplings to unprecedented levels. Each of these experiments is sensitive to
unique and interesting physics, and together constitute a program of parity
violation experiments in which the Louisiana Tech PPG group plays a critical
role. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will allow the LaTech PPG group to
continue to make major contributions to physics research, transfer technology
from basic science to engineering applications, and enhance the educational
opportunities for undergraduate students, local high school students and
teachers, providing an excellent avenue for recruiting students into scientific
disciplines.