* 1206323
* Perturbed Fluctuations &amp; Patterns
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Mehran Kardar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research, as well as educational activities, towards understanding
the influence of boundaries on fluctuating fields. Fluctuating electromagnetic
fields pervade space, accounting for phenomena as diverse as thermal (blackbody)
radiation, van der Waals&lt;br/&gt;forces between neutral objects; thermal
motions of fluids and macromolecules are inherent to soft matter, for example
polymers and gels; while biology provides many instances of out of equilibrium
fluctuations. This research will explore how static and dynamic perturbations of
the boundaries confining fluctuating fields modifies energy transfer and forces
between surrounding bodies, and influences aggregation patterns of particles
diffusing on the surfaces. Specific thrusts of the project include, but are not
limited to: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. The well known blackbody results are
applicable only on scales larger than the thermal wavelength. Using tools from
scattering theory, the PI shall develop basis independent trace formulae to
treat heat transfer, as well as interaction forces, amongst a collection of
objects, compact or extended, at different temperatures, applicable to all
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. The PI shall consider non-equilibrium steady
states involving moving and rotating objects, and compute energy radiated as
well dissipative and shear forces due to modifications of electromagnetic
fluctuations in the surrounding vacuum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. The PI shall
explore the novel boundary conditions, and consequent force laws, that may be
realized by appropriate modification of surfaces; for example by etching fractal
patterns, or at a percolation threshold.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Fluctuation
induced forces for scale invariant objects, such as a cone or pyramid, have
simple universal forms dictated by dimensional considerations. The dependence of
these forces on shape and geometry will be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5. The
PI will address the question: How are reaction/diffusion patterns modified on a
curved surface?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systems in equilibrium are described by
standard tools of statistical field theory, with the confining objects
formulated as boundary conditions. Scattering amplitudes are an efficient way of
encoding the influence of an object on the field, while transmission of
influence between bodies in captured by Green's functions. For systems out of
equilibrium, the focus shifts to fluctuating sources within each body, but the
interactions between bodies are still captured by manipulations of scattering
amplitudes and Green's functions. For patterns on curved surfaces we shall rely
on methods from differential geometry. A combination of analytical and numerical
studies is anticipated in all cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education and
development of human resources are an important aspect of this project. The
research is interdisciplinary, aimed at applying methods from statistical
physics to a wide range of scientific problems. The research is closely linked
to courses taught by the PI, which through textbooks and dissemination by the
web have an impact on a broader scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical and computational research, as well as educational
activities, towards understanding the influence of boundaries on fluctuating
fields. Fluctuations, whether the result of the random thermal motion or a
consequence of Heisenberg's famous uncertainty principle are ubiquitous in
nature, and particularly pronounced in small systems. While fluctuations imply
uncertainty, they can be utilized to manipulate forces and to achieve preferred
outcomes. Specific examples include: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Far from empty,
the vacuum pulsates with electromagnetic fluctuations of quantum and thermal
origin. Objects in vacuum modify these fluctuations and in turn experience
forces, the much studied Casimir and van der Waals forces. The motion of the
immersed objects far from the steady state of equilibrium are less well studied
and include phenomena such as friction of vacuum, emission of radiation, and
violations of classical blackbody radiation results at short scales. The latter
can for example be utilized to increase heat transfer across a short gap by
orders of magnitude.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Thermal fluctuations in soft
matter, for example near critical fluid mixtures, result in forces of
controllable range that can be used to assemble colloids into desired patterns.
How are these forces modified by the shape and structure of the boundary, for
example by etching specific chemical or geometrical
patterns?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Biological systems form patterns at different
scales, from sub-cellular to organism, despite, or because of, non-equilibrium
fluctuations. The influence of boundary shapes will be explored for aggregation
processes that involve diffusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education and development
of human resources are an important aspect of this project. The research is
interdisciplinary, aimed at applying methods from statistical physics to a wide
range of scientific problems. The research is closely linked to courses taught
by the PI, which through textbooks and dissemination by the web have an impact
on a broader scientific community.