* 1206637
* Radiative and ultrafast non-radiative electronic  relaxation in individual and assembled noble metallic nanoparticles of different shapes
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2016
* Mostafa El-Sayed, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 11/30/2016
* USD 419,001.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY The main focus of this renewal project, supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program, is to elucidate the effects of plasmonic
fields on the dynamics of important photochemical and photophysical systems
(e.g. polymers, doped and undoped metal oxides, and the protein
bacteriorhodopsin). Doped TiO2 has attracted much recent attention in the
scientific community because the use of plasmonic silver and gold nanoparticles
has greatly enhanced the material's photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical
efficiency. Bacteriorhodopsin is one of only two naturally-occurring
photosynthetic systems and, in addition to its important chemical and biological
properties, has been considered for applications in solar-energy conversion and
electronics. In all of these materials there is little known about the effects
of strong plasmon-enhanced local electric fields on their fundamental dynamical
light-induced processes. The dynamics may involve unknown excited states and
intermediates and altered kinetic rates. Fundamental processes most important to
applications in photocatalysis and solar-energy conversion will be identified
and colloidal chemistry will be used to synthesize new noble-metal
nanostructures that selectively enhance the probabilities and/or dynamics of
photophysical events. This program will build upon the El-Sayed group's
extensive accomplishments in the areas of plasmonics, metal and semiconductor
nanostructures, spectroscopy, catalysis, photochemistry, and photobiology.

NON TECHNICAL SUMMARY The proposed work seeks to determine at a fundamental
level the interactions between plasmonic nanoparticles and materials that can be
applied for photocatalysis and solar-energy conversion, so that the mechanisms
responsible for plasmon-enhanced performance may be elucidated. Success will
provide chemists, physicists, materials scientists, and engineers with knowledge
on how best to incorporate noble-metal nanoparticles into devices and catalytic
systems. The knowledge obtained will inform scientists in the field of colloidal
chemistry on new synthesis strategies and how to optimize nanoparticle shape,
size, structure, composition, and interparticle arrangement for particular
applications. Students, postdoctoral fellows, and junior scientists will gain
valuable multidisciplinary experience in chemistry, spectroscopy, and
nanotechnology in preparation for careers in academia or industry.

The electric field enhancement caused by gold and silver nanostructures has
revolutionized entire fields such as Raman spectroscopy. Although the cost of
noble metals is very high, the many orders-of-magnitude enhancement in surface-
enhanced Raman scattering suggests that only extremely small amounts of material
may be needed in optimized systems. Taking full advantage of plasmonic effects
while minimizing cost requires a detailed understanding of the static and
dynamical properties of materials coupled to plasmonic fields, as well as
scalable chemical syntheses that avoid expensive and time-consuming techniques
such as electron beam lithography. Success in this endeavor will help to better
utilize sunlight as an energy source and reduce the energy consumed to produce
important industrial products such as H2. The resulting technological and
economic growth, while slowing the rate of releasing pollutants and greenhouse
gases into the environment, will have a significant worldwide impact.