* 1206404
* Field-and Current-Driven Domain-Wall Dynamics in Microstructures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* James Erskine, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2016
* USD 390,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic domain walls can be manipulated at
high-speeds and on nanometer spatial scales by applied magnetic fields and
electric currents. Modern nanotechnology methods can be used to engineer and
fabricate nanometer-scale magnetic wires. These model one-dimensional structures
can serve as conduits for electric current and for guiding magnetic domain
walls. This project utilizes magneto-optic techniques to probe the high-speed
manipulation of magnetic domain walls in fabricated nanometer-scale magnetic
structures. The goal of the work is to characterize and understand the (spin-
torque) mechanisms that: 1) allow high-speed manipulation of magnetization on
nanometer spatial scales by electric currents, and that 2) govern energy loss
and damping. The work is directly related to existing and emerging technology
that relies on high-speed manipulation of magnetism on small spatial scales:
magnetic meta materials, memory and logic structures, and imaging, radar and
telecommunication technology. The research involves state-of-the-art materials
synthesis and nanofabrication techniques, and addresses new phenomena that occur
as a result of nanometer spatial constraints. It provides excellent education
and training opportunities for the students and postdoctoral associates who work
on the projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Electron spins in one-dimensional nanometer-scale
structures of magnetic material (magnetic nanowires) form regions of uniform
magnetization (domains) separated by a domain wall in which spin orientation
reverses between the two opposing spin domains. The spin configuration in the
nanostructure can be manipulated by the application of a magnetic field or an
electric current. The ability to manipulate and probe electron spins (local
magnetism) on nanometer scales at high speeds is technologically important: it
provides the basis for magnetic cellular logic and related new device technology
that could extend and improve existing microelectronic devices that digitally
store and process information. This project explores high-speed manipulation of
electron spins in magnetic nanostructures. The objective of the work is to
determine and understand the mechanisms that allow electric current manipulation
of spins and discover how material composition and geometrical constraints
govern and limit the control of local magnetism on nanometer scales. The project
provides a good venue for training the next generation of scientists,
technologists, and teachers because it involves new phenomena and requires
application of current state-of the-art research instruments and materials
science/nanoscience technology.