* 1206332
* Linking membrane mechanics to membrane protein structure: Spatial organization and cooperative signaling of membrane proteins
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Christoph Haselwandter, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 361,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the Division
of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences contribute funds to this award. This award
supports theoretical research at the intersection of condensed matter physics,
membrane biology, and structural biology. The PI will explore the physical
principles underlying the spatial organization and biological function of cell
membranes. Cell membranes exhibit a complex organization of lipids and membrane
proteins, and play an integral role in many cellular processes. The functional
properties of membrane proteins are not purely determined by protein structure
but, rather, membrane proteins act in concert with the surrounding lipid
bilayer. The overall objective of this project is to relate recent insights into
the molecular structure of membrane components, which have resulted from a
number of seminal breakthroughs in structural biology, to the coarse-grained
description of cell membranes in terms of continuum elasticity theory, thereby
providing a bridge between the structure of membrane proteins and the
organization and biological function of cell membranes.&lt;br/&gt;Linking
membrane mechanics to membrane protein structure requires a theoretical approach
going beyond previous elastic models of membranes, which have mostly focused on
cylindrical or conical membrane inclusions at large separations. Cell membranes
are crowded, with the size and spacing of membrane proteins both being of the
order of a few nanometers, and membrane proteins are found to exhibit a rich
variety of hydrophobic shapes. The PI aims to develop a versatile elastic
description of cell membranes allowing for the complex shapes of membrane
proteins obtained from structural biology, and permitting the analysis of
interactions among a large number of membrane inclusions in close proximity,
which is the experimental scenario most relevant for the crowded membrane
environment provided by living cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general
theoretical concepts developed through this project will be employed to address
specific biological questions in three model systems. First, the functional
characteristics associated with the various reported oligomeric states and
structures of mechanosensitive ion channels will be predicted in the form of
channel gating curves with varying membrane tension. Second, the minimum energy
shapes of membrane protein polyhedra - faceted bilayer vesicles of well-defined
polyhedral symmetry - will be related to the properties of the constituent
lipids and membrane proteins. Third, the planned research will explore the
impact of membrane-mediated elastic interactions on the spatial organization and
cooperative signaling exhibited by chemoreceptor lattices. These three case
studies will enable the systematic exploration of the relationship between the
structure of membrane components and the spatial organization and functional
properties of cell membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This supports educational
activities across a range of age groups, including two graduate students who
will (1) help to mentor undergraduate research assistants, (2) participate in
outreach activities to local high schools, (3) collaborate closely with
researchers across different academic departments and institutions, (4) engage
in minority outreach programs, and (5) participate in the development and
teaching of a new course at the interface of physics and biology. This project
supports high school science education in central Los Angeles through the
organization of workshops for inner-city high school science
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The
Division of Materials Research and the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences contribute funds to this award. This project explores the physical
principles underlying the biological function of proteins embedded in cell
membranes, and supports research at the intersection of condensed matter
physics, membrane biology, and structural biology. Membrane proteins are an
abundant and important class of molecules that play critical roles in many human
diseases, including cancer and Alzheimer's. Recent years have seen several major
breakthroughs in the structural elucidation and biophysical characterization of
membrane components. The biological function of membrane proteins is generally
determined by a complex interplay between protein structure and the properties
of the surrounding lipid bilayer, a major component of the membrane. This leads
to a deformation of the membrane from its unperturbed state which can be
described quantitatively using the theory of continuum elasticity, which has
been studied widely in the context of materials research. This project develops
the continuum elasticity theory of membranes as a bridge connecting the
structure of membrane components to the organization and biological function of
cell membranes in vivo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general theoretical concepts
developed in this project will be employed to address specific biological
questions in three model systems. The first of these model systems concerns
mechanosensitive ion channels, which are membrane proteins that can respond to
mechanical stimuli and constitute and form the basis for the sense of touch, for
example. The second model system concerns membrane protein polyhedra, which have
been proposed as a novel tool for the structural study of membrane proteins.
Finally, the third model system concerns chemoreceptors which form the basis for
the sense of smell, for example. Chemoreceptors provide a widely-studied example
of membrane proteins able to transmit signals across cell membranes, and which
have been shown recently to exhibit an intriguing spatial organization into
regular lattice structures. These three case studies represent model systems of
high experimental interest, and will allow the systematic exploration of the
relationship between the structure of membrane components and the spatial
organization and functional properties of cell
membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goals of this project are
complemented by a range of educational activities which will (1) support
graduate, undergraduate, and high-school students, (2) lead to the development
of a new course at the interface of physics and biology, and (3) support high
school science education in central Los Angeles through the organization of
workshops for inner-city high school science teachers.