* 1206272
* Isometric Embedding and Other Problems in Geometry and Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Jeanne Clelland, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2015
* USD 165,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1206272, Principal Investigator: Jeanne Nielsen Clelland

The principal investigator plans to apply the theory of exterior differential
systems and Cartan's method of equivalence to study several problems in
differential geometry and differential equations, both individually and with
various collaborators. In joint work with Gui-Qiang Chen, Marshall Slemrod,
Dehua Wang, and Deane Yang, she will investigate the local existence problem for
isometric embedding of higher-dimensional Riemannian manifolds into Euclidean
space, incorporating ideas from elastostatics and hyperbolic conservation laws
to find conditions which guarantee local existence of isometric embeddings. She
will continue her joint work with Thomas Ivey on classification results for
Backlund transformations for certain categories of PDEs, paying particular
attention to auto-Backlund transformations, which may be used to generate new
solutions of a PDE from a known solution of the same PDE. She will expand upon
her joint work with Christopher Moseley and George Wilkens on sub-Finsler
geometry, and investigate geometric properties of metric structures associated
to affine distributions, as well as potential applications to optimal control
theory. In joint work with her former Ph.D. student Matthew Stackpole, she will
investigate the phenomenon of dynamic equivalence between control systems, with
a focus on finding ways to compute invariants to distinguish between dynamically
inequivalent systems. In joint work with her former M.A. student Nathaniel
Bushek, she will investigate geometric properties of surfaces in 5-dimensional
centroaffine space, including the classification of homogeneous examples and
other special families.

Differential equations have an enormous range of applications, from engineering
and physics to biology and finance, just to name a few. A common theme in all
the proposed projects is the use of geometric techniques to study structural
features of differential equations which may be obscured by the expression of an
equation in a particular choice of coordinates. This approach, pioneered in the
early 20th century by Elie Cartan, has enjoyed great success in furthering the
understanding of many types of differential equations and their solutions. The
proposed research on isometric embedding addresses one of the 23 mathematical
challenges recently posed by DARPA, due to potential applications to the science
of protein folding. The proposed research on Backlund transformations is related
to integrable systems, whose applications include efficient signal propagation
over long distances with minimal distortion in signal quality. The proposed
projects on affine distributions and dynamic equivalence are related to control
theory, whose applications include areas such as robotics and quantum computing.