* 1206635
* Characterizing cell morphology, adhesion, and migration in 2.5 and 3D cell-derived extracellular matrices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Muhammad Zaman, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 02/28/2017
* USD 420,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
Boston University is to characterize the interactions between normal and
transformed human mammary epithelial cells and 2.5- and 3-dimensional
fibroblast-derived extracellular matrices. These 3D culture systems consist of
fibroblast derived extracellular matrix supported by a 3D polymeric scaffold
system produced by electrospinning. Cellular interactions with the surrounding
extracellular matrix are key regulators of tissue homeostasis and phenotype and
upon deregulation can cause severe diseases. Thus, it is critical that we study
the complex and multi-scale mechanisms regulating cell-extracellular matrix
interactions in native like environments. Unfortunately, most of our current
understanding between cells and surrounding extra-cellular matrices arises from
cells cultured on artificial 2D environments that pose artificial geometric and
mechanical restrictions and are unable to capture the in vivo complexity. Key
cellular structural, morphological and mechanical properties will be
characterized in these complex environments. Using these different culture
systems, the project aims to generate and integrate quantitative datasets on
cell adhesion, migration, cell signaling and gene expression in complex and
native like environments. By comparing these datasets, the project expects to
obtain new insights into the complex mechanisms, by which cells interact with
the extra cellular matrix and enhance our understanding of cellular form and
function in native environments. Broader impacts of this work will include
providing researchers at multiple levels with a new quantitative toolbox to
answer questions of fundamental importance in cell-matrix interactions in vivo.
In addition, this award will focus educating the next generation of
undergraduate and graduate students and scientists at multiple institutions who
will develop skills to create a quantitative, broad based, multi-scale and
integrated understanding of cell-matrix interactions in both in vivo and in
vitro.

The form and function of cells in the human body rests on their chemical,
physical and mechanical interactions with the surrounding environment. These
interactions regulate key cellular processes and upon deregulation can cause
severe diseases, including cancer, developmental disorders and chronic wounds.
Understanding the fundamental basis of cellular interactions with the
surrounding environment is therefore of critical importance for gaining insights
into the normal homeostasis as well as to probe promising areas of therapeutic
interventions. The goals of this project are to recreate the in vivo environment
of cells in an in vitro setting to gain insights into how cellular behavior,
form and function are regulated by the complex surrounding environment in vivo.
This requires the use of cell culture systems that better mimic native tissues
than what has been used traditionally. In the proposed work, we will undertake
an integrated approach rooted in cell biology, material science, tissue
engineering and biomechanics to characterize the interactions between cells and
cell-derived extracellular matrices that will provide a robust and quantitative
platform to understand a wide variety of physiologically relevant processes.
Using a coordinated research, education and outreach plan, this project will
enable the next generation of interdisciplinary scientists and engineers across
multiple campuses, and particularly among under-represented groups, to create
novel, quantitative and a broad based understanding of cellular behavior to
address a number of high-value challenges in cellular engineering and
biomaterials research.