* 1206522
* First Conference of the International Society for NonParametric Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2013
* Dimitris Politis, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 02/28/2013
* USD 18,000.00

A 5-day international conference,``The First Conference of the International
Society for NonParametric Statistics'' is being planned to be held in Halkidiki,
Greece, June 15-19, 2012.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NonParametric Statistics is not a
new subject. Nevertheless, it has become more prominent in the 21st century
since data have become abundant, and the computing power to analyze them is
generally available. The aim of the PI and his collaborators is to bring
together researchers from the U.S., Europe and other parts of the world in order
to foster research on nonparametric inference with special emphasis on emerging
fields such as:&lt;br/&gt;a) Nonparametric methodology for high dimensional
data.&lt;br/&gt;b) Bootstrap, Empirical Likelihood, and related
methods.&lt;br/&gt;c) Data depth and and related multivariate nonparametric
methods.&lt;br/&gt;d) Dimension reduction, model selection, and related
methods.&lt;br/&gt;e) Nonparametric machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;f) Nonparametric
models for high dimensional mixed and random effects designs. &lt;br/&gt;g)
Empirical process and semiparametrics.&lt;br/&gt;h) Bayesian
Nonparametrics.&lt;br/&gt;i) Nonparametric methods for time series and
Econometrics.&lt;br/&gt;j) Nonparametric methods for spatial
processes.&lt;br/&gt;k) Wavelets and nonparametric functional
estimation.&lt;br/&gt;l) Nonstandard Asymptotics in nonparametric
inference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the conference is to facilitate
the exchange of research ideas on all actively growing areas of nonparametric
statistics, thereb giving the development of this important field of statistics
a timely boost. This will also be the first conference of the newly formed
International Society for NonParametric Statistics (ISNPS) whose mission is "to
foster the research and practice of nonparametric statistics, and to promote the
dissemination of new developments in the field via conferences, books and
journal publications." ISNPS has a distinguished Advisory Committee that
includes R.Beran, P.Bickel, R. Carroll, D. Cook, P. Hall, W. Hardle, R. Johnson,
B. Lindsay, E. Parzen, P. Robinson, M. Rosenblatt, G. Roussas, T. SubbaRao, and
G. Wahba, as well as a Charting Committee consisting of over 50 prominent
researchers from all over the world. In particular, theprogram will provide a
forum for junior and senior researchers alike to gain valuable experience
interacting with leaders in their respective sub-areas,and for building new
collaborations between researchers in Nonparametric Statistics from the US with
researchers from all over the world.