* 1206121
* From Genes to Gels: Programming the Physical and Biological Properties of Multifunctional Protein Hydrogels
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* David Tirrell, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2015
* USD 450,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1206121 PI: Tirrell, David ORG:
Caltech&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: From Genes to Gels: Programming the Physical
and Biological Properties of Multifunctional Protein
Hydrogels&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: This project uses recombinant
DNA technology to prepare multifunctional protein-based biomaterials. This
approach to polymer synthesis provides near-absolute control over chain length
and monomer sequence, and enables straightforward preparation of multifunctional
materials. The physicochemical properties of protein polymers can be engineered
further by exploiting methods for incorporating non-canonical amino acids into
the protein chain. In this project, protein biosynthesis is harnessed to prepare
new protein-based, multifunctional protein polymers that can be assembled into
viscoelastic gels. The resulting materials are targeted for encapsulating and
culturing pancreatic beta-cells and islets, and will contain functional domains
thought to be important for beta-cell and islet survival. The bioactive regions
of the proteins will be composed largely of elastin-derived sequences; these
domains will alternate with leucine-zipper domains that permit assembly of the
materials into physically crosslinked hydrogels through formation of coiled-coil
aggregates. These gels will enable cell encapsulation through simple mixing of
protein components under ambient conditions. The elastin sequences will be
further tailored to contain the non-canonical amino acid azidohomoalanine, which
enables control of viscoelastic properties through covalent crosslinking. This
approach exploits the mild, bio-orthogonal character of the strain-promoted
azide-alkyne cycloaddition to effect covalent crosslinking of protein gels. The
goals of this work are (1) to engineer multidomain proteins that gel upon
mixing, (2) to chemically crosslink protein hydrogels using mild, bio-orthogonal
chemistries, and (3) to elucidate the behavior of cells encapsulated in
physically and chemically crosslinked protein hydrogels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The research supported by this project
will be integrated with a new high school science program, entitled "Genes to
Gels," which introduces students to ideas and research at the interface between
the biological sciences and materials science. The new program will bring to the
Caltech campus a small number of students selected from Pasadena public high
schools, for a three-week, summer hands-on laboratory experience. An important
element of the program will be the commitment of the students' high school
teachers to build on what the students do at Caltech, to develop demonstrations
or experiments for use in their classrooms. Students will gain hands-on
experience with each step of the process that takes us from "genes to gels."
They will grow bacterial strains that carry artificial genes encoding leucine-
zipper proteins, learn how to express and isolate proteins, and verify their
molecular weights and purities by using gel electrophoresis and mass
spectrometry. The proteins to be used in this work are well suited to
experiments of this kind, because they can be purified easily by cycling through
the lower critical solution temperature. With pure proteins in hand, students
will prepare hydrogels and characterize the associated changes in viscosity by
inversion tests, falling ball viscometry, and simple particle tracking. At the
end of the program, all of the participants will work together to select and
structure activities that can be productively transferred to the high school
classroom. This program will impact a dozen classrooms and hundreds of high
school students over the course of the project.