* 1206233
* Computational Studies of Nonequilibrium Dynamics of Classical and Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Mark Novotny, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 248,341.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The Division of Materials Research and the Office of Cyberinfrastructure
contribute funds to this award.

This award supports computational and theoretical research and education on non-
equilibrium dynamics of materials involving classical and quantum models. Two
recent algorithmic advances by the PI, one for classical systems and one for
quantum systems, will be further developed and applied to specific models. The
main thrusts of this project are:

1. The mathematical underpinnings necessary to bridge disparate time scales in
simulations, related to Projective Dynamics and Forward Flux Sampling methods,
have recently been shown to be applicable to non-equilibrium dynamics of
classical off-lattice systems. The Projective Dynamics and Forward Flux Sampling
methods will be further developed and applied to two simulations with
oscillating electromagnetic fields. One study will be related to fast charging
for Lithium-ion rechargeable batteries, the other to non-equilibrium processes
relevant to the folding of proteins. 2. A novel quantum algorithm will allow
studies of spin systems with a much larger Hilbert space than previously
accessible to real-time calculations. This algorithm will be applied to study
decoherence and thermalization of spin systems coupled to specific explicit spin
baths. Both non-equilibrium dynamics and the approach to equilibrium will be
investigated. The methodology will also enable quantification of the relation
between physical time and time in dynamic Monte Carlo simulations.

3. Two additional studies of a more speculative nature will also be performed.
One study will expand a new Renormalization Group method of the PI to
investigate time-dependent electron transport through tight-binding models of
nanomaterials with disorder. The second study will be to perform real-time
quantum simulations in order to understand how the ubiquitous classical
phenomenon of synchronization is manifest in large quantum systems. This award
also supports education of graduate and undergraduate students, including
minority and female students, in the computational study of equilibrium and non-
equilibrium materials processes. In addition, select computer source codes
developed in the course of this project and related to non-equilibrium
simulations of quantum and classical systems will be made available to the
general public through a web site utilizing a GNU General Public License,
version 3 or later, in order to encourage code reuse for both research and
education.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY The Division of Materials Research and the Office of
Cyberinfrastructure contribute funds to this award.

The award supports computational and theoretical research and education related
to the non-equilibrium dynamics of materials. Recharging the battery of an
electronic device is a non-equilibrium process. Processes related to the
approach toward classical behavior of quantum systems are additional forms of
non-equilibrium dynamics, which are called decoherence and thermalization.
Performing computer simulations of non-equilibrium processes provides a better
understanding of materials properties. The ultimate goals of such studies may be
the faster charging of a battery or maintaining the integrity of a quantum
mechanical state of electrons for a longer time. Sophisticated algorithms are
required to enable computer simulations of long-time studies of large non-
equilibrium systems. This award supports developing innovative computer
algorithms for non-equilibrium processes in materials, and to apply these
algorithms to specific models to obtain a better understanding of the dynamics
of materials. This award supports the education of undergraduate and graduate
students, including minority and female students, in the computational studies
of non-equilibrium materials processes. Computer codes related to non-
equilibrium simulations of quantum and classical systems that are developed in
the course of this project will be made freely available encouraging code reuse
for research and education.