* 1206480
* Theoretical investigation of triboelectric charging
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2019
* Daniel Lacks, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2019
* USD 353,373.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports computational and theoretical research and
education with the aim to elucidate the physical basis of triboelectric
charging.

The project has two thrusts:

(1) Elucidation of triboelectric charging on a well-characterized system. The
use of a well-characterized system will enable strong connections to be made
with experiment and other simulations of related phenomena. The well-
characterized system involves crystallographic surfaces of quartz and sapphire.
These surfaces have been very actively studied and are relatively well
understood. Molecular dynamics simulations will be performed to analyze
partitioning and free energy profiles for ions in thin water layers between two
solid surfaces. A better understanding of the ion transfer mechanism should
enable insight into when this mechanism, as opposed to an electron transfer
mechanism, is applicable and what parameters affect charging by the ion transfer
mechanism.

(2) Development of a coarse-grained model to describe triboelectric charging
between surfaces of identical chemical composition. A fundamental understanding
of the charging in this case remains unclear. Since the surfaces have the same
chemical composition, this symmetry would seem to preclude a driving force for
charge transfer. The PI will endeavor to include undergraduate researchers in a
meaningful way. In the past 13 years, 17 undergraduate researchers from the PI's
group have been coauthors of journal articles. The PI also aims to train
scientists and engineers with a global perspective, with a particular focus on
sub-Saharan Africa. The study of triboelectric charging has led to interactions
with universities in Botswana and Niger.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports computational and theoretical research
and education on triboelectric charging, the electrostatic charging that occurs
when two surfaces rub. While everyone appreciates whimsical effects like the
mild shock when a doorknob is touched after walking across a carpet,
triboelectric charging has a wide range of important applications in industry,
including imaging technologies and pneumatic conveying, and consequences for
natural phenomena, such as dust devils, and volcano plumes. There are important
scientific aspects of triboelectric charging that are in essence completely
unknown - for example, it is not clear whether the species transferred between
surfaces are electrons, ions or bits of material, and whether rubbing the
surface merely increases the contact area between surfaces or introduces
stresses that enhance charge transfer. This project aims to apply computer
simulation techniques to model experimentally well characterized materials down
to the level of individual atoms with the aim of elucidating the origins of
triboelectric charging. Of particular interest are systems where the materials
that are rubbing are identical. The PI will endeavor to include undergraduate
researchers in a meaningful way. In the past 13 years, 17 undergraduate
researchers from the PI's group have been coauthors of journal articles. The PI
also aims to train scientists and engineers with a global perspective, with a
particular focus on sub-Saharan Africa. The study of triboelectric charging has
led to interactions with universities in Botswana and Niger.