* 1206715
* Multifunctional pH-Sensitive Biodegradable Brush Polymer-Drug Conjugates
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Paras Prasad, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 07/31/2016
* USD 459,500.00

This award to State University of New York at Buffalo is cofunded by the
Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research and the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program in the Chemistry
Division. This project is to develop biodegradable brush polymer-drug conjugates
(BPDCs) that have high drug loading capacities, pH-sensitive conjugation
linkages, imaging functionalities and targeting ligands for potential
applications in clinical treatment of diseases, including cancer. Drug delivery
using biodegradable scaffolds to achieve high therapeutic efficacy with minimal
side effects has attracted significant interest. Relative to drug encapsulation
systems, polymer-drug conjugates can lead to sustained drug release without
burst effect. Linear, lightly branched and dendritic polymers have been used as
polymer-drug conjugates. However, relatively low optimal drug loading of
polymer-drug conjugates remains a bottleneck for their biomedical applications.
In this project, comprehensive studies of BPDCs for cancer therapy are proposed.
The structural design of these BPDCs is to conjugate anticancer drugs with
biodegradable polylactide backbone via pH-sensitive linkages and to modify the
backbone with numerous hydrophilic poly(ethylene glycol) chains. The rationales
for the design of these novel BPDCs are: (1) optimal drug loadings and high
maximum tolerance doses because drug moieties are well-shielded at core domains
of BPDCs; (2) with densely PEG-grafted nanostructures, they may have prolonged
circulating half-time, improved antitumor efficacy and reduced systemic toxicity
through passive tumor targeting; and (3) the polymer scaffolds can be completely
removed from biological system by renal clearance after backbone degradation.
These BPDCs will be prepared via click chemistries through "grafting-onto"
strategy, and further functionalized with imaging contrast agents and targeting
ligands through graft-end reactions to enhance their biomedical functions.
Characterization, property study, and biomedical assessment of the BPDCs will be
conducted to understand their structure-dependent properties and therapeutic
activities. The research findings would not only provide a guideline for
designing polymer-drug conjugates, but also generate new insights on the
structure-function principles of multifunctional drug delivery systems. The
synthetic strategy based on biodegradable polymer, sensitive linkage, and click
chemistries used in this project may be further employed to create a broad
variety of environmentally responsive biodegradable materials. Students at
different levels, including these from underrepresented groups in science and
engineering professions, will be trained in this interdisciplinary research
project. The outcome of this project will also enhance several graduate and
undergraduate courses. Video-based online educational activities will be
conducted to broadly disseminate the PIs research activities.

The research in drug delivery field has tremendous importance for the treatment
of different diseases. The success of the proposed research may help to
establish biodegradable novel brush polymer-drug conjugates as drug delivery
systems with excellent and comprehensive biomedical properties. Specifically,
the research results of this project may provide a solid basis for extensive in
vivo study and clinical translation of the multifunctional brush polymer-drug
conjugates in the treatment of cancer. Because cancer is a leading cause of
death of human beings in the U.S. and in the world, this project potentially can
help to improve the national and global health. The project will provide an
excellent interdisciplinary research opportunity for various students, and the
research participation of students from underrepresented groups. Video-based
online educational activities will be conducted to broadly disseminate different
aspects of this research project via YouTube and other websites.