* 1206149
* RUI: Superconductivity Research in the Microwave Regime with Undergraduates
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2016
* Stephen Remillard, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 04/30/2016
* USD 165,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;A newly developed technique of three-tone
intermodulation distortion will be used to examine the nonlinear electrodynamics
of high-temperature superconducting (HTS) thin films in the microwave frequency
regime. This method generates multiple orders of nonlinearity at the same
frequency, thereby eliminating time-scale and dispersion differences between the
different orders. Using this advantage, the physical origin of even and odd
order nonlinearity will be probed in patterned HTS passive microwave devices.
The contribution of patterning to nonlinearity, in particular to time reversal
symmetry breaking, will be determined by comparing devices comprised of sloped
or vertical line edges. The contribution of crystalline symmetry will be
understood by comparing devices made from yttrium and thallium based HTS
materials. Finally, the contribution of hole doping will be understood by
modifying films with nitrogen gas anneals. The bulk of this work will be done by
a team of six to ten undergraduates pursuing degrees in physics and engineering.
Along with learning in-demand skills such as microwave test and measurement and
finite element analysis, students will learn to be effective researchers by
developing experiment plans, presenting at conferences and contributing to
publications in the peer reviewed literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-
Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;High temperature superconductors were
discovered in the 1980's and since then there has been a variety of commercial
applications. One application area of both commercial and military value is in
high frequency electronics where the absence of resistance permits device
performance far beyond that seen conventionally. A limit to high frequency
device applications of superconductors results from the tendency of
superconductors to distort the electronic signals. This research seeks an
understanding of this distortion at a fundamental physics level by studying how
the superconductors violate time reversal symmetry. That superconductors do not
do the same thing when time runs backwards has implications on the application
of these materials to electronics, which proceeds largely on the assumption that
time is symmetric. This project will seek an understanding of why
superconductors distort signals and will provide insight into how the distortion
could be mitigated. Superconducting devices made by several companies have been
acquired for use in this project. The bulk of this work will be done by a team
of six to ten undergraduates pursuing degrees in physics and engineering. Along
with learning in-demand skills such as microwave test and measurement and finite
element analysis, students will learn to be effective researchers by developing
experiment plans, presenting at conferences and contributing to publications in
the peer reviewed literature.