* 1206061
* Search for Dark Matter with XENON100
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2012,10/31/2015
* Rafael Lang, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 10/31/2015
* USD 498,929.00

There is ample evidence that large amounts of matter in the Universe are made
from an unknown kind, called Dark Matter. Yet, its properties are largely
unknown and pose a major challenge for contemporary physics. The XENON100
collaboration, working at the underground laboratory at Gran Sasso, Italy, runs
the currently most sensitive experiment to search for Dark Matter. Together with
the large volume and mass of the detector, the low background enables studies of
the nature of Dark Matter that are not possible with any other operating
detector.

This award provides base support to work on the unique opportunities that data
from the XENON100 detector provide to search for signatures that are expected
from unconventional models of Dark Matter particles. The data will be studied in
original analyses to gain new insights into the nature of Dark Matter. Two
different and dedicated searches will be performed for Dark Matter particles
with low masses. Innovative searches for signals that are predicted by models
such as inelastic Dark Matter or magnetic inelastic Dark Matter will be carried
out.

Broader impacts: the PI will continue to build on previous experience from his
involvement in a planetarium and other outreach activities in order to stimulate
the imagination and curiosity of the public. Newspaper articles and other
channels of diverse popular science communication will be utilized to
disseminate results from the research. Undergraduate and graduate students as
well as a postdoctoral researcher will be educated and trained in research at
the cutting edge of modern astroparticle physics.