* 1206314
* Processing an Additional Quantity of Ge-76 for the Majorana Demonstrator
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Frank Avignone, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 08/31/2015
* USD 298,790.00

A comprehensive program in neutrino-less double-beta decay is very timely. A
principal finding of the APS Multidivisional Study stated: "We recommend, as a
high priority, a phased program of sensitive searches for neutrino-less nuclear
double-beta decay." The intellectual merit of this award is based on the fact
that the observation of such a decay is the only practical way to determine if
neutrinos are Majorana particles (their own antiparticles). This exotic decay is
the most sensitive test of lepton number conservation, an important symmetry in
elementary-particle physics. In fact, if neutrinos are Majorana particles, a
measurement of the decay half-life would yield the effective Majorana mass of
the electron neutrino. This result, combined with neutrino oscillation data,
would determine all three neutrino-mass eigenvalues. Is leptogenesis even a
possibility? Yes, but only if neutrinos are Majorana particles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These funds are awarded to assist the Majorana
Demonstrator (MJD) experiment searching for neutrino-less double beta decay in
germanium -76 (Ge-76). The specific and limited work is to carry-out the highly
technical conversion of germanium oxide (GeO2) into metallic form suitable for
the fabrication of Ge detector units. The PI leads the Task in the MJD R&amp;D
Project responsible for the procurement of enriched GeO2, its reduction to
metal, zone refinement to detector quality Ge metal, and reprocessing of the
scrap material. The PIs formed the team that equipped the facility and acquired
the necessary equipment for the Ge processing and reprocessing; they are now
operating the facility. Recently two Russian Institutes have agreed to loan MJD
between 8.7 and 14.5-kg of enriched GeO2. The cost of processing this material
was not covered in the original proposal. Accordingly, this funding is provided
for the reduction, zone refinement and reprocessing of this material, and for
new R&amp;D to develop more efficient scrap reprocessing. This new loaned GeO2
will significantly extend the science reach of the
MJD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;One broader impact would
be an important contribution to cosmology. Another is, and has been, new
detector technology for National and Homeland security. A third broader impact
is new ultra-low background Ge-detector technology for other basic and applied
sciences. In fact, this technology has broad application in environmental
radiological surveys.