* 1206612
* Correlated Electron Transport in Mesoscopic Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Leonid Glazman, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 540,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
investigation of the static and time-varying responses of mesoscopic systems.
The emphasis is placed on theory applicable to experiments on topological
insulators and superconducting nano-circuits. The motivation comes from the
recent advances in nanofabrication, synthesis of new materials, and precise
experimental techniques of microwave and time-resolved measurements, as well as
from the theoretical challenges inherent in the evaluation of the response
functions. The common thread of the entire project is the importance of electron
interactions and symmetries in the responses of the mesoscopic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is composed of three parts
on:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Investigation of the finite-temperature conductance
of one-dimensional electron channels at the edges of a two-dimensional
topological insulator. Here, the conductance evaluation calls for the
development of a theory for inelastic electron backscattering in one-dimensional
helical electron liquids. The PI and his group aim at deriving a low-energy
theory valid for a generic interacting helical edge state which respects time-
reversal invariance, but may not conserve any of the electron spin
projections&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Analysis of the conduction of thin films of
three-dimensional topological insulators. The intrinsic disorder in these
materials results in their substantial bulk conductivity, which shunts the
electron transport within the topologically-protected conducting state at the
surface. The aim is to build a comprehensive theory for such experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3) Addressing the scattering of microwave photons off a
weak link in an array of Josephson junctions. This bosonic version of the
quantum impurity problem has a number of common traits with its electronic
counterpart, but allows one an experimental access to a different set of
response functions. Like in the first part of the project, the aim is to develop
a theory for inelastic scattering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will also
support the PI's educational activities integrated with the above research at
the undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels. The results of the
research will be incorporated into the PI's graduate level courses on quantum
many-body physics and condensed matter theory. The PI will also organize optical
workshops geared towards broad representation of scientists from diverse
backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How matter responds when an electric current passes
through it or when electromagnetic waves interact with it depends on the size of
the sample. Upon decreasing size new properties that are not observed in bulk
materials may emerge. Quantum interference and interaction of electrons or
quanta of light, called photons, result in properties emerging on the meso-scale
- a scale small enough to preserve coherence, but large compared to the atomic
scales. This project aims at theoretical investigation of a number of new
experimentally accessible systems which are expected to display unusual
mesoscopic behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The systems of interest include two
and three-dimensional topological insulators, which do not conduct electricity
through the bulk but are perfect conductors for currents passing through their
edges or boundaries, photons interacting with scattering centers in small-scale
superconducting circuits. All such systems are currently viewed as potential
elements of future electronic technology. The theoretical research to be carried
out on this project will help in achieving an understanding of real materials
exhibiting various exotic properties at the mesoscale and could potentially lead
to the design of new technologically important devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
award will also support the PI's educational activities integrated with the
above research at the undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels. The
results of the research will be incorporated into the PI's graduate level
courses on quantum many-body physics and condensed matter theory. The PI will
also organize optical workshops geared towards broad representation of
scientists from diverse backgrounds.