* 1206575
* Novel Injectable Carriers for Regeneration
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Peter Ma, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2015
* USD 390,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
University of Michigan Ann Arbor is to develop novel nanofibrous hollow
microspheres as injectable carriers for patient-based stem cells to regenerate
cartilage. This project will investigate the role of the architecture of
polymers as injectable scaffolds prepared from star-shaped poly(L-lactic acid).
The project will study the self-assembly of hollow microspheres and will develop
the relationships between the structure and functional properties of these
hollow microspheres. State-of-the-art treatments for destroyed/damaged joint
cartilage are seriously limited. Tissue engineering has thus far failed to
regenerate high-quality cartilage for clinical application. Scaffolds play key
role in cell attachment, proliferation, differentiation, and 3D tissue
regeneration. The proposed fundamental studies are expected to lead to rational
design of novel cell carriers. The technology will not only facilitate the
realization of regenerative therapies, but also enables mechanistic
investigations into the interactions between biomolecules and biomaterials. As
an integral part of this proposed research project, there are three educational
and outreach components: 1) to mentor an interdisciplinary and multi-level
research team; 2) to incorporate the newest research findings from this project
into class-room teaching; and 3) to organize interdisciplinary symposiums to
promote idea exchange and facilitate interdisciplinary and multi-disciplinary
collaborations among peers and general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Disability
with arthritis and chronic joint inflammation affect about one third of adult
population in the US, and is one of the leading cause of disability. The cost of
this public health condition is expected to increase as the U.S. population
ages. Surgical intervention is frequently required to repair deteriorating joint
cartilage because of its limited self-healing capacity. Although several
cartilage substitutes have been developed, to date none has successfully
replaced normal joint cartilage. Cartilage defects and wounds are usually
irregular in shape. Thus fluid-like injectable formulations are highly desired
for easier filling and minimally invasive procedures. This project will develop
novel injectable cell-carriers for cartilage regeneration, potentially enabling
a patient-based stem cell therapy for millions of patients suffering from
degenerative cartilage diseases and traumatized joint wounds. As an integral to
the research project, there will be significant educational components to
facilitate the training of researchers and educators in interdisciplinary and
multidisciplinary topics including biomaterials that are expected to ensure the
continued growth of the field of biomaterials and regenerative medicine.