* 1206425
* Heterogeneous Integration of Complex Metal Oxides in Molecular Scale Nanowires for Advanced Electronics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Yue Wu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2014
* USD 250,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program
(EPM) in the Division of Materials Research (DMR) and the Electronics,
Photonics, and Magnetic Devices Program (EPMD) in the Division of Electrical,
Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS).

Technical Description: This project seeks to develop both rational synthetic
methods and fundamental understanding of the electrical properties of complex
metal oxide nanowires and their heterostructures with diameter below 10
nanometers for the potential applications in advanced nanoelectronics. It
enables the experimental and theoretical investigation of ultra-thin ternary and
quaternary complex metal oxide nanowires and their heterostructures, advancing
the opportunities for the studies of electron transport in these unique
platforms. Scientific issues to be addressed include materials synthesis,
physical property characterizations, and multiscale modeling. The capability of
rational design and scalable synthesis of nanowires with desirable size,
morphology, and properties can significantly advance the innovation at the
frontier of functional complex metal oxide-based nanoelectronics and provide a
great potential for future large-scale device fabrication and deployment.

Non-technical Description: The project addresses fundamental research issues in
materials science and electronic devices. Success of the research can have
significant impacts on not only complex metal oxide materials systems but also
more broadly materials science and device physics. The educational goals of the
project are accomplished through the development of interdisciplinary
educational and training opportunities for graduate students and industrial
experience via internships in industry through the existing collaboration
between Purdue University and DuPont, which can also significantly benefit the
transformative technology development of transparent thin film electronic
devices based on large-scale assembly of complex metal oxide nanowires and their
heterostructures on flexible plastic substrates. The research results will be
integrated with undergraduate and graduate courses and serve as the basis for
undergraduate design projects. Outreach activities to high school students,
including students from underrepresented groups, are included in this project.