* 1206033
* RUI: The aCORN Experiment to Measure the Beta-Neutrino Asymmetry in Neutron Decay
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Gordon Jones, Hamilton College
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 05/31/2016
* USD 114,315.00

The aCORN collaboration intends to measure the beta-neutrino asymmetry, 'a,' in
neutron decay with a relative uncertainty of 1%. The decay of the free neutron
provides a nearly ideal system where we could probe the limits of the Standard
Model of the electro-weak interaction because the decay coefficients can be
accurately calculated in the standard model. Some current tests of the self-
consistency of the Standard Model are limited by the 4% experimental uncertainty
in 'a.' The aCORN experiment relies on separating neutron decays into two
classes; one in which the beta and neutron are emitted nearly parallel, and one
in which they are nearly anti-parallel. A set of electric and magnetic fields
guide the particles to detectors at opposite ends of a 3m long vacuum vessel.
With this apparatus, the determination of 'a' is reduced to counting the numbers
of protons in the two classes. The apparatus has been designed to reduce
systematic errors below 0.5%. The experiment will begin its first physics run on
neutron guide NG-6 at NIST in the spring of 2012, and will move to the new guide
NG-C when it becomes available in 2013. Hamilton College will be involved in
several aspects of the experiment throughout the operations phase. We will
manage the distributed data analysis effort including both front end data
reduction software at NIST and final analysis software distributed throughout
the collaboration. We will continue to model magnetic and electric field
geometries as inputs to a Monte Carlo simulation and as a way to improve the
physical apparatus. Toward the end of the run we will implement an alignment
check using electrons from a hot filament. We will also continue to maintain
magnetic field alignment equipment including power supplies and a field mapping
robot.

Including undergraduates in research is a vital part of the culture at Hamilton
College. We see research as crucial to attracting strong students to the
sciences, producing scientifically knowledgeable graduates, and inspiring them
to continue in science after they graduate. We have a history of including
undergraduates in research, and about half of our research students go on to
further education in physics or engineering. Furthermore, the nurturing
environment at Hamilton is especially important for attracting women to physics.
A quarter of the students that have come through our group are women, and six of
these eight women have gone to graduate school in science or education. The
proposed work will continue to involve significant numbers of undergraduates,
both at Hamilton and at NIST. Our students can own a manageable piece of the
project under close faculty mentoring Hamilton, and later integrate their piece
into the final system in the environment of a national lab.