* 1206321
* Statistical Methodology for Stochastic Systems with Parameters Jumps and Applications to Economics, Genetics and Engineering
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Haipeng Xing, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2016
* USD 184,257.00

Statistical inference problems in complex stochastic systems with parameter
jumps arise in science and engineering, including economics, finance, genetics,
industrial quality control, and public health. An important ingredient in the
solution to these problems is efficient estimation of time-varying parameters
with unknown jumps. In the proposed research, the investigator studies some
newly emerged stochastic models with unknown parameter jumps in different
disciplines and develops the related inference procedure. In particular, four
types of problems in different areas are studied in the proposal. The first
investigates a semi-parametric change-point regression model and its inference
procedure for abrupt changes of covariate effect in longitudinal studies. The
second develops a credit rating transition model in the presence of unknown
structural breaks and an estimation procedure for the analysis of the
relationship between the structural breaks in the U.S. credit market and
macroeconomic and firm-specific covariates. The third considers a class of
Markov switching models with stochastic regimes and their applications in
economic analysis of business cycles and recurrent copy number variation
analysis in genomic studies. The fourth problem discusses surveillance rules in
sequential surveillance problems and their applications in risk management. The
investigator will show how these challenging problems in different areas can be
unified and solved by the developed statistical models and inference procedures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex stochastic systems with unknown parameter jumps
are often encountered in various scientific and engineering practices including
economics, finance, biology, risk management and control. While systems with
smoothly changing parameters have been discussed intensively in the literature,
recent advances in natural and social sciences show the growing importance of
stochastic systems with unknown parameter jumps. In current genomic research,
DNA copy number variations are key genetic events in the development and
progression of numerous diseases including cancer, HIV acquisition, and
Alzheimer and Parkinson's disease, and an important step in studying these
genetic events is to identify the regions of variations. In economic studies,
the authorities are keen to have a more detailed and quantitative
characterization of the real economic states, instead of some simple
descriptions such as booming or recession that are commonly discussed in the
economic literature, so that proper monetary and fiscal policies can be issued.
In financial studies, the 2008-2009 financial crisis raises the immediate needs
for the regulatory authorities that the credit market and banking systems should
be regulated and monitored based on solid statistical and econometric models and
procedures, and hence an early warning system should be established to
surveillance the stability of financial and economic systems. The proposed
research is one of the first attempts to explore the possibility of building
quantitative and implementable early-warning systems for financial markets and
economic activities, which aggregates microeconomic information among individual
firms and banks and macroeconomic statistics from general economic activities.