* 1206152
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Ion Losses to Plasma Boundaries Sheaths and Presheaths
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Noah Hershkowitz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2015
* USD 20,014.00

This award is made in response to a proposal submitted to and reviewed under the
NSF/DOE Partnership in Basic Plasma Science and Engineering joint solicitation
NSF 09-596. The award provides funds to support undergraduate participation in
the overall research effort, which is being funded separately by the DOE under
contract to the University of Wisconsin - Madison (Grant Number DE-
FG02-97ER54437)."

Understanding sheaths is fundamental to the understanding of all bounded
plasmas. Experiments for this project are aimed at establishing the basic
properties of sheaths and associated presheaths for a variety of situations for
which theoretical predictions and assumptions have not yet been verified.
Coordinated studies will be carried out at the University of Wisconsin and the
University of San Diego. Experiments will determine the presheath and sheath
plasma potential profiles and the resulting ion velocity distribution functions
(IVDFs) associated with ion acceleration. Most of the experiments will be
carried out in Madison and led by the P.I., Prof. Noah Hershkowitz. LIF
diagnostic development will be carried out on both campuses and led by the other
P.I. Prof. Greg Severn. Plasma parameters will be determined with two or more
techniques, e.g. combinations of emissive probes, Ar, Xe, and Kr metastable ion
LIF, Langmuir probes, the phase velocities of ion acoustic waves, and optical
emission spectroscopy. The intellectual merit of this work is that after more
than 80 years, many important questions associated with sheaths will be
addressed for the first time. Indeed it was during the current funded period
that our previous discovery of anomalous sheath edge velocities in multiple ion
species plasmas met with theoretical justification by the introduction of a new
theoretical element: ion streaming instabilities. The new theory, which is the
freshest thinking about medium like behavior in connection with sheath formation
in 80 years, was applied directly to our experimental results with excellent
agreement. It follows then that many different aspects of sheath formation must
be reevaluated in light of the new theory.

Our research activities will also have a broader impact. Results will be
disseminated widely to the scientific community through refereed publications
and talks by the P.I.'s and their students at scientific meetings, as well as in
seminars at universities and national Labs, and through patents. For example,
previous work on electron sheaths resulted in a patent application and STTR
support from NASA to develop an electron source to replace hollow cathode
electron sources as neutralizers of ion-thrusters on long-range space
exploration missions. Further, the relatively inexpensive tabletop experiments
used in the investigations we are pursuing in this project are suited to student
laboratory courses, permitting students to perform state-of-the-art experiments.
Prof. Hershkowitz has developed three new plasma-based courses offered several
times to a very inter-disciplinary audience. Several student lab experiments
were adopted to train semiconductor-processing technicians at Portland Community
College. New ion acoustic wave experiments have been introduced by Prof. Severn
in the upper division experimental modern physics course at the University of
San Diego. In the past, several undergraduates who worked with Prof. Hershkowitz
have been first authors on published papers, have gone on to receive Ph.D.s in
plasma physics and other areas, and to work in a variety of fields, including
one who is now a reporter for the New York Times. Further, students have served
as tutors in community colleges and secondary schools to increase awareness in
careers in science. A student who performed undergraduate research work with
Prof. Severn was one of six students honored for outstanding undergraduate
research in plasma physics at the 51st American Physical Society, Division of
Plasma Physics meeting in Atlanta, GA, in 2009. This student was a first
generation college attendee. Our activities will continue to have a positive
impact on diversity in STEM fields in the US.