* 1206067
* Polarized Electron Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Timothy Gay, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Orel
* 07/31/2015
* USD 635,000.00

This project involves the study of collisions between polarized electrons
(having an average spin that points preferentially in one direction) and chiral,
or "handed" molecules as well as zinc atoms. The former experiments address
physics questions about the dynamics of electron-molecule scattering,
particularly with regard to the role played by electron spin in collisions with
molecules that have a handed stereochemical structure. They will also provide
important clues about the origins of biological homochirality -- the fact that
all naturally-occurring DNA spirals in the same direction. The zinc experiments
are being done to check the results of an experiment done recently by an
Australian group in which states of zinc excited by polarized electrons
exhibited linear polarization that was tilted relative to the incident beam
direction in the collision. This result is forbidden by all known theories of
atomic collisions; if the Australian result is reproduced, much of our basic
theoretical knowledge of how electrons collide with atoms and molecules will be
shown to be in error. Improved sources and analyzers of polarized electrons are
being developed. We are testing increasingly compact designs of electron spin
detectors. We also are studying multiphoton ionization of bulk materials such as
the semiconductor GaAs to see if polarized electrons can be photoemitted from
such material even when the surface has not been prepared to give it a negative
electron affinity -- the normal method used to produce efficient photoemitters.
This latter work holds the promise of providing new analytical tools for
biological and materials research, and for industry.

These experiments will have an impact beyond the immediate community of atomic,
molecular, and optical science. In addition to its broader scientific
implications, this work will have a significant educational component.
Undergraduates working on these projects will have their first experience in
scientific research. In an effort to expand the talent pool for atomic,
molecular, and optical physics, women and underrepresented minorities will be
especially recruited for these positions. The experiments with chiral molecules
and their connection to astrobiological questions make an excellent topic for
talks that will be given regularly to high school and civic groups, and that
serve to illustrate the beauty of basic physics to a large lay audience.