* 1206492
* Workshop on Identifying Barriers for Lignocellulosic Biofuels Using Thermochemical Conversion, June 13-15, 2012, Auburn, Alabama
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2013
* Sushil Adhikari, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 02/28/2013
* USD 28,841.00

Adhikari/1206492&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this project is to
host a workshop on lignocellulosic biofuels at Auburn University from June
13-15, 2012. This award will support travel costs for the speakers attending the
workshop. This workshop will bring together a diverse audience with a collective
wealth of knowledge that will: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; (1) identify research gaps
that currently exist in thermal biomass conversion processes &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; 2) determine future research directions that will provide immediate
and long-term benefits and to help realize the goals of The Energy Independence
and Security Act (EISA) of 2007, which calls for a reduction in the country's
reliance on fossil fuels&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; (3) exchange information via
several panel sessions with distinguished and knowledgeable speakers &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; (4) educate the biofuels community about the relevant issues that
need to be addressed to increase the efficiency and reduce the cost of biofuels
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A main goal of this workshop is to identify technological
barriers to producing biofuels on a commercial scale from gasification and fast
pyrolysis processes. This objective will be achieved by organizing a two-day
workshop at Auburn University. Experts in biomass gasification, pyrolysis, and
logistics from industry, academia, and national laboratories will be invited to
participate in the workshop. This workshop will follow the format of individual
presentations followed by panel discussion by experts. Three sessions will be
organized during the workshop: (i) biomass logistics, (ii) gasification, and
(iii) pyrolysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of the broader impacts, outreach
activities will be organized for 7th and 8th grade students who will learn what
the gasification and pyrolysis technologies are and how to make biofuels using
these technologies. Students will also learn how to make biodiesel from waste
vegetable oils recycled from local restaurants. During the students' visit, they
will have an opportunity to see a mobile downdraft gasifier. The exchange of
ideas and information by speakers and participants will advance the knowledge-
base of the participants. It will also foster collaborations leading to basic
and applied research that increases the impact of the biofuels community.