* 1206355
* New Sonochemical Methodologies for Nanostructured Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/2012,10/31/2016
* Kenneth Suslick, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 10/31/2016
* USD 484,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The chemical effects of ultrasound do not come from a direct interaction with
molecular species. Instead, sonochemistry arises from acoustic cavitation: the
formation, growth, and implosive collapse of bubbles in a liquid. Collapse of
bubble clouds produces intense local heating (~5000 K), high pressures (~1000
atm), enormous heating/cooling rates, all in isolated sub-micron reactors.
Cavitation thus represents a unique interaction of energy and matter and
provides access to a distinct region of reactivity and a general synthetic
methodology for the production of unusual materials.

The goal of this proposal is to couple a fundamental understanding of the
chemical and physical effects of high intensity ultrasound to the development of
a new synthetic methodology with diverse applications in the synthesis of
nanostructured materials with unusual morphologies and useful chemical
properties. Projects will utilize synthetic sonochemical methodologies that fall
into three related categories: (1) the direct sonochemical synthesis of novel
nanostructured materials; (2) the synthesis of novel nanostructured materials
using ultrasonic spray pyrolysis; and (3) the effects of acoustic cavitation on
slurries: inter-particle collisions and sonocrystallization. The targets in
these three domains include new routes to nanomaterials and nanoporous materials
for lithium ion battery anodes, novel fluorescent carbon nanodots, and new
morphologically-robust hollow-shell forms of main-group metal oxides for CO2
sequestration. In addition, the fundamental physical phenomena that occur during
ultrasonic irradiation of liquid-solid slurries will be explored. Cavitation in
slurries generates shockwaves that can drive solid particles together at
velocities that approach the speed of sound in the liquid. These interparticle
collisions can have dramatic effects on the reactivities of slurried powders.
For example, the effect of ultrasound on crystallization will be examined to
produce a mechanistic understanding of the phenomena; sonocrystallization which
has been empirically used on large scale for preparation of active
pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs), but little systematic understanding of its
origins is currently available.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The use of high intensity ultrasound has undergone dramatic growth in materials
science during the past decade. As our understanding of the chemical effects of
ultrasound has grown, so too has the impact of sonochemistry on a wide range of
the physical sciences. Importantly, sonochemistry also has substantial strategic
research significance to our industrial economy. Ultrasound already has major
industrial applications (e.g., cleaning, welding, emulsification, biotech
processing), and the U.S. dominates the world market in production of ultrasonic
equipment. Commercial generators of high intensity ultrasound for very large
scale liquid processing are available off the shelf, and ultrasonic cleaning is
now the standard for both general purpose industrial and microelectronics
applications. Thus, the development of sonochemistry and its applications will
advance a global market in which the U.S. has a significant commercial
advantage. Broader impacts also include the education of the general public
about sonochemistry, e.g., through popularized articles which the PI has written
for essentially all the general science magazines and major encyclopedias.
Finally, substantial success has been made in advanced technical training: over
the past five years, 13 Ph.D.'s were graduated, including 4 women and one
African-American.