* 1206916
* Synthetic Quantum Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Hari Manoharan, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 07/31/2016
* USD 360,000.00

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This project will apply atomic and
molecular manipulation to the nanoscale assembly of novel quantum materials -
materials whose structural and electronic properties are dominated by quantum
mechanics and give rise to either novel behavior or promising technologies. The
primary experimental apparatus for these investigations are custom-built low-
temperature scanning probe microscopes capable of both studying and controlling
matter at atomic length scales. The overall project targets synthetic
nanomaterials that can be used as model systems for understanding complex
physics in natural materials. The project targets exquisite control of two
quantum variables, the amplitude and phase of an electron wavefunction, to
address new states formed by electrons that are playing increasingly vital roles
in modern science and technology. Since these investigations require specialized
apparatus not available from commercial sources, undergraduate and graduate
students working directly on these projects will maintain their own equipment
and perform state-of-the-art experiments. The research involves programs
designed to train the next generation of high-school science teachers, courses
at the undergraduate level into which current research in nanoscale science and
technology is interwoven, and the active promotion of nanoscience education via
visual and audio tools targeting students and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;The ways
in which electrons move through different types of materials provide the
foundations for nearly all modern electronic technology. For example, the
electron flow through the semiconductor silicon can be turned on or off, or
modulated like a valve, and these behaviors are the basis behind transistors,
computer processors, and communication signal amplifiers. To maintain continued
progress in electronics technology, the underlying components and materials must
be continuously scaled down in size. However this progress is now stymied by the
fact that critical dimensions are approaching "quantum" sizes where the position
of even a single stray atom or molecule plays a measurable role in performance,
and the flow of electrons is impeded by atom-size impurities and even by the
their own tiny weight. New materials hold the key to circumventing many of these
problems, but new materials are often difficult to understand and therefore
apply, due to their complex nature. This project will synthesize new electronic
materials using one of the most advanced laboratory technologies available-the
controlled manipulation of single atoms and molecules to build up entirely new
materials that can guide electrons in ways not possible with existing materials.
These new materials will be built one atom at a time as a means to test new
fundamental physics which can be applied to electronic technologies, such as
making electrons move as if they have no weight, and making electron avoid
impurities so that their flow through electronic devices is unimpeded. In the
process of conducting the calculations and experiments needed by this project, a
Ph.D. student will receive education and training in the critical fields of
nanotechnology and nanomaterials, and undergraduate students will receive
exposure to state-of-the-art research.