* 1206571
* Dynamics of Precise Ethylene Copolymers and Ionomers Using Dielectric Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* James Runt, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2015
* USD 384,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This project will explore the fundamental dynamics of a new class of polymer
system: copolymers with monodisperse ethylene sequences between very precisely
spaced acid (or ionic) functionalities. Motivated by the recent synthesis and
self-assembly of poly(ethylene-acrylic acid) [PEAA] precise copolymers and
ionomers this study will focus on the comprehensive investigation of polymer and
ion dynamics of these novel materials using primarily broadband dielectric
spectroscopy. Recent findings demonstrate that these materials exhibit
considerably less heterogeneity than traditional ethylene-based copolymers with
randomly placed functionality. Significantly narrower dielectric relaxations are
anticipated, making these ideal model materials for the fundamental study of
polymer dynamics.

The role that highly regular self-assembly of ionic domains has on ion transport
will be investigated in order to determine whether precise ethylene ionomers
offer a unique route to mechanically robust, yet highly conductive, solid
polymer membranes. As there is an intimate connection between phase-separated
microstructure and molecular dynamics, a thorough understanding of the nanoscale
structure of the precise ethylene copolymers and ionomers is required.
Consequently, an important component of this project involves collaborations
with other institutions on morphological and moedling aspects of these new
materials.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This project focuses on the systematic investigation of polymer and ion motions
in a new class of molecularly precise polymeric materials. The study will also
enhance the basic understanding of ion transport in solid polymers, of interest
for the next generation of membranes for lithium ion batteries, actuators, and
other potential applications. Ethylene-based polymers are of strategic
industrial importance, representing the largest class of commercial polymers. As
this project is the first to investigate polymer and ion motions of precise
ethylene-based acid copolymers and ionomers, it will assist in evaluating the
commercial potential of these new materials.

The project will create learning opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students, the latter participating through senior thesis projects or as part of
the NSF-REU Program at Penn State on soft materials. Program participants will
engage in outreach activities, particularly those connected with Penn State's
Women in Science and Engineering Institute.