* 1206142
* Graduate Student Topology and Geometry Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Michael Mandell, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Chen
* 01/31/2013
* USD 44,900.00

The tenth annual Graduate Student Topology and Geometry Conference is to be held
March 31-April 1, 2012, at Indiana University, Bloomington. The conference will
involves more than 100 graduate students of all levels from all over the
country. The conference will consist of 24 graduate student 30 minute talks on
expository and original research topics in geometry/topology; two plenary
speakers who are both prominent in their respective fields and excellent
expositors: Jacob Lurie (Harvard University) in algebraic topology and Andras
Stipsicz (Princeton University) in geometric topology; four invited young
faculty speakers: Andrew Blumberg (University of Texas, Austin), Julia Elisenda
Grigsby (Boston College), Adam Simon Levine (Brandeis University), and Angelica
Osorno (University of Chicago). The topic of this conference is broad: topology
and geometry. There will be talks in many of the following subfields: hyperbolic
geometry, three-manifolds, homotopy theory, symplectic geometry, dynamics, knot
theory, cobordism theory, category theory, Teichmuller theory, four-manifolds,
differential topology, geometric group theory, algebraic K-theory, and
more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference provides a venue for communication
among young mathematicians from different geographic regions. Participants come
from dozens of different schools, and include graduate students at all years of
study. Although there are many conferences dedicated to topology and geometry,
this one is uniquely dedicated to graduate students. The experience of
presenting at this conference allows graduate students to refine their speaking
skills and grow into more effective communicators. Because of the opportunity to
meet other students in related fields, the environment also encourages
collaboration now and throughout the participants' careers. Both geometry and
topology are growing mathematical fields with deep connections to many other
areas of research, such as dynamical systems, physics, computer science, and
mathematical biology. This conference serves to further research and
communication about research in these areas, and to enable and encourage
graduate students in these fields. More information can be found at
http://www.math.indiana.edu/gstgc.