* 1206589
* Biomimetic design of peripheral nerve guides
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Yadong Wang, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2016
* USD 420,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
University of Pittsburgh is to combine engineering innovations (interfacial
processes driven by thermodynamic intermolecular forces), breakthroughs in
protein transport, and recent insights on neurovascular cross talks to create
nerve guides that can induce co-regeneration of neurovascular systems. This
award is cofounded by the Interfacial Processes and Thermodynamics program in
the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems.
Peripheral nerve system regeneration is still a significant challenge because
majority of these patients have limited functional recovery. The presently used
autografts cause donor site morbidity. Rationally-designed biomaterial nerve
guides with aligned microchannels proposed in this project would avoid donor
site morbidity and may offer functional recovery. Vascular transport is critical
to sustain regenerating axons, and yet this aspect is at present overlooked in
nerve regeneration treatments. The innovation of this research is in the unique
presentation of contact guidance and transport of growth factors to the cells.
The proposed guide will have a completely open porous structure that enhances
mass transfer while providing directed cell growth along the guidance channels.
The proposed guide will use biomimetic transport of growth factors to induce co-
regeneration of the neurovascular systems. The intellectual merit of this
research is in: 1) the preparation of electrospun nerve 3D guides with parallel
microchannels and microfibers prepared from polycaprolactone and gelatin at
different ratios. This versatile platform will incorporate contact guidance and
biochemical cues using innovative designs; and 2) the proposed innovative design
of the nerve guide that will enhance the regeneration of central nerve system
because many central nerve tracks have long parallel axon bundles within the
track. The described research would generate a versatile platform for a new
approach to nerve guides. The innovative nerve guide design will also impact
research for the guided regeneration of other tissues such as cardiovascular
regeneration, where nerve control of engineered cardiovascular tissues is
largely unexplored at present. This project will be integrated into this
researcher's educational activities of students. The graduate and undergraduate
students will benefit from rigorous interdisciplinary training in this cutting
edge research at the interface of materials science, biochemistry, and
neurobiology. Furthermore, the research team will disseminate this research to
the scientific community through high impact journals. Additionally, the
investigator plans to inform the general public about the research activities by
news releases, social media and internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Peripheral nerve
injury is a very stressful and physically debilitating injury, and presents a
significant societal and economic burden. The current clinical approach is by
harvesting a donor nerve from one site of the body and transplanting it to the
injury site. This presents a multitude of problems including losing nerve
functions at the donor site, and size mismatch of the graft and the injured
nerve. The goal of this research is to create man-made nerve guides that promote
peripheral regeneration of nerve. The nerve-guide design is based on thorough
examinations of how healthy nerve functions and how injured nerve degenerate
after injury. Students working on this research will be trained in a cross-
disciplinary environment exploring the frontiers of regenerative medicine. This
will prepare them to become leaders of the next generation researchers in neural
studies. More broadly, the highly translational nature of this project means
that when successfully completed, patients suffering from peripheral nerve
injuries will benefit from improved functional recovery without loss of nerve
function at the donor site. The investigator is very active in outreach
activities such as recruiting minority students into research programs, and
mentoring and hosting high school research teams. The research activities will
be disseminated to broadest possible audience through biweekly blogs through
internet and social media.