* 1206354
* Spin Transfer In Spin-orbit Coupled Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Kyungwha Park, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexios Klironomos
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research in condensed
matter physics and materials theory that focuses on understanding the coupling
between spin and other internal degrees of freedom and environmental factors in
spin-orbit coupled molecular nanostructures. Both quantum-mechanical computer
simulations based on first-principles computations and model Hamiltonian
approaches will be employed to achieve this goal. Spin degrees of freedom in
nanostructures provide both complexity and control knobs of properties of
nanostructures. They can be coupled to other internal degrees of freedom, and
are very susceptible to external perturbations such as temperature, pressure,
mechanical stretching, current, or magnetic field, at the nanometer scale. This
coupling and response to perturbations can be used to manipulate properties of
nanostructures for effective, efficient nanoscale devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To study physical properties of nanostructures, it is
customary to rely on either large-scale computer simulations or theoretical
models. However, the coupling and response to perturbations in nanostructures
turn out to be so subtle that either quantum-mechanical simulations or a model
Hamiltonian approach with arbitrary parameter values alone cannot provide a
comprehensive picture of the coupling and its consequences in properties of
nanostructures. The specific objectives of the research to be carried out are as
follows: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) To clarify coupling mechanisms and to
quantify the strengths of coupling of spin to other degrees of freedom and
external environmental factors such as substrate and current, using quantum-
mechanical simulations (density-functional theory including spin-orbit
coupling). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) To investigate responses of spin degrees of
freedom and its coupling to the environmental factors using a model Hamiltonian
approach with parameter values obtained from the quantum-mechanical simulations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the proposed research will be compared with
experiments via international and national collaborations. The outcomes of the
research will shed light on new ways to greatly increase spin transfer/transport
and spin polarization in molecular nanostructures, and to build energy-saving
new spin-based devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports education
of undergraduate and graduate students and a postdoctoral researcher by engaging
them in research at the forefront of nanoscience and high-performance computing.
To integrate the proposed research efforts into education, the PI will
incorporate the outcomes of the proposed research into a new 4000-level course,
"Nanomaterials and Devices", designed for a new Nanoscience undergraduate degree
program in the College of Science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research in condensed matter
physics and materials theory that focuses on understanding the coupling between
different quantum-mechanical degrees of freedom and its consequences in
molecular nano-structures that are approximately one millionth the size of the
human hair. Among those degrees of freedom, the electron "spin" is of particular
interest because it provides both complexity and control knobs to manipulate
various properties of molecular nano-structures. Spin degrees of freedom can
interact with other internal degrees of freedom, and they are very susceptible
to environmental factors such as temperature, pressure, mechanical stretching,
current, or magnetic field, at the nanometer scale. This coupling and response
to environmental factors can be used to manipulate properties of nanostructures
to build new energy-saving tiny devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To study physical
properties of nanostructures, it is customary to rely on either large-scale
computer simulations or theoretical models. However, the coupling and response
to environmental factors in nanostructures turn out to be so subtle that either
computer simulations or mathematical models alone cannot provide a comprehensive
picture of the coupling and its consequences in properties of nano-structures.
In this research, the PI will use both approaches to achieve the following
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Using large-scale computer simulations, the
mechanisms through which spin couples to other degrees of freedom and external
environmental factors will be clarified and the relevant coupling strengths will
be quantified. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Using mathematical models with
parameter values obtained from the simulations, the response of spin degrees of
freedom to various environmental factors will be investigated.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the proposed research will be compared with
experiments via international and national collaborations. The outcomes of the
research will shed light on new ways to greatly increase spin transport in
molecular nanostructures, and to build new energy-saving devices at the
nanoscale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports education of
undergraduate and graduate students and a postdoctoral researcher by engaging
them in research at the forefront of nanoscience and high-performance computing.
To integrate the proposed research efforts into education, the PI will
incorporate the outcomes of the proposed research into a new 4000-level course,
"Nanomaterials and Devices", designed for a new Nanoscience undergraduate degree
program in the College of Science.