* 1206221
* New Photophysical and Photoelectrochemical Phenomena in Doped Nanocrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Daniel Gamelin, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 06/30/2015
* USD 435,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This research supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program seeks
to develop new colloidal transition-metal-doped semiconductor nanocrystalline
materials that show new photophysical and spectroelectrochemical properties
relevant to advanced information-processing, imaging, and energy conversion
technologies. Synthetic, analytical, and spectroscopic techniques will be
integrated to develop a fundamental understanding of the structure/function
relationships that govern the physical properties of these nanocrystals. A
balanced research effort incorporating synthetic, spectroscopic,
spectroelectrochemical, and analytical approaches will be applied to evaluate
the microscopic origins of luminescence saturation in doped semiconductor
nanocrystals, the impact of nonradiative decay channels on the intrinsic dual
emission of doped semiconductor nanocrystals, the capability of dual-emitting
doped semiconductor nanocrystals to probe temperatures in plasmonic
microspheres, the microscopic origins of electrobrightening in doped and undoped
nanocrystal films, the potential to use electrobrightening for identifying and
passivating specific electron or hole traps at nanocrystal surfaces, the
technical feasibility of multi-color voltage tunable luminescent films based on
combinations of electrobrightened and electroquenched luminescent nanocrystals,
and the accessibility of different transition-metal redox states in doped
semiconductor nanocrystals. This research will yield new fundamental scientific
insights that could alter the ways such materials are understood and applied in
various technologies including in information processing, lighting, bioimaging,
and energy conversion technologies.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Doped semiconductor nanostructures are ubiquitous in energy conversion, energy
storage, and photocatalysis technologies, as well as in information processing
and storage technologies, and they are central to numerous futuristic proposed
device technologies including in the area of spin-based electronics. The
information learned from this project will have broad implications for each of
these technologies. This research will address the development of new forms of
matter on nanometer length scales made from semiconductors doped with
impurities. This project will also yield new chemical strategies for controlling
the physical properties of doped nanocrystals. In addition to yielding new
fundamental scientific insight and new forms of matter, this project will also
provide advanced technical training for participating undergraduate and graduate
students to prepare them for future careers in science, engineering, and
education. Special emphasis will be placed on integrating research and education
at the undergraduate level through aggressive involvement of undergraduates in
this research, incorporation of experiments and concepts from this research into
the University of Washington undergraduate curriculum, hosting faculty and
students from undergraduate institutions as visiting scientists at University of
Washington, and mature outreach activities at Seattle-area community colleges
and high schools.