* 1206175
* Cluster Beam Deposition and Analysis of Metal Chalcogenide Nanoparticles in Organic Films
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Luke Hanley, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 06/30/2016
* USD 389,911.00

Technical Description: Cluster beam deposition of metal chalcogenide
nanoparticles into films is performed in combination with evaporative or ion-
assisted deposition of an organic phase. These deposition methods improve
control of nanoparticle surface chemistry and morphology for the development of
high-efficiency, stable photovoltaic films. Nanoparticle surface chemistry and
heterojunction bonding in films are probed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy,
transmission electron microscopy, and laser desorption vacuum ultraviolet
postionization mass spectrometry. Dynamic X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy is
utilized to probe the photophysics of these films by examining their
photoinduced charging in an element-specific fashion, without the need for metal
overlayers for electrical contact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
Description: This research project contributes to fundamental knowledge of the
relationship of nanoparticle surface chemistry to film photovoltaic behavior
and, ultimately, to production of high-efficiency solar cells using low-cost,
abundant materials. One broader educational impact is the development of
mentoring seminars for graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. These
seminars prepare participants for diverse careers in academia, industry, or
government by discussing job placement, interviewing, proposals, job
expectations, the balance of career with personal goals, and related issues.