* 1206528
* Precision Measurements in Intermediate Energy Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2012,11/30/2015
* James Miller, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Hicks
* 11/30/2015
* USD 1,587,369.00

This award will support our group's leadership of two major new experiments at
the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (Fermilab): Mu2e, and muon g-2 (E989).
The Mu2e experiment at Fermilab, co-led by J. Miller will search for the lepton
flavor violating (LFV) muon to electron conversion reaction at the 10^{-16}
level, a factor of 10,000 times more sensitive than the present limit. B.L.
Roberts is co-leading the muon g-2 experiment. Both experiments involve a dipole
operator, and in the context of supersymmetry probe complementary aspects of
that particular beyond-the-SM (BSM) theory. Mu2e is sensitive to a wider range
of physics than the LFV decay of the positive muon to a photon and positron,
which must go through the dipole interaction. The muon anomalous magnetic moment
(g-2) is also sensitive to a wide range of BSM physics. It is a chiral-changing,
flavor-diagonal interaction, which could have contributions from the chargino
and neutralino in SUSY, or the "dark photon" from a hidden U(1) sector, or from
Randall-Sundrum models. At present the difference between the SM and the
Brookhaven experiment is around 3.5 standard deviations. Fermilab E989 is
designed to cross the five standard deviation threshold. Whatever the result
from Fermilab E989, it will provide an important constraint on the
interpretation of new phenomena found at the LHC. The MuSun experiment is
measuring the weak matrix element for muon capture on deuterium, which is
related to the weak pp fusion matrix element that powers the
sun.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support our group's leadership of two
major new experiments at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (Fermilab):
Mu2e and muon g-2. It will also support our participation in two other
experiments: the MuSun experiment at the Paul Scherrer Institute in Switzerland
and the neutron electric dipole moment (EDM) experiment being prepared for Oak
Ridge National Laboratory. J. Miller is co-leading the Fermilab Mu2e experiment
that will search for the conversion of a muon into an electron without the
emission of neutrinos. B.L. Roberts is co-leading the Fermilab muon g-2
experiment which will measure the magnetism associated with the muon a factor of
four times more precisely than the previous experiment at the Brookhaven
National Laboratory. Both of these experiments are looking for evidence of New
Physics that cannot be explained by the Standard Model, a theory that at present
describes all measured quantities in particle physics, but is known to be
incomplete. Results from the previous g-2 experiment show a hint of something
new, which should be clarified by the Fermilab experiment. This program is
complementary to the searches at the energy frontier at the Large Hadron
Collider in Geneva Switzerland. R. Carey is working on the MuSun experiment,
which measures the rate at which a negative muon captures on the deuterium
nucleus (made up of a proton and neutron), and breaks it apart by changing the
proton into a neutron. This process is interesting since it can be related to
the fusion of two protons together to form deuterium, the "burning of hydrogen"
that powers the sun.