* 1206790
* Nonlinear effects in quantum condensed matter systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Alexander Abanov, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
and education on strongly correlated electron systems. To make any progress in
understanding systems with strong interactions nonperturbative methods are
needed. The hydrodynamic approach provides a general framework for treating
interacting quantum and classical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrodynamic
methods and methods developed in the field of classical integrable equations
will be used to analyze nonlinear behavior of quantum interacting systems. The
PI aims to develop a hydrodynamic description of cold atoms, fractional quantum
Hall effect systems, and low-dimensional integrable models. The linearized
version of the hydrodynamic description - bosonization is known to be very
effective in one- dimensional physics. The PI will develop a nonlinear and
dispersive hydrodynamic theory to study nonlinear effects, such as formation of
dispersive shock waves and to describe higher-dimensional systems. The PI will
also develop topological methods in condensed matter physics and apply exact
results for quantum transport and integrable systems to topological insulators
and superconductors, and to mesoscopic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research lies at the interface with mathematics and provides a good environment
for training graduate students. The PI is developing a course on topological
terms for advanced graduate students and researchers and plans to make
corresponding lecture notes publicly available in the near future. The PI
teaches math and physics with enthusiasm to K-12 students in the enrichment
program for children at Stony Brook and to gifted high school students in
Russia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical investigations of quantum
mechanical systems of many electrons or atoms that interact strongly with each
other. This remains a challenging and fruitful area of research. The PI aims to
develop a hydrodynamic description of these systems. Within the framework of
hydrodynamics, systems of electrons or atoms are viewed as fluids with effective
properties, for example, density, velocity, and viscosity. As a result, well
known phenomena in fluids have analogs in systems of very cold atoms and
electrons. Examples include vortices, shock waves, and turbulence. The PI aims
to develop a hydrodynamic approach to systems of cold atoms, to the fractional
quantum Hall effect and to the "fluids" that arise in exactly solvable models.
The fractional quantum Hall effect arises in electrons confined to two
dimensions in artificial semiconductor structures or in a single layer of carbon
atoms called graphene, and exposed to a high magnetic field. Under these
conditions the interactions between electrons can become very strong. Research
on quantum Hall systems has led to the notion of a new kind of order known as
topological order which is reflected in topological insulators. Like ordinary
insulators, for example rubber, topological insulators do not conduct
electricity though the interior of the material. Unlike ordinary insulators,
topological insulators are able to conduct electricity on their edges or
boundaries through the formation of a new state of matter. Among the known
topological insulators are compounds made of the elements bismuth and selenium,
and bismuth and tellurium. The PI will also develop new theoretical methods and
methods known in exactly solvable models and apply them to topological
insulators and other states of electronic matter. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
research lies at the interface with mathematics and provides a good environment
for training graduate students. The PI is developing a course on topological
terms for advanced graduate students and researchers and plans to make
corresponding lecture notes publicly available in the near future. The PI
teaches math and physics with enthusiasm to K-12 students in the enrichment
program for children at Stony Brook and to gifted high school students in
Russia.