* 1206765
* Colloids as Models for Crystals and Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Frans Spaepen, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 07/31/2016
* USD 375,000.00

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Suspensions of colloidal particles, with
well-controlled size and interactions, will be used to study complex structures,
defects and transformations in crystals and glasses. The motion of these
particles can be tracked in space and time with high precision using confocal
microscopy. The analogy between these particles and individual atoms will make
it possible to obtain unique visual access at the particle/atomic scale to
complex processes, such as the formation of crystal nuclei in a supercooled
liquid, the nucleation of a melt in a superheated crystal, the interaction of
dislocations with other defects, the structure and motion of grain boundaries,
and the nature and kinematics of the shear transformation zones that govern
plastic flow of simple glasses. This work aims to contribute to the fundamental
science of materials and will give new impetus to long-standing "hard problems"
in the field, such as nucleation and glass science. The work is uniquely
interdisciplinary, in that it combines two areas with their own unique
perspective: expertise in materials science complemented by that in colloid
science. The work will provide a very rich learning environment, not only for
broadly-trained graduate students in materials science, but also for research
projects at the undergraduate or even high-school
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Physical
modeling of atomic-scale processes has a long and venerable history in materials
science. In the 1940s, for example, the deformation of two-dimensional hexagonal
raft of soap bubbles provided convincing evidence for the role of dislocations
in plastic deformation of metals. We can now do this in three dimensions. The
arrival of confocal microscopy has made it possible to track hundreds of
thousands of colloidal particles in a suspension in time and space. By arranging
this particles into crystalline or glassy structures, similar to those formed by
atoms, we can now make "movies" of the formation or straining of these
structures , and thereby obtain a unique view of these complex processes on the
atomic/particle scale. An example is the growth of small crystal from a liquid
during solidification, which appears to be much more complex than the simple
growth of sphere that most theories have been assuming so far. Another example
is the deformation of glasses, which have a non-periodic structure, and appear
to deform by the rearrangement of pockets of about a hundred atoms; the colloid
technique will allow a detailed look at the number, size and motion of these
pockets. Both these phenomena -- nucleation and glass science -- represent long-
standing "grand challenges" in materials science, to which this unique,
interdisciplinary approach should provide new insights and impetus. This work
will provide a very rich learning environment for the training of broadly
educated graduate students. At the same time, the direct, visual nature of the
work makes it highly accessible to younger students, even at the high-school
level.