* 1206515
* Topological Phases and Correlation Phenomena in Complex Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Joel Moore, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2015
* USD 462,296.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education to study several problems
in two general areas of theoretical condensed matter physics. The first area of
research concerns topological phases of electronic and atomic systems: the PI
will study the properties and instabilities of partially filled bands with
nontrivial topology and how topological states could be created at surfaces and
interfaces, for example in the unconventional two-dimensional gas at the surface
of a 3D topological insulator. The PI will investigate connections between
topological or geometric field theories of topological states and plausible
experiments. The second area of research is on how a combination of numerical
matrix-product-state methods and analytic theory can lead to insights into some
challenging problems in strong-correlation physics in low dimensions. The two
goals for this section of the project are to understand one-dimensional models
of many-body localization in interacting disordered systems, and to develop
predictive methods for some open two-dimensional classical or quantum
statistical physics problems. This section builds upon previous work on
understanding how quantum information theory concepts such as entanglement can
aid the numerical simulation of correlated materials.

The educational component of this proposal is significant, and the largest
expenditure is for graduate student support. This will contribute to the
development of a scientifically sophisticated workforce. The PI will carry out
new course development and undergraduate student research supervision within the
university, in addition to his ordinary teaching load and lectures at advanced
schools elsewhere. For outreach beyond the academic community, the PI will
expand his lecturing and writing about recent developments and historical
highlights of condensed matter physics.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education to study new kinds of
electronic materials. Recent years have seen the creation of several new kinds
of electronic materials. One example is the discovery of electrical insulators
with atomically thin metallic surfaces that are extremely robust to the most
common types of impurities and disorder. These new insulators are called
topological insulators as the connection between their bulk insulating behavior
and surface metallic behavior is described by the branch of mathematics known as
topology, which studies properties invariant under continuous changes. More
familiar insulators usually have no surface metallic layer, and if they do, it
is much less stable to disorder. Another interesting property of the robust
surface metallic layer in topological insulators is that the electrons moving in
the layer are effectively massless, in that their energy is linearly
proportional to their momentum.

Electrons in solids exhibit a remarkable variety of collective phenomena
including magnetism and superconductivity. Superconductivity is a state of
electrons with the signature that resistance to the flow of electric current
vanishes at low temperatures. These collective behaviors result from the
interactions between electrons. One goal of this project is to understand how
topological insulators and related materials, which are currently understood at
the level of individual electrons, could lead to new collective phenomena when
the interactions between electrons are included. The PI also seeks to understand
how new electronic states could be created using interfaces between different
materials. Methods used range from advanced techniques originally developed for
particle physics to computational simulations, where ideas drawn from the theory
of quantum information have had a major impact on our ability to simulate
systems in low dimensions. Quantum information generalizes the classical
information theory which describes the operation of modern computers and data
systems, using ideas specific to quantum systems. One important idea is
entanglement, which is a kind of subtle correlation in which the best possible
description of a large system does not imply a complete description of its
parts. Work on topological order influences many other areas of condensed matter
physics and some areas of technology; it contributes to the intellectual
foundation for future devices. Several education and outreach efforts will be
supported in order to convey to a broad audience the importance and excitement
of theoretical materials research.

The educational component of this proposal is significant, and the largest
expenditure is for graduate student support. This will contribute to the
development of a scientifically sophisticated workforce. The PI will carry out
new course development and undergraduate student research supervision within the
university, in addition to his ordinary teaching load and lectures at advanced
schools elsewhere. For outreach beyond the academic community, the PI will
expand his lecturing and writing about recent developments and historical
highlights of condensed matter physics