* 1206908
* Imaging Cellulose - Carbohydrate Binding Module Interactions With Nanometer Resolution Using Single Molecule Flourescence Methods
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Steve Smith, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2017
* USD 290,877.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1206908 PI: Smith, Steve ORG: South Dakota School of
Mines and Technology

Title: Imaging Cellulose - Carbohydrate Binding Module Interactions with
Nanometer Resolution Using Single Molecule Fluorescence Methods

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Cellulose, one of the most abundant biopolymers on earth, is
a naturally occurring nanomaterial. It is the primary component of plant cell
walls and the feedstock for valuable products derived from biomass sugars, such
as liquid and gaseous fuels. Most of what is known about the chemical structure
of biomass comes from analysis of the products generated during its
decomposition via batch methods. These approaches necessarily lose the spatial
correlations between the biomolecules that drive biomass degradation and the
chemical-spatial structure of the feedstock, that is, the plant cell wall and
its primary constituents, cellulose, hemi-cellulose, and lignin. This project
will focus on exploiting single molecule, super-resolution imaging methods to
reveal important facets of cellulose-carbohydrate binding module (CBM)
interactions that are lost in the ensemble averaging of batch analyses. CBMs
play a critical role in the action of a large family of cellulase enzymes,
locating and positioning the catalytic components on their target substrates.
This project will utilize single molecule fluorescence methods to reveal
molecular level details of the interaction of families of CBMs, derived from
microbial, bacterial, and cellulosomal sources, with cellulose substrates. The
binding characteristics of single CBMs, including specificity, orientation,
motility, and binding persistence will be studied using CBMs tagged with
fluorescent proteins (FPs), including photo-activated FPs, to extract
orientation and positional information at the single molecule level. Sequential
imaging of sparse subsets of single molecules with high resolution imaging
approaching the 5nm level will be used to study these processes and the spatio-
chemical structure of biomass.

BROADER IMPACTS: This project aims to provide detailed knowledge of cellulose-
carbohydrate binding module interactions, thus building a biophysical knowledge
of the molecular processes responsible for the breakdown of cellulose to simple
sugars, knowledge critical to enabling new biotechnologies, which could
accelerate conventional bioprocessing. Such knowledge could, for instance, aid
in selecting new enzymes or designing enzymatic bioprocessing systems. This work
thus leverages the significant efforts made by the State of South Dakota towards
the utilization of biomass in the production of biofuels and other biomass-
derived products, and investments made toward stimulating this industry. The
proposed work will enrich graduate and undergraduate education in South Dakota
by enabling collaborative research opportunities and interdisciplinary training
for scientists and engineers in the region. SDSM&T also maintains a permanent
Native American outreach program, with established and well-organized outreach
programs such as SD GEAR UP, aimed at increasing the number of Native American
high-school students continuing on to college. On-going aspects of this project
will be incorporated into the educational portions of this program.