* 1206399
* Linking Spatial and Spectral Transport in Two-Dimensional Fluid Flow
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Nicholas Ouellette, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 07/31/2015
* USD 330,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predicting the behavior of
nonlinear, nonequilibrium systems remains a tremendous challenge for condensed
matter physics. Since they are out of equilibrium, they tend to move, leading to
a flow of energy and momentum throughout the system. But since they are
nonlinear, energy and momentum may also be redistributed among the various
degrees of freedom in the system. This project seeks to understand the
relationship between these two kinds of transport in a turbulent quasi-two-
dimensional laboratory fluid flow, a model system with a very large number of
strongly coupled degrees of freedom. Using powerful tools known as filter-space
techniques, measurements of the spatially resolved spectral energy fluxes will
be made, and will subsequently be correlated with the spatial transport of
energy in the flow. These two kinds of transport will also be linked to the
self-organized coherent structures in the flow field. The project will support
the training of a Ph.D. student in both the experiments and the novel
computational analysis tools that will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Physical systems that are far from equilibrium
and that are governed by nonlinear equations of motion, such as fluid flows or
many biological systems, are extremely common in nature. Characterizing and
predicting their behavior, however, remains a significant challenge, both
because they tend to move in complicated ways and because perturbations tend to
excite responses on many different length and time scales. By using high
precision laboratory experiments and novel analysis tools, this project seeks to
understand how the flow of energy in space is related to the flow of energy
between motions of different scales. Experiments will be conducted in a nearly
two-dimensional turbulent fluid flow, and computational analysis will be used to
measure the flow of energy both in space and between length scales. These
measurements will lead to a better understanding of the flow dynamics, with
consequences for models of geophysical flows in the atmosphere and oceans, and
will reveal the mechanisms by which the flow self-organizes into coherent
structures. A Ph.D. student will be trained in both nonlinear physics and fluid
dynamics, gaining valuable skills that are transferable to many other
disciplines. The results of this research will lead to a deeper understanding of
turbulent fluid flows and to nonlinear systems more broadly, and may lead to new
ways of characterize strongly coupled condensed matter systems.