* 1206648
* Theoretical Studies of Quantum Systems with Strong Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Pavel Wiegmann, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research, the
Physics Division, and the Division of Mathematical Sciences contribute funds to
this award. This award supports theoretical research and education in the
general areas of theoretical condensed matter physics, and statistical physics
focusing on geometrical non-equilibrium phenomena in quantum liquids and
statistical mechanics. The study emphasizes a role of singularities and
instabilities arising in non-equilibrium processes and quantum and statistical
aspects of singularities. &lt;br/&gt;The first area of research concerns non-
linear quantum hydrodynamics of fractional quantum Hall states with a focus on
edge states and the relation of fractional quantum Hall states to conformal
invariance. The PI will focus on the quantum non-linear hydrodynamics of
electronic liquid in the fractional quantum Hall regime and especially on a
topological manifestation of the fractional charge of excitations as solitons on
fractional quantum Hall edge states emerging as a result of non-linear dynamics.
The PI will also investigate realistic experimental settings where edge solitons
can be observed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second area of research focuses on
singularities and emergent conformal symmetry in driven processes. PI will study
fingering instability in Lapacian Growth building on the idea that singularities
of non-equilibrium patterns occurring at small scales give rise to fractal non-
equilibrium patterns visible at a large scale. The work will be built on the
theory of viscous shocks developed under prior NSF
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third theme of research focuses on the
statistics of geometrical objects in critical phenomena. This study addresses
the long-standing problem of the area-length distribution of critical clusters
or domains of different phases in critical phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;The research
addresses important problems of material research, and simultaneously
contributes to emergent fields in mathematical physics and mathematics by
synthesizing problems and methods of different
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports training and
mentoring graduate and undergraduate students and a postdoctoral fellow.
Research results will be integrated into graduate level courses in modern
dynamics, and traditional courses in condensed matter physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of
Materials Research, the Physics Division, and the Division of Mathematical
Sciences contribute funds to this award. This award supports research at the
interface with mathematics, and mathematical physics. It focuses on the emergent
field of non-linear quantum dynamics with an emphasis on the role of geometry in
non-equilibrium processes in quantum electronic and atomic liquids. Similar
geometrical phenomena also emerge in critical phenomena of statistical mechanics
and processes of growth and aggregation of materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One thrust of the research focuses on
developing a theoretical description of a special kind of quantum liquid.
Quantum liquids differ from more familiar liquids in that their properties are
dominated by the effects of quantum mechanics. The PI will focus on a particular
kind of quantum liquid, a quantum Hall liquid that results when electrons
confined to two dimensions in an artificial materials structure made of
semiconductors and exposed to a high magnetic field. The way the electrons
organize themselves leads to an 'edge state' that wraps around the bulk of the
liquid. The 'edge state' is also related to a metallic state that arises at the
surfaces of a particular class of insulating materials, known as topological
insulators. The PI will develop a hydrodynamic theory of this liquid in a way
that emphasizes the role of geometry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another thrust of
the research concerns the investigation of geometrical patterns that emerge
close to the transformation of one phase into another, for example water to ice.
The PI will use sophisticated mathematical methods to determine the number of
critical loops containing one phase in the presence of the other with a
particular area and length of boundary. The loops are examples of fluctuating
random geometrical shapes and patterns that appear not only in phase transitions
but also in growth processes of materials and disordered systems. This effort
reflects a new approach to critical behavior, for example phase transformations,
in two-dimensions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the
proposal is a dissemination of methods of material science to the fields of non-
equilibrium statistical mechanics, non-linear physics, probability theory and
complex analysis, forging links between the disciplines. Interdisciplinary
research area is particularly well suited for the training of graduate students
and postdoctoral fellows. It requires mathematical sophistication and deep
understanding of fundamental aspects of correlated quantum states and
statistical mechanics.