* 1206240
* Understanding Precipitation and the Mechanical Properties of Novel Laves Phase-Strengthened Austenitic Steels for Energy Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Ian Baker, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2017
* USD 405,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This project aims to understand both the effects of
deformation on the precipitation processes in Laves phase-strengthened
austenitic steels, including determining the mechanism of NiAl co-precipitation,
and how these two kinds of precipitates affect subsequent deformation processes.
Thus, the proposed work will determine both the precipitation mechanisms and the
interaction of gliding dislocations with these precipitates by performing
annealing studies for a variety of times and temperatures, both with and without
prior cold rolling, and both room-temperature tensile tests and elevated-
temperature creep tests on these materials followed by post-mortem TEM
examination. The fracture behavior will also be examined by performing in-situ
straining studies at a variety of temperature in a scanning electron microscope.
The orientation relationships between the phases both after various thermo-
mechanical treatments and after creep deformation will be carefully studied
using electron diffraction, while the microchemistry will be determined using
both energy dispersive spectroscopy in the TEM and atom probe tomography. The
precipitation processes and the deformation mechanisms will be further
elucidated by performing in situ annealing studies and in situ straining studies
in the TEM, respectively, at a variety of temperatures. The work will be
performed by a Ph.D. student and several undergraduates.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY The critical factor limiting the operation of power
generation plants at higher temperatures is the lack of materials that are
strong, corrosion resistant and economically viable. Operation at high
temperature can lead to energy conversion efficiencies of >50%, which not only
reduces running costs, but can also extend the lifetime of fossil fuels and/or
reduce the carbon footprint of the plants. Unfortunately, currently-used steels
cannot satisfy these requirements for higher operating temperatures. This
project aims to determine the optimum processing condition and mechanical
properties in new class of stainless steels strengthened with novel particles,
and alloyed with aluminum for improved oxidation resistance. A Ph.D. student and
several undergraduates are performing the work.