* 1206274
* Coordinating Office for Research on the Sedimentary Crust, Deep-Time and the Earth-Life System
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2013,01/31/2017
* John Hess, The Geological Society of America, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Judith Skog
* 01/31/2017
* USD 975,707.00

This grant supports a sedimentary geology, deep-time, and Earth-life system
science community coordinating Office (STEPPE, Sedimentary geology, Time,
Environment, Paleontology, Paleoclimate, and Energy) to facilitate collaboration
and communication among existing and new initiatives, build capacity, and
promote research into the deep-time record of Earth processes. The Geological
Society of America (GSA), the Society for Sedimentary Geology (SEPM), and the
Paleontological Society (PS) will provide financial and in-kind support to the
office.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit and Broader Impacts: To predict
the boundaries for human life on this planet--those imposed by climate change,
energy, water issues, and our impact on the biosphere--we must have an
integrated, deep-time perspective, or our vision will be incomplete, and our
ability to make predictions about natural and human-made events and outcomes
will be limited. Single sub-disciplines or even whole disciplines cannot provide
the breadth and depth of information needed to address real-world issues. All
sedimentary crust research groups examine different parts of a larger research
problem, and current initiatives reflect different perspectives and/or emphases
for sedimentary-crust research, especially in the deep past. It is clear that
broad segments of the community is working toward an integrated approach, but
lack a platform to coordinate and integrate these efforts. The 2011 National
Research Council report on Understanding Earth's Deep Past, states that it is
essential to make "A transition from single researcher or small group research
efforts to a much broader-based interdisciplinary collaboration of observation-
based scientists with climate modelers for team-based studies of important
paleoclimate events," and this requires coordination. The STEPPE office will
provide that platform and that coordination. &lt;br/&gt;The STEPPE office will
help facilitate the EarthCube vision for geoscience cyberinfrastructure by
bringing together various relevant geoinformatics efforts, and work to ensure
that other cyberinfrastructure needs are articulated and coordinated. In
addition, the STEPPE office will work with the community and with education
partners to develop state-of-the-art education and outreach programs involving
K-12, decision makers, and the general public through formal and informal
educational activities. The STEPPE office will enhance communication between the
research community and State, Federal and international agencies and
organizations, including industry, in order to build capacity and voice
community perspectives. The office will ensure that the independence and
importance of existing and planned community initiatives is maintained, and also
enhanced through this group effort. The office will promote individual
initiatives and coordinate efforts among them. Better communication,
coordination and collaboration will help to develop more effective research
strategies for the entire community and help meet goals of the 2009 NSF
GeoVision Report. The office will help the community develop new strategies and
tools for understanding Earth-environment-life relationships with greater
sophistication, and for application to our understanding of Earth-system
processes.