* 1206219
* Developing materials strategies to control siRNA spatial and temporal delivery to engineer multicomponent tissues
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Danielle Benoit, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2016
* USD 424,995.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1206219 PI: Benoit, Danielle ORG: University of
Rochester&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Developing materials strategies to control
siRNA spatial and temporal delivery to engineer multicomponent
tissues&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Small interfering (siRNA) is a
powerful and specific gene silencing mechanism that can initiate signaling
cascades governing stem cell differentiation. Thus, siRNA may provide potent
cues to direct stem-cell differentiation for regenerative medicine applications.
However, development of technology to provide patterned, localized, and
efficacious delivery of siRNA is crucial for realizing this potential. The
objective of this work is to incorporate and control the patterning of polymer
nanoparticles (NPs) to deliver siRNA within a hydrogel to affect encapsulated
mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) differentiation, where MSCs are multipotent
precursor cells capable of differentiating into cells of the musculoskeletal
lineage. The PI aims to develop hydrogel scaffolds that can be patterned with
powerful siRNA differentiation cues capable of directing osteogenic and
chondrogenic differentiation of MSCs for osteochondral tissue engineering
applications. Four technical objectives have been established to achieve this
goal: (1) Assemble and characterize siRNA/polymer nanoparticles (NPs) to direct
MSC osteogenic and chondrogenic differentiation. (2) Exploit controlled release
chemistries to sustain the release of siRNA from or within hydrogels. (3)
Develop spatial photopatterning techniques for siRNA/polymer NP within hydrogel
microenvironments. (4) Exploit spatiotemporally regulated siRNA/polymer NP
availability to develop osteogenic, chondrogenic, and osteochondral tissue in
vitro. The results of these objectives will establish MSC differentiation
induced by siRNA within hydrogel microenvironments. Moreover, it will
demonstrate that delivery of spatiotemporally controlled differentiation cues
can be exploited to develop complex tissue structures. These developments will
advance and expand the utility of siRNA for numerous therapeutic applications
within regenerative medicine and beyond, where spatial and temporal depot
delivery is required.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: Over 50% of
orthopaedic injuries involve damage to osteochondral tissues within articular
joints. Due to the paucity of regenerative strategies, these injuries commonly
progress to irreversible degenerative osteoarthritis. This work will develop the
means to exploit spatially and temporally controlled siRNA therapeutics for
osteochondral tissue regeneration. However, the approach can readily be tailored
for the engineering of any multicomponent tissue. Beyond the anticipated
scientific results, the PI has planned a variety of activities to educate non-
engineers as well as to recruit and retain women and underrepresented minorities
in engineering. Specifically, the PI will be proactive in working with UR
programs aimed at increasing diversity and exposing high school students to
possible career opportunities in engineering. These programs include: hosting
and mentoring Xerox, Kearns, and SURF students each summer, developing and
teaching hands-on laboratory experiments for UR's Summer Scholars Program,
working with UR's Women In Engineering Group to host events in our laboratory
and speak to visiting student groups, hosting shadowing high school students,
and speaking at numerous public engagements to educate the general public about
engineering's impact in society (e.g., WXXI Healthy Friday radio program, Annual
Benoit Laboratory Alex's Lemonade Stand).