* 1206462
* Optimizing Cycling Stability and Coulombic Efficiency of Nanostructured Si-Based Anode
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2017
* Se-Hee Lee, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 408,540.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Traditional Li-ion batteries employ carbonaceous
anodes, but projected performance targets for next-generation Li-ion batteries
require new, higher capacity materials that can be electrochemically cycled in a
stable manner. The most attractive candidate to replace carbon is silicon; it
has the highest known capacity, is relatively low-cost, and is physically
abundant. At present, the drawback with silicon is that a volume expansion on
the order of ca. 300% occurs upon Li insertion that leads to rapid capacity fade
during cycling. Creative approaches to realize highly-reliable electrodes are
being pursued with nanometer-scale materials and geometric architectures;
impressive results have been obtained, but a fundamental understanding is still
lacking. To this end, this project focuses on understanding the complex
phenomena of Li insertion and extraction from Si, and developing novel
nanostructured Si-based anodes which can address these critical technical issues
with Si anodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This project aims to
uncover the underlying principles that govern the complex phenomena of Li
insertion and extraction from Si, especially the complex interplay among
electrochemical surface reactions, transport, mechanical response, and material
evolution based on a tightly-coupled experimental-theoretical research. A
combination of theoretical electrochemomechanics, hybrid organic-inorganic sol-
gel synthesis, in situ monitoring of microstructural developments with a focused
ion beam system, and AC impedance measurements allows a systematic exploration
of materials chemistries for the creation of nanostructured Si-based anodes. By
targeting enhanced cycling stability, mechanical stability, and coulombic
efficiency, these core-shell nanostructures are designed to exhibit unsurpassed
performance as Li-ion battery anodes. By coupling research discoveries with
ongoing and new educational activities, students at all levels (K-12 through
graduate) will be exposed to the excitement of renewable energy including energy
storage material systems for electric vehicles. Interdisciplinary, tightly
integrated research provides a unique environment for the education of a new
cadre of scientists and engineers who will become experts in their disciplinary
fields and also understand the broader context of sustainable energy; thus, they
will be equipped to lead the design of a new sustainable energy future.