* 1206072
* Natural Resin Acid-Containing Antimicrobial BioMaterials: Synthesis and Mechanism
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Alan Decho, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2015
* USD 420,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1206072 PI: Tang, Chuanbing ORG: University of South
Carolina&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Natural Resin Acid-Containing Antimicrobial
BioMaterials: Synthesis and Mechanism&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT:
Bacterial infections remain one of the most serious complications leading to
destruction of local tissues, patient disability, morbidity, and death. This
project seeks to develop low-cost biomaterials and antimicrobial agents that
kill a broad spectrum of bacteria, but present low toxicity to mammalian cells.
It is proposed that natural resin acid-based cationic materials, which can be
synthesized in large quantities and at low cost, can be used as robust,
selective antimicrobial agents to treat various bacterial infections or
incorporated into plastics such as those used in medical catheters. Preliminary
data show that natural resin acids, when chemically-modified to acid-derived
cationic compounds and polymers, efficiently inhibit growth of a wide range of
Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, without inducing significant hemolysis
of red blood cells. The PI will demonstrate the versatility of resin acid-
derived cationic compounds and polymers with controlled charge location, charge
density, balanced hydrophobicity, and unique conformation via precise molecular
and macromolecular design. The project will combine fluorescence
microscopy/spectroscopy and atomistic molecular dynamics modeling to study
interactions between these materials and bacterial membranes. These unique
materials will be formulated into antimicrobial coatings on medical implants
based on titanium and polymers. The ultimate goal is to translate the most
desirable and unique properties of resin acid-based cationic compounds and
polymers into new classes of antimicrobial agents with functionality and
performance that are unprecedented for current antimicrobial materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: Infections associated with bacterial
contamination are a critical issue in global healthcare. This proposal advances
not only the knowledge of resin acids via the unprecedented use of chemistry and
polymerization techniques, but also uncovers new concepts for utilizing
hydrophobic resin acids as active components in antimicrobial agents. The
research proposed herein will have a positive impact on reducing the escalating
occurrences of bacterial infection. The proposed investigations cut across the
fields of synthetic organic and polymer chemistry, microbiology, and
biomedicine. The technical nature of this proposal will provide training
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students in polymer synthesis and
antimicrobials. An important component of the above plan involves several
integrated educational activities for high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students to stimulate their interest in science and technology with enhanced
global research and education training opportunities. An international outreach
program for Education in Sustainable Materials and Nanotechnologies will be
pursued with a Chinese institution to facilitate global cooperation/networking
in addressing natural product utilization and global healthcare and to
strengthen the international competence and competitiveness of American
students. Furthermore, the project will participate in the ACS Seed program to
support summer research opportunities for high school students from economically
disadvantaged backgrounds. Existing collaborations with Historically Black
Colleges and Universities will continue to train African American undergraduate
students. Finally, a Young Scientist Program, which was initiated over a decade
ago through NSF funding, will be continued at local Primary and Middle schools.