* 1206298
* Microscopic Theory of High Temperature Superconductivity Induced by Electronic Fluctuations
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Chandra Varma, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 330,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
on a consistent microscopic theory of the extraordinary phenomena discovered in
high temperature cuprate superconductors. Work done by the PI in the past two
years suggests that d-wave superconductivity in cuprates comes from the quantum-
critical fluctuations of the time-reversal order parameter discovered in the
pseudogap region of the phase diagram and their derived coupling to fermions. In
this project, the PI will work on providing definitive evidence for this
suggestion by analyzing high resolution laser-angle-resolved-photoemission-
spectroscopy to determine (i) the absolute magnitudes and the momentum and
frequency dependence of the spectrum of fluctuations, and (ii) their coupling to
fermions and variation for a range of dopings and critical temperatures. The
expected outcome is the formulation of a fundamental and testable theory of the
pseudo gap. In addition to this main theme, the PI and his group will undertake
two new investigations on related problems: (1) Solution of Eliashberg equations
for superconductivity induced by gaussian quantum-critical fluctuations, which
are expected to yield results in variance with the Bardeen-Cooper-Schieffer type
formulas for the energy gap, critical temperature, and thermodynamic quantities,
and (2) Derivation of the multiple Higgs or amplitude modes expected in d-wave
superconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the education and
training of a postdoctoral research associate and a graduate student in
condensed matter theory. The PI will continue his active participation and
mentoring activities under the University of California Leadership Excellence in
Advanced Degrees and Mentoring Summer Research Internship programs. He will also
participate in the Early Academic Outreach Program at this institution targeting
high school students by providing various lectures and demonstrations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical research on a consistent microscopic theory of the
extraordinary phenomena discovered in high temperature cuprate superconductors.
These are materials discovered in the late 1980s that conduct electricity
without any dissipation (no resistance, no energy loss) when they are cooled
below certain critical temperatures. Even though the critical temperatures
necessary for these materials to superconduct are significantly below the room
temperature, they are still much higher compared to the critical temperatures of
ordinary superconductors (which are close to absolute zero). Furthermore, a
theory formulated in the late 1950s that explains the microscopic mechanism of
superconductivity in ordinary superconductors is not adequate to explain the
mechanism and physical properties of high temperature cuprate superconductors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even though it has been 25 years since the discovery of
high temperature superconductivity and many theories have been proposed, a
consistent microscopic theory that explains all properties of cuprate
superconductors is still missing. For the last several years, the PI and his
group have been working on a theory that is consistent with most of the
experimental findings. In this project, the PI will work on providing definitive
evidence for his theory by analyzing the latest high resolution spectroscopy
experiments. The expected outcome is the formulation of a fundamental and
testable theory of an important part of the phase diagram of the cuprate
superconductors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the education
and training of a postdoctoral research associate and a graduate student in
condensed matter theory. The PI will continue his active participation and
mentoring activities under the University of California Leadership Excellence in
Advanced Degrees and Mentoring Summer Research Internship programs. He will also
participate in the Early Academic Outreach Program at this institution targeting
high school students by providing various lectures and demonstrations.