* 1206365
* The role of group actions in symplectic geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Susan Tolman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2016
* USD 191,573.00

The main goal of Prof. Tolman's research is to investigate the role of group
actions in symplectic geometry. She intends to focus on three related areas.
First, she will explore the conditions that force a symplectic action to be
Hamiltonian; in particular, she plans to construct a compact six-dimensional
symplectic manifold with a non-Hamiltonian symplectic circle action with exactly
two fixed points. Second, she will work on classifying symplectic manifolds with
``large" torus actions. More specifically, she will finish her project with Y.
Karshon on n-1 dimensional torus actions on 2n dimensional manifolds, analyze
Hamiltonian circle actions on six-manifolds, and find applications in both cases
-- especially to Fano manifolds. Third, R. Goldin and S. Tolman will generalize
ideas from algebraic combinatorics to the more general symplectic setting of
Hamiltonian actions on symplectic manifolds. In addition to these three main
areas, she will work with her collaborators on a number of other projects:
calculating the cohomology of the symplectic quotients of Hamiltonian loop group
actions, and computing the integer cohomology of symplectic manifolds and their
quotients in the finite dimensional case. Taken together, these results will
significantly advance our understanding of this
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consider a physical system, such as a planet
orbiting around a star. We need to keep track of the position and momentum of
each object: The set of all possible measurements is called phase space. For the
two-body system, the phase space is twelve dimensional Euclidean space. Even for
more complicated systems, the phase space looks locally like Euclidean space.
Moreover, the rate of change over time of the momentum of an object is
determined by the rate of change of the total energy of the system with respect
to the position of that object; the converse also holds. Finally, many physical
systems have symmetries. For example, if we ignore any external gravitational
field, the solar system has three-dimensional rotational symmetry. Prof. Tolman
studies a mathematical generalization of phase space, called "symplectic
manifolds." Her research focuses on understanding the role of symmetries on
these spaces. For example, she is studying when symplectic manifolds with
symmetry are as well behaved as algebraic varieties, which are the spaces cut
out by solutions to polynomial equations. Working with Prof. Karshon, she is
trying to describe all symplectic manifolds with extremely large amounts of
symmetry.