* 1206975
* RUI: Spectroscopy of Many-Body Processes in Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Tigran Shahbazyan, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 150,114.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational studies of plasmonic nanomaterials and of optics and transport in
semiconductor nanostructures. During past decade, plasmonics has become a
rapidly developing interdisciplinary research area that cuts across physics,
chemistry, biology, engineering and medical science. The research objectives of
this project include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Microscopic calculations of
energy exchange processes between plasmons and molecules, quantum dots or
electron-hole pairs which underpin the physics of surface-enhanced Raman
scattering, metal luminescence, fluorescence or luminescence of molecules or
quantum dots, and resonance energy transfer between donors and acceptors near a
metal nanostructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Studies of cooperative phenomena
due to plasmonic coupling between system constituent parts, such as spontaneous
and stimulated emission of ensemble of fluorophores or resonance energy transfer
from an ensemble of donors to an acceptor near a metal
nanostructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3) Investigations of extraordinary electron
transmission through a periodic system of quantum dots and quantum wires
sandwiched between doped semiconductor leads, and of the role of spin-orbit
coupling in coherent transport through a double-quantum-dot
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide research and educational
opportunities to undergraduate students from underrepresented groups. Being a
historically black predominantly undergraduate institution, Jackson State
University primarily serves the educational needs of the local community. During
past several years, the Physics Department at Jackson State University has
developed a comprehensive Nanoscale Science undergraduate student research and
education program with the aim of (a) exposing students to advanced topics of
science and technology, and (b) providing additional resources and opportunities
to physics majors who are willing to pursue graduate education in out-of-state
universities. This project will help in strengthening the vital research
component of this program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
studies of optical and transport properties of two classes of materials that
have sizes of the order of one millionth the size of the human hair. The first
part of this project involves spectroscopic studies of molecules or very small
confined systems called quantum dots when they are placed near metallic
materials. In such close proximity of the two systems, quantum mechanical
effects become important. The PI and his group will examine the emission,
absorption, and scattering of light from such hybrid systems through numerical
simulations and analytical methods. The second part of the project involves
studies of coherent electron transport through a periodic system of
semiconductors or confined wires sandwiched between semiconductor leads and the
role of the interaction between the spatial and spin degrees of freedom of the
electron in such structural arrangements. Both systems of study have potential
technological applications in such areas as sensing, medicine, and green
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide research and educational
opportunities to undergraduate students from underrepresented groups. Being a
historically black predominantly undergraduate institution, Jackson State
University primarily serves the educational needs of the local community. During
past several years, the Physics Department at Jackson State University has
developed a comprehensive Nanoscale Science undergraduate student research and
education program with the aim of (a) exposing students to advanced topics of
science and technology, and (b) providing additional resources and opportunities
to physics majors who are willing to pursue graduate education in out-of-state
universities. This project will help in strengthening the vital research
component of this program.