* 1206696
* Ramanujan 125
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* F. Garvan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 08/31/2014
* USD 15,000.00

Ramanujan 125, a conference to commemorate the 125th anniversary of Ramanujan's
birth, will be held November 5-7, 2012 at the University of Florida. A centenary
conference in the USA was held at the University of Illinois in 1987. At
Ramanujan 125, progress since the centenary conference will be reviewed,
emphasing current research in areas of mathematics influenced by Ramanujan. The
conference will cover the following topics: Partition Congruences and Congruence
Properties of Modular Forms, Ramanujan's Mock Theta Functions, The Hardy-
Littlewood Circle Method, q-Series and Special Functions, Combinatorics of
Partitions and q-series, and Symbolic Computation.

Srinivasa Ramanujan was an Indian mathematical genius who died in 1920, and who
although had no formal training left behind a collection of notebooks filled
with mathematical formulae which has intrigued mathematicians ever since. His
work has had a profound impact on many areas of mathematics including number
theory, combinatorics and generalized hypergeometric functions. The conference
will include eight plenary talks surveying major recent developments relating to
Ramanujan's work and their impact on a wide range of areas. There will also be
two History Lectures of appeal to undergraduate students and a number of 30
minute research presentations. Undergraduate students, graduate students and
recent PhDs will be invited to the conference. Special effort will be given to
support women and minority participants. The talks and papers of the conference
will be widely disseminated by making presentations and abstracts available on
the conference web page, and by publishing a refereed conference proceedings.
More information can be found at www.math.ufl.edu/~fgarvan/ramanujan125.html.