* 1206563
* Polarization Mediated Atomic Interactions: Water and Pt on BaTiO3 (100)
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Dawn Bonnell, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 442,691.00

NON TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Transition metal oxides represent a family of
materials that is enabling new devices in applications ranging from solar cells
to post CMOS electronics to communications systems to chemical catalysis.
Ferroelectric compounds exhibit extreme properties related to electron spin,
charge and polarization that suggest innovative pathways to some of these
solutions. This project uses atomic resolution tools to determine the
interactions of ferroelectric surfaces with molecules and metal clusters.
Specifically, interactions of water and platinum with barium titanate are
quantified. This research represents the first atomic level visualization of
molecular interactions in this class of materials. A high school summer academy
class in nanotechnology is offered to inspire interest in careers in science
based fields and a leadership program for graduate students imparts the non-
technical skills required in future leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: Ferroelectric compounds exhibit extreme properties related to electron
spin, charge and polarization that have the potential to enable next generation
devices in energy, nanoelectronics, and catalysis. This project uses scanning
tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy in conjunction with other characterization
tools to determine the mechanisms of molecular absorption on barium titanate
(100) surfaces with and without metal clusters. The effect of Ti atomic
coordination on water absorption is determined by comparing reactions on a
series of surface reconstructions that vary in Ti concentration. The effect of
polarization on reactions of water with Pt metal clusters is examined by
comparing tunneling spectra over domains with different orientations with those
of the clusters. Charge carriers that effect surface reactions are generated
with optical illumination and the effect on water reactivity quantified. The
results are compared to theoretical calculations in order to relate the local
electronic structures to chemical interactions. The results inform advances in
thin film growth, surface chemical reactivity and the physics of electronic
polarization. A high school summer academy class in nanotechnology is class is
offered to inspire interest in careers in science based fields and a leadership
program for graduate students imparts the non technical skills required in
future leaders.