* 1206042
* A Guided-Beam Measurement of the Electron's Electric Dipole Moment
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* John Furneaux, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2014
* USD 25,000.00

This grant supports the development of a Ramsey double resonance apparatus using
a coherently excited molecular beam of PbF to search for the electron's electric
dipole moment (e-EDM). The current phase of the work involves precise
spectroscopy of the transitions and states of the PbF molecule that will be used
in the e-EDM search -- the hyperfine-resolved transition between the ground
state X1(nu=0,J=1/2,+,|M|=1,F=1) and the excited state A(nu=0,J=1/2,+,M=0,F=1)).
Specifically, we are making precision determinations of the energy of this
transition and the effect of an applied E field to this transition. The latter
measurement will determine the PbF molecular electric dipole moment to higher
accuracy than currently known. We are also improving the stability of our laser
system by using precisely characterized absorption lines in diatomic isotopic
130-Tellurium molecule. Future steps in this project include testing our entire
measurement system along with our understanding of the Geometric Phase, an
important systematic error in our proposed measurement, by constructing a
molecular beam with an adjustable geometric phase. We will then show that we can
predict, produce and measure this geometric phase for a specific configuration
of electric fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the profound puzzles associated
with our understanding of the universe is the asymmetry between matter and anti-
matter that is observed. Why is our universe made of matter and not anti-matter?
A factor that affects this asymmetry is the shape of the electron as determined
by measuring the electron's electric dipole moment (e-EDM). The possibility of
such an e-EDM was first proposed by Purcell and Ramsey (Phys. Rev. 78, 807
(1950)) over 60 years ago. A new limit on the e-EDM was recently reported in
Nature, 473,493 (2011) by a group at Imperial College, London. We are working on
a similar, more sensitive, experiment to either set an even lower limit on this
important constant or to more precisely measure it using PbF. We are in the
preliminary phases of the planned experiment and this grant funds important
spectroscopic measurements and equipment developments making an eventual e-EDM
measurement possible.