* 1206095
* In Situ Probing of Correlations and Dynamics with Quantum Gases in Optical Lattices
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Cheng Chin, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2015
* USD 469,479.00

In this project, Dr. Chin's group at the University of Chicago identifies and
investigates generic behaviors of strongly interacting atoms at ultralow
temperatures. Once these generic correlations are determined, our understanding
of a whole class of other complex quantum systems in nature will be greatly
improved. One prominent goal is to understand high-Tc superconductivity, where
the essential microscopic interactions can potentially be captured by fermionic
atoms in optical lattices. Another fascinating goal is to explore the
conjectured correspondence between the dynamics of atoms near a "quantum phase
transition" and the quantum gravity in the early universe described by string
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, the project will identify emerging
universal behaviors of quantum systems in the strong coupling regime. More
specifically, temporal and spatial density correlations at all length scales are
being investigated based on in situ imaging of Lithium-Cesium quantum gases with
high spatial resolution. Spatial correlations can be extracted from same-time
density measurement, while temporal correlations are being measured by locally
poking the sample and monitoring the consequent density response. Among other
directions, the group investigates pairing and superfluidity of fermions in
lattices described by the Fermi-Hubbard model, and quantum critical transport,
and its connection to the conjectured gauge-gravity
duality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Correlations of particles are of fundamental
interest in the research of condensed matter physics and materials science,
since they lie at the heart of novel quantum phenomena, such as high-Tc
superconductivity and quantum magnetism. Both pose a major challenge to our
understanding of quantum materials. In recent years, quantum simulations based
on ultracold atoms has emerged as a powerful tool and a fast growing research
direction for unveiling the mystery of complex quantum
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the group is initiating a new outreach
program for K-12 students of public schools in the historical Chicago south
side. This program offers a variety of science education activities to enhance
the exposure of young students to the development of modern science and
technology.