* 1206781
* Topologically ordered phases of matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Alexander Seidel, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education to advance understanding
of topological order in various forms. The PI seeks to advance understanding of
their underlying mathematical structure.

The PI's specific goals are: i) to obtain a direct proof of the existence of
gapless excitations in the Haldane-Rezayi quantum Hall state, ii) to identify a
new and general connection between fractional quantum Hall states and integrable
models, and in doing so open a new avenue to the problem of classifying quantum
Hall states, iii) to develop a deeper understanding of the "occupation number
basis" structure of FQH wave functions in the torus geometry, which is generally
indispensable to the study of different kinds of topological order, iv) to
develop a new method to systematically study the correlations of short-range
resonating valence bond spin-1/2 wave functions, the proposed prototype wave
functions for a long sought spin liquid, v) to prove the uniqueness of the
nearest neighbor valence bond ground states in generalized Klein models, and to
establish the feasibility of an SU(2)-invariant spin liquid on the kagome
lattice, vi) to develop an argument that determines theoretically whether or not
a supersolid state exists.

The PI will also generate new advanced course material. The PI will continue to
give public outreach lectures where the broader ideas of quantum mechanics and
of quantum condensed matter systems in particular are presented in perspective
with some of the main questions driving research supported through this award.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education on how electrons and
atoms organize themselves into ordered states of matter. The self-organization
of atoms into a regular array in crystalline materials and the alignment of
atomic scale constituents of magnetism to become a magnet are examples of
ordered states of matter. Research on quantum Hall systems, electrons confined
to two dimensions in artificial semiconductors and placed in a strong
perpendicular magnetic field, has led to the notion of a new kind of order known
as topological order which is reflected in topological insulators. Like ordinary
insulators, for example rubber, topological insulators do not conduct
electricity though the interior of the material. Unlike ordinary insulators,
topological insulators are able to conduct electricity on their edges or
boundaries through the formation of a new state of matter. Among the known
topological insulators are compounds made of the elements bismuth and selenium,
and bismuth and tellurium.

The PI will develop new methods to study model systems exhibiting topological
order both in fractional quantum Hall systems as well as in quantum magnets.
These methods will borrow from the idea that the fundamental physics is
faithfully contained in the properties of its edge, for example the surface
metallic state of the topological insulator. The PI will also investigate the
organizing principles for other new states of matter.

The PI will also generate new advanced course material. The PI will continue to
give public outreach lectures where the broader ideas of quantum mechanics and
of quantum condensed matter systems in particular are presented in perspective
with some of the main questions driving research supported through this award.