* 1206867
* Photoconductive Metal Nanowires with Embedded Semiconductor Nanonodes
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Reginald Penner, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2015
* USD 414,998.00

Technical Description: A new strategy is under investigation for the creation of
nanometer-scale photoconductors that are both fast, in terms of the response and
recovery of the photoconductive state to light (&lt;100 ns), and highly
sensitive to light, possessing a high internal photoconductive gain (&gt;100).
The gain, defined as the number of electrons produced for each absorbed photon,
can be maximized by collapsing a semiconductor nanowire in length until it
becomes a semiconductor nanoparticle, cradled between a pair of metal electrical
contacts. This arrangement is achieved by preparing arrays of crossed nanowires
in which an ultrathin (&lt;100 nm) optical absorbing layer of cadmium selenide,
for example, is sandwiched between two gold nanowires. Light-emitting junctions
or nanonodes are obtained using the same crossed-nanowire strategy except that
one set of metal nanowires is replaced by p-type semiconductor nanowires, such
as silver (I) oxide or PEDOT (poly (3,4-ethylene-dioxythiophene)). A
photoemissive n-p junction is thereby formed. Processes for preparing dense
arrays of crossed nanowire junctions that function as photoconductive optical
sensors and photoemissive junctions are being developed. Fundamental aspects of
these structures are being probed using single crossed nanowire junctions. The
properties of photoconductive arrays for detecting spatially modulated light
sources, and the collective properties of photoemissive arrays for generating
spatially modulated light will be characterized. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical Description: A new method is being studied for fabricating optical
detectors and light sources that are smaller than the wavelength of light. In
this project, linear arrays of nanowires composed of metal or semiconductors are
superimposed on top of one another to create an array of nanowire crossings or
junctions. This crossed nanowire strategy should be capable of producing arrays
of millions of optical detectors or optical sources. This project provides a
multidisciplinary training experience for graduate students that encompassing
nanofabrication, surface chemistry, electrochemistry, condensed matter physics,
and spectroscopy. A fellowship-based outreach program that targets economically
disadvantaged high-school students is operating in parallel with these research
activities.