* 1206093
* Geometric Frustration in an Optical Superlattice
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Dan Stamper-Kurn, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2015
* USD 540,000.00

The structure of many materials is determined by how the constituents of the
material obey the many constraints that are established by microscopic physical
principles. For example, stable crystalline structures are those that are
constrained to minimize the pairwise interactions between the atoms or molecules
forming the crystal. Similarly, in magnetic materials, the magnetic moments of
electrons that are localized on neighboring atoms may lower their energy either
by aligning in the same or in opposite orientations. In some cases, there is no
trivial way in which to satisfy all the energetic constraints within a system,
and so the formation of any simple configuration of the system -- e.g. of
magnetic moments within a crystalline structure -- is precluded. This phenomenon
is known as frustration. The question of whether some sort of predictable order
is established in frustrated systems, and, if so, what is the character of that
order, are both major open questions in physics. The answer to these questions
has relevance to the design of new materials and the application of such
materials to information technology and other uses.

In this project, the physics of frustrated materials will be explored using cold
atoms that are trapped within geometric patterns -- such as the two-dimensional
kagome lattice -- that lead to a high degree of frustration. The effects of this
frustration on phase transitions and on transport will be investigated. The
system chosen provides a clean realization of geometric frustration, free of the
structural defects that influence solid-state realizations of similar systems.
Thus, the experimental findings may provide clear answers to vexing questions
regarding geometric frustration.