* 1206920
* Magnetic Parameters from First-principles
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Juan Peralta, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 187,862.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award support research aimed at the
development and assessment of computational methods for the evaluation of
magnetic parameters in confined and extended structures. The expected outcome is
an improved understanding of magnetic phenomena in materials, which will be
achieved by implementing and utilizing a fundamentally different way to extract
magnetic parameters from first-principles computations based on density
functional theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed methodology allows one to
express magnetic parameters in terms of derivatives of the total electronic
energy of a reference state with respect to a parameter that probes local or
global rotations of the magnetization density, analogous to molecular response
properties. In combination with analytic perturbation theory, magnetic
parameters will be straightforwardly evaluated, providing a unique tool that
will be used to explore the magnetic properties of new materials in an efficient
and reliable way. This methodology will initially be developed for finite
systems and local atomic Gaussian-type orbitals, and later extended to crystal
systems and used to characterize the magnetic parameters of transition-metal
complexes and Heusler alloys. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports an
educational and outreach program which will involve (i) the training of one
Ph.D. student in the new Science of Advanced Materials program at Central
Michigan University and (ii) PI's participation in a series of physics
demonstrations for K-12 students. The PI will continue his activities on the
integration of research with education at the undergraduate and graduate levels
while promoting the involvement of women and minorities in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding magnetism at the molecular level is
of both fundamental and technological importance. Many examples can be found
that make use of molecular magnetism for practical applications, such as
spintronics devices, magnetic memory alloys, and single-molecule magnets. This
award support research aimed at the development and assessment of computational
methods for the evaluation of magnetic parameters in small-scale as well as
extended bulk structures. The expected outcome is an improved understanding of
magnetic phenomena in materials, which will be achieved by implementing and
utilizing a fundamentally different way to extract magnetic parameters from
parameter-free, unbiased, and reliable computations. Such elucidation of the
fundamental physical and chemical mechanisms that lead to microscopic magnetism
is essential for the design and optimization of new materials and
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports an educational and
outreach program which will involve (i) the training of one Ph.D. student in the
new Science of Advanced Materials program at Central Michigan University and
(ii) PI's participation in a series of physics demonstrations for K-12 students.
The PI will continue his activities on the integration of research with
education at the undergraduate and graduate levels while promoting the
involvement of women and minorities in science.