* 1206472
* Analytic and geometric approaches to group theory and topology
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2016
* Igor Mineyev, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 04/30/2016
* USD 158,751.00

The PI recently proved the Strengthened Hanna Neumann Conjecture (SHNC), and
developed a topological and analytic language that allows one to generalize its
statement from free groups and graphs to more general groups and complexes. The
more general property is called submultiplicativity. This restatement of SHNC
shows that there is deep relation between SHNC and the Atiyah Conjecture, which
comes from analysis. The PI introduced the deep-fall property, which is useful
for each conjecture. This opens a new direction research, which the PI is
planning to pursue: finding examples of group actions and matrices that satisfy
the deep-fall property. Another part of the proposal is to investigate how PI's
earlier constructions of geodesic flow and symmetric join help understanding the
geometry of manifolds and more general metric spaces.

The PI's research interleaves themes and techniques from three core areas of
mathematics: algebra, analysis, and geometry. A group is one of the central
notions in algebra. The Hanna Neumann Conjecture, posed by Hanna Neumann in
1956-1957, is a question about a special class of groups called free groups. The
PI recently proved this conjecture, and provided a more general point of view
that allows asking similar questions in a more general setting, and using the
tools from analysis. The PI's program is now to answer similar kinds of
questions in this more general setting. Another goal is to investigate the
structure of metric spaces, building upon PI's past results in this area. The
goal is therefore, broadly, to relate these various branches of mathematics. The
PI also plans to present his research results at national and international
meetings and to invite research collaborators to the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign.