* 1206108
* Toward Enabling the Detection of Compact Binary Coalescences and their Astrophysical Characterization with a Network of Second-Generation Gravitational-Wave Interferometers
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Fred Raab, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2016
* USD 360,000.00

This project will support the development, testing, and subsequent
implementation of a fast data analysis pipeline for searching gravitational-wave
(GW) signals from compact binary coalescences (CBCs) in the data of Advanced
LIGO (aLIGO) and other second-generation detectors. These detectors are expected
to make the first direct observations of gravitational waves and herald the
birth of GW astronomy by harnessing information on the distribution of the
sources in the sky, distance, masses, and spins. These observations may also
shed light on the nature of the host galaxies of CBCs. This project will also
support work on aLIGO commissioning and instrumentation at the Hanford site, and
the development of rapid detector characterization techniques and tools. To
catch a prompt electromagnetic or neutrino emission from a CBC it is critical
that the duty factors of the GW detectors be high for sky localization, and
detector characterization and background estimation be rapid so that robust GW
alerts can be communicated to electromagnetic and neutrino observatories.

Rapid detector characterization will facilitate the publishing of gravitational-
wave data to the public, with robust data quality flags in hand. This project
will also engage the faculty of the Washington State University campuses in
Pullman and Tri-Cities in education and outreach on gravitational-wave science.
The latter campus caters to a large percentage of Hispanic and Native-American
populations, both of which are under-represented, and offers a rare setting for
integrating university education with cutting-edge research in gravitation being
carried out at a nearby lab.