* 1206150
* Synthesis of Heparin mimicking polymers containing N-alkyl urea peptoids and their evaluation in anticoagulation assays
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Neil Ayres, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2016
* USD 275,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1206150 PI: Ayres, Neil ORG: University of
Cincinnati&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Synthesis of heparin mimicking polymers
containing N-alkyl urea peptoids and their evaluation in anticoagulation
assays&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Current approaches to synthetic
analogues of pharmaceutically relevant, sugar-containing biopolymers focus on
global scale properties such as charge and hydrophilicity, rather than
attempting to understand how the complex interplay of charge, functionality, and
stereochemistry might be harnessed to prepare a superior alternative. Heparin is
a linear polysaccharide possessing variable patterns of substitution including
N-sulfate, O-sulfate, and N-acetyl groups. This results in heparin ranking among
the most structurally complex GAGs. However, heparin is sourced from mammals and
possesses inherent safety concerns. Therefore, replacing heparin with a
synthetic analogue would be highly beneficial. The objective of this proposal is
to use N-alkyl-N,N'-linked oligomers, which we have termed "N-alkyl urea
peptoids," as a point of synthetic diversity for the synthesis of defined
glycosaminoglycan mimetics. The central hypothesis under study is that combining
N-alkyl urea peptoids with sugar-functionalized polymers will lead to
glycosaminoglycan mimetics with a high degree of synthetic versatility, enabling
the rapid probing of rational structure-activity relationship studies directed
at heparin replacement. The research hypothesis will be tested by pursuing the
following specific aims: (1) Use N-alkyl urea peptoid/polymer conjugates to
synthesize glycosaminoglycan mimetics. (2) Use N-alkyl urea peptoid oligomers to
synthesize polyurea/urethanes with heparin mimetic segments. (3) Perform simple
representative assays to gauge the performance of the synthetic
glycosaminoglycan mimetics. This project will establish a new platform for
researchers to use in studying controlled sequence polymers, protein-binding
synthetic macromolecules, and sugar-functionalized
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The work contained in this
proposal represents a new strategy in preparing synthetic GAG mimics and has the
potential to enable progress in scientific areas including biomaterials,
biomimetic chemistry, and polymer-biomolecule interactions. This research will
deliver focused, rationally designed post-graduate projects and undergraduate
student learning modules. Beyond the expected scientific results, the PI has
planned activities to promote integration of students transferring into the
University of Cincinnati from community colleges and other institutions.
Transfer students can have lower retention rates, longer time-to-graduation, and
lower final GPAs than their "traditional" student counterparts. One of the
factors influencing the integration of transfer students is the opportunity to
perform research with a professor. The PI will target transfer students for
undergraduate research opportunities in his lab. The undergraduate researcher
will be given student learning modules developed from individual experiments
contained within the Research Plan, resulting in a significant contribution to
the successful outcome of the project.