* 1206183
* Rydberg Atom-Microwave Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Thomas Gallagher, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2015
* USD 449,844.00

The authors are conducting a research program in which they are studying highly
excited, or Rydberg, atoms in strong microwave fields. They have two specific
goals. The first is to understand novel states of the combined atom-field system
which are remarkably stable, even at energies above the ionization limit of the
atom, the energy above which the valence electron is normally not bound to the
atom. The atom is stabilized by the combination of the Coulomb field and an
oscillating field with a frequency far in excess of the intrinsic frequency of
the valence electron's orbit. The second goal of the project is to manipulate
the Rydberg atoms with weak microwave fields oscillating at frequencies close to
the orbital frequencies of the atoms. In classical terms the motion of the
valence electron is phase locked to a microwave field, which is then varied to
alter the electron's orbit in the same way.

These experiments are carried out using an atomic beam of lithium atoms, which
are excited to energies near the ionization limit, either to Rydberg states just
below the limit or to energies just above it. The excitation is done using a 1
kiloHertz repetition rate laser system, and the excited atoms are exposed to the
microwave pulse either during or after laser excitation. The effect of the
microwave field is analyzed in one of three ways. After the end of the microwave
pulse the final states are analyzed by selective field ionization, which reveals
the energy distribution of bound final states. During the microwave pulse the
atoms are exposed to a temporally short, 1 picosecond, field pulse which gives
the electrons a momentum kick and ionizes the atoms if the electron is moving in
the direction of the momentum kick. Finally, during the microwave pulse the
atoms are exposed to a phase locked harmonic of the microwave field, which, with
the proper phase, ionizes atoms with orbits phase locked to the microwave field.
The latter two techniques enable the authors to determine the electron's time
resolved velocity.

The intellectual merit of the proposed activity is twofold. First, it promises
to lead to new insights into the importance of the often ignored Coulomb
potential in the presence of strong radiation fields. Specifically, it will
clarify how the combination of the Coulomb potential and a strong radiation
field can together produce unexpected effects. Second, the Rydberg atom-
microwave system is one in which the presence of multiple levels on coherent
population transfer can be studied in a quantitative fashion.

The authors expect their work to have broad impact beyond their own interests.
Insights into strong field physics are immediately transferrable to high
intensity laser physics. The techniques used in the manipulation of Rydberg
atoms, such as coherent population transfer, can be generalized and used in
other contexts and are of particular interest in physical chemistry. More
generally, manipulation of Rydberg atoms is of interest for the production of
low lying states of antihydrogen, quantum computing, axion searches, and long
wavelength photon detection.