* 1206724
* Surface Crystallization and Diffusion of Organic Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2016
* Lian Yu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 04/30/2016
* USD 535,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: With support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program, Lian Yu and his student coworkers at the University of Wisconsin -
Madison will study Surface Crystallization and Diffusion of Organic Glasses (DMR
1206724). Glasses constitute an important class of solids produced by cooling
liquids, condensing vapors, and evaporating solutions while avoiding
crystallization. According to the current view that crystallization is
controlled by diffusion, glasses should not crystallize readily. Yet many do
crystallize, sometimes surprisingly fast. Recent work has discovered new modes
of crystal growth that emerge as organic liquids are cooled to become glasses.
This study seeks to understand one such process: fast crystal growth at the
surface of organic glasses. The team will test the hypothesis that the
phenomenon arises because of surface molecular mobility and the possibility for
surface crystals to grow toward free space. They will determine how molecules
are transported to support upward-lateral growth of surface crystals through
real-time high-resolution microscopy. Surface diffusion coefficients will be
measured for organic glasses to learn whether surface diffusion can sustain
surface crystal growth. Experiments will be performed to determine the effect of
glass aging on surface crystallization and diffusion, and how the fast growth of
surface crystals is terminated as glasses are heated to become liquids. Polymer
additives will be used to perturb crystallization and diffusion to understand
their role in stabilizing organic glasses against crystallization. The team will
study how the nature of surface mobility changes from hard inorganic solids to
soft organic solids, from crystals to glasses, and from small-molecule glasses
to polymer glasses.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The results of this research will benefit many areas of
science and technology in which crystallization, glasses, and surfaces are
important. Glasses are amorphous materials that combine solid-like mechanical
stability and liquid-like spatial uniformity, making them ideal for many
applications ranging from telecommunication to bio-preservation. Understanding
glass crystallization will benefit the fabrication of glass ceramics and control
of bio-mineralization, for which amorphous solids are key precursors. This
research will improve the stability of organic glasses against crystallization
and advance their applications in electronic and biomedical technologies.
Pharmaceutical scientists will benefit from this knowledge as they develop
amorphous formulations to deliver poorly soluble drugs. Poor solubility is
limiting the development of many drugs that are beneficial and can significantly
advance health care in the U.S. and developing countries. This project will
provide rates of surface diffusion on organic materials, which are essential for
understanding and controlling many technological processes - crystal growth,
sintering, stability of thin films, and durability of nano-materials. Although
extensive data exist for metals and semiconductors, the data are lacking for
soft organic materials. Graduate and undergraduate students will benefit from
the multi-disciplinary nature of this project, having significant exposure to
crystals and glasses, high and low molecular weight organic materials, and both
industrial and academic research labs. Personnel supported by this grant will
work with UW-Madison's Pre-college Enrichment Opportunity Program for Learning
Excellence (PEOPLE), which has a proven record of increasing the enrollment of
minority and low-income high school students to colleges and universities. This
program provides experiences that help students to become scientifically
literate citizens and encourages them to consider careers in science and
engineering.