* 1206291
* CAREER: Smart Cameras Getting Smarter: Detecting High-level Events Across Battery-powered Wireless Embedded Smart Cameras
* CSE,CNS
* 08/06/2011,12/31/2017
* Senem Velipasalar, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

Visual surveillance is widely used in military and commercial applications, and
public transportation scenarios. There are an estimated 30 million surveillance
cameras in the U.S. capturing 4 billion hours of footage a week. The large
amounts of video data generated by these cameras necessitate automatic detection
of semantically high-level events, since the attention of a human operator
watching multiple video feeds decreases over time. In addition, requiring
cameras to have access to electrical outlets and to have wired links hinders
system flexibility in terms of the number and placement of cameras, incurs
significant costs, and limits possible applications and mobility. Embedded smart
cameras allow us to deploy many spatially-distributed cameras interconnected by
wireless links. A smart camera combines sensing, processing, and communication
on a single embedded platform. Yet, it has very limited energy and processing
power. The objective in this project is to build a battery-powered, self-
adapting, wireless embedded smart camera system for the detection of
semantically high-level events, which can span multiple overlapping or non-
overlapping camera views, in a scalable and energy-efficient manner, and remove
the dependence on wired links. Resource-aware and distributed object tracking
and event detection algorithms, and self-adapting decision methodologies will be
developed to decrease the energy consumption, and increase the battery-life of
cameras. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes are expected to have important
positive impact, because they will fundamentally transform video surveillance
and event detection solutions by addressing the privacy issues simultaneously.
This technology can be used across disciplines and in wide-ranging areas,
including next-generation cyber-physical systems, military and commercial
applications, traffic analysis, health care and wildlife monitoring. Outreach to
younger children is planned through the deployment of this project at the local
Children?s Zoo and Museum.