* 1206016
* Spin, Heat and Charge Transport in Quantum Hall Edge Modes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Amir Yacoby, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 06/30/2016
* USD 520,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** This research project will investigate spin, heat and
charge transport in quantum Hall edge modes. Already in the integer quantum Hall
regime once edge reconstruction occurs, correlated electron physics described by
Luttinger liquid theory is needed in order to properly describe edge mode
characteristics. In the fractional quantum Hall regime edge reconstruction is
expected to produce both charged and neutral excitations that result from the
interplay between confinement, Coulomb repulsion and disorder. A renewed
interest in quantum Hall systems also arises due to the prospects of using such
systems for topological quantum computing. Furthermore, in recent years, edge
mode physics has also immerged in other material systems known as topological
insulators even in the absence of an external magnetic field. Leading examples
of intriguing edge mode physics in these systems are the quantized spin Hall
effect and the anomalous quantized Hall insulator. Three approaches will be used
in this project: cleaved edge overgrowth for sharp edges, laterally defined
edges and suspended graphene. The experimental tools developed here for studying
edge mode physics in the quantized Hall regime will offer new approaches for
exploring edge mode physics in this new class of materials. This project will
assess the possible technological use of topologically protected edge modes for
dissipationless transfer of information in solid state devices. The research
will be incorporated into our new graduate program that will be centered on the
"fundamental properties of materials and their applications" as well as into our
undergraduate curriculum addressing the "principles of scientific inquiry".

****Non Technical Abstract**** Microelectronic circuitry changed our lives. One
of the growing challenges, however, in this field is the dissipation of energy
or heat production due to the flow of electricity within such devices. These
challenges call for new approaches for carrying information across microscopic
dimensions. This project seeks to use other properties of electrons such as
their intrinsic angular momentum, known as spin, as opposed to their charge, for
carrying information. Electros move in circles when subject to an external
magnetic field. In clean samples such circular motion prevents electricity from
flowing in the bulk from one side of the sample to the other. However, near the
boundaries of a sample this circular motion leads to skipping orbits which allow
electrons to traverse the length of the sample without dissipation. In addition
to their charge, electrons also carry spin and heat. Under unique conditions
that result from the interactions between neighboring electrons, the edge modes
at the boundary can carry heat and spin currents without carrying any charge
current. Such neutral modes offer intriguing possibilities for carrying
information without involving the charge of the carries. This project explores
the properties of such edge modes in high purity semiconductors and will assess
their utility in future applications. Participating students are trained in
technological areas that are front and center in the nanoelectronics industry
including nanofabrication, electrical measurement and data acquisition.
Furthermore, by incorporating the research topics into the undergraduate and
graduate curriculum, this project will prepare the next generation of scientists
for future challenges in nanoelectronics and their applications.