* 1206669
* Lab-in-a-Fiber Optofluidic Platform: In-Situ Assembly and Response of Layer-by-Layer Polyelectrolyte Films in Confined Geometry
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Henry Du, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2015
* USD 389,637.00

This project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program
(EPM) in the Division of Materials Research (DMR) and the Electronics,
Photonics, and Magnetic Devices Program (EPMD) in the Division of Electrical,
Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: This project is a theoretical and experimental investigation to
integrate layer-by-layer (LbL) assembly of functional polyelectrolyte thin films
with a long-period grating structure inscribed in index-guided photonic crystal
fiber. The integrated system represents a lab-in-a-fiber optofluidics platform
by virtue of its high refractive index sensitivity and the feasibility for
molecular/nanoscale functionalization in axially aligned cladding air channels.
The research is designed to gain fundamental insights into distinct features of
LbL growth in fiber and to probe the response of the LbL film to stimuli in
confined geometry in order to demonstrate the feasibility of the integrated
scheme for optofluidic sensors. Project activities entail (1) simulation of mode
coupling in various lab-in-a-fiber configurations to determine optimal platform
with the highest possible index sensitivity; (2) inscription of the grating
structure with the simulation as a guide to realize mode coupling at prescribed
resonant wavelengths; (3) deposition of LbL polyelectrolytes with different
propensity to chain exchange with a multitude of parameters while measuring the
shift in resonance wavelength in situ; and (4) evaluation of the pH response of
polyacid-based hydrogels constructed via LbL in the lab-in-a-fiber platform. The
central goals of this project are to (1) establish a novel lab-in-a-fiber
optofluidics to study LbL deposition in situ; (2) provide important insights
into the distinct features of LbL deposition and response in confined geometry;
and (3) build a knowledge foundation for the exploration of lab-in-a-fiber
optofluidic sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: The
research component of this project is to investigate layer-by-layer thin-film
growth inside a special type of optical fiber, photonic crystal fiber with long-
period grating structure, and to study the response of the thin film to stimuli
in confined geometry. The success of the project is expected to bring to basic
and applied research community and potentially the market place a transformative
lab-in-a-fiber optofluidic stimuli-responsive platform for scientific
exploration and technological applications. From educational perspective, this
project engages doctoral students, undergraduate students, as well as high-
school students. Dissemination of research results is achieved via various
channels, including peer-reviewed publications, conference presentations, web
posting, and case studies in classrooms.