* 1206138
* Sn Whisker Nucleation and Growth: Fundamental Mechanisms Controlling Where, When and Why Whiskers Form on Sn Coatings
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Eric Chason, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 08/31/2015
* USD 380,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sn whiskers are a serious reliability
problem in electronics manufacturing. Whiskers have been implicated in failures
of pacemakers, nuclear power plants, satellites and other critical systems.
Recently, the removal of Pb from manufacturing (for environmental reasons) has
made the problem more severe since Pb had been used as an alloying element to
prevent whisker formation. In previous work, whiskering has been shown to
increase with the layer stress and finite element analysis (FEA) has been used
to model how the intermetallic (IMC) growth at the Sn-Cu interface leads to
stress in the layer. The new work will focus on the microscale features that
determine why whiskers start to grow at specific sites, i.e., which grains will
form into whiskers/hillocks and how is this influenced by the magnitude of the
stress. Scanning electron microscopy/electron backscattering diffraction
(SEM/EBSD) will be used to monitor the surface repeatedly. These images will be
used to create videos of how whiskers/hillocks grow out of the surface.
Correlation with the underlying grain structure will show which grain
configurations are most likely to form whiskers. Synchrotron microdiffraction
studies at the APS synchrotron will be used to measure the deviatoric strain as
well as the grain structure in real time as whiskers form. Results of these
studies will be used to determine what factors control where whiskers nucleate
(e.g., local stress concentration, weak oxide, IMC accumulation,
recrystallization, horizontal grain boundaries, etc.). The data will be
interpreted using finite element analysis simulations, with the measured
microstructure serving as a critical input for the calculations. Additional
measurements during thermal cycling and under corrosive environments will be
used to determine how these factors influence whisker formation. The knowledge
gained from this work will be used to develop mitigation strategies (using layer
structure and composition) to suppress whisker formation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tin whiskers
are long thin filaments that grow out of tin coatings used in electronics
manufacturing. These whiskers have caused failures in pacemakers, nuclear power
plants, satellites and other critical systems. The problem has become more
serious recently due to the removal of lead from manufacturing for environmental
reasons. Lead-tin alloys had been used for the last 50 years to suppress
whiskering and there is currently no alternative that prevents whisker formation
as well as lead. The focus of this research is to understand why whiskers form
where they do in order to develop schemes to prevent their formation. Stress in
the layer is believed to be the driving force for making whiskers, but that does
not explain why they form at specific sites on the surface. The researchers will
use advanced characterization tools (electron microscopy) to repeatedly monitor
the tin surface to observe the whiskers when they start to form. Videos made
from these images will show how the whiskers grow out of the surface from
individual sites. This technique also measures the orientation and shape of each
tin grain in the layer which will enable the whisker formation to be correlated
with the characteristics of the sites where they form. The researchers will also
use a unique X-ray diffraction tool with microscopic spatial resolution to
determine the stress in the individual grains in the layer. These measurements
will provide input for mathematical modeling of the surface to understand how
the stress develops in each grain and how that leads to whisker growth. Future
work will include studying how humidity and temperature influence whisker
growth. The results of these studies will be used to develop processing schemes
to make layers that are resistant to whisker formation.