* 1206146
* Statistical Physics of the Functional Organization of Chromosomes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Jane Kondev, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2016
* USD 480,017.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
at the interface of physics and biology. The goal is to develop statistical
physics models of chromosomes in cells that connect their structure to their
function. In biology chromosomes are typically described as carriers of genetic
information. They are also multi-component and dynamic polymer-like structures
made of DNA and proteins that exhibits elements of both regularity and
randomness. At the micron scale genes on chromosomes are often localized to
particular regions of the cell, within which they undergo diffusive motion. This
spatial and temporal organization of chromosomes has been quantitatively
characterized using cell biology techniques but the rules that connect these
physical properties to their function are largely unknown. The goal of this
proposal is to develop coarse grained models based on ideas from statistical
physics, which will elucidate the physical mechanisms that link chromosome
structure at the micron scale to its function. Two fundamental biological
processes will be considered: transcription and DNA recombination. The key
question that will be addressed is how these processes are modulated and
controlled by the spatial and temporal organization of genomes in cells. One of
the key features of the theoretical research supported by this award is a close
collaboration with experimental labs that study transcription and recombination
quantitatively at the single molecule and single cell level. Theoretical
predictions based on specific physical mechanisms of transcription and
recombination will be tested in these labs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
will support graduate students working at the interface of physics and biology.
Physics graduate students engaged in research supported by this award will
closely collaborate with biology students in collaborating labs. This mode of
graduate training will promote an interdisciplinary research environment that
will result in the cross-fertilization of ideas between statistical physics and
molecular and cell biology. It will provide physics students with a unique
opportunity to learn from students in life-science fields and help train them
for research in interdisciplinary teams, which are being deployed with
increasing frequency in industry and academia to tackle the outstanding
challenges in biology and medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chromosomes are biological structures
that perform functions that are essential to life, such as replication of DNA,
the repair of damaged DNA, and the synthesis of new proteins. Chromosomes are
also large molecular structures consisting of DNA and proteins whose shape and
motion within the cell can be described in quantitative details using ideas from
physics. The research supported by this award will provide the link between the
biological functions of chromosomes and their physical attributes. In
particular, it will lead to mathematical descriptions of how the nature of the
dynamic and folded state of chromosomes within cells specifies their biological
function. A mathematical description will be developed for the search process by
which two genes on the same chromosome find each other within the crowded
environment of the cell so as to enable the exchange of genetic material that
occurs in the process of DNA recombination. Also, there is an abundance of
experimental evidence that the folded state of DNA can interfere with the
reading of genes in the process of transcription that leads up to protein
synthesis, and the proposed research will formulate quantitative models of this
unusual structure-function relation. The outcome of these theoretical
investigations will be concrete proposals for quantitative experiments on DNA
and chromosomes which will be carried out in collaborating biology laboratories
that study DNA recombination and transcription. The combined theoretical and
experimental approaches will lead to a precise quantitative description of
chromosome structure and function. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support
graduate students working at the interface of physics and biology. Physics
graduate students engaged in theoretical research supported by this award will
closely collaborate with biology students. These activities will promote an
interdisciplinary research environment that will result in the cross-
fertilization of ideas between statistical physics and molecular and cell
biology. This environment will also provide the students with a unique
opportunity to learn from students in biological fields and help train them for
research in interdisciplinary teams which are being deployed with increasing
regularity in industry and academia to tackle the outstanding challenges in
biology and medicine.