* 1206410
* Non-Equilibrium Dynamics in Closed Interacting Quantum Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Anatoli Polkovnikov, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 303,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
focused on understanding fundamental aspects of quantum many-particle dynamics
and the experimental consequences. The main objective of this proposal is to
find universal non-equilibrium phenomena of interacting systems, that is
phenomena, which are insensitive to microscopic details. It has been shown that
universality emerges in very different aspects of dynamics ranging from
universal deviations from the adiabatic limit near quantum critical points, to
non-equilibrium phase transitions and universal work fluctuations in driven
systems. The PI will develop concepts, utilize theoretical tools from various
areas of physics, including condensed matter, atomic, and statistical physics,
and develop new theoretical methods. The goals of the research include:
understanding the role of geometry in quantum dynamics, in particular, the
connection of linear response of physical observables to quench velocity;
understanding the interplay of adiabatic dynamics and decoherence; developing
approaches for finding a universal statistical description of driven thermally
isolated systems, developing a renormalization group analysis of relaxational
dynamics; extending phase space approaches to quantum dynamics to new
applications like quantum tunneling or going beyond mean field approximation.
Theoretical findings will be applied to specific experimental tests.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will be engaged in educational activities at the
graduate level and higher including course development, contributing to
pedagogical review articles, and participating as a lecturer or organizer in
international schools aimed at graduate and advanced undergraduate students. The
work will also involve training graduate students directly participating in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research focused on understanding universal or robust
aspects of systems composed of many particles that interact with each other and
are far from the steady state of equilibrium. For example electrons in materials
or atoms cooled to very low temperatures and trapped by light, and driven far
from equilibrium by an applied electromagnetic field. It is well known that
interacting many particle systems in equilibrium can self organize leading to
new types of collective behavior, for example superconductivity, a state of
electrons that can carry electric current without dissipation. However, much
less is understood about interacting many-particle systems that are driven far
from equilibrium, where the standard tools of statistical physics do not
apply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI aims to use advanced theoretical methods from
across different areas of physics to find new properties of interacting many-
particle systems far from equilibrium that are insensitive to specific
microscopic features of the system and therefore apply to many systems. These
properties are called universal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The understanding of the
dynamics of quantum mechanical many-body systems far from equilibrium has broad
consequences and contributes to intellectual foundations that may lead to future
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will be engaged in educational
activities at the graduate level and higher including course development,
contributing to pedagogical review articles, and participating as a lecturer or
organizer in international schools aimed at graduate and advanced undergraduate
students. The work will also involve training graduate students directly
participating in the research.