* 1206040
* Enhancing Light-Matter Interfaces via Collective Self-Organization
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Harold Baranger, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 480,000.00

The primary goal of this quantum nonlinear optics research program is to study a
new type of light-matter interface, realized by laser driving cold atoms, that
has very large coupling strength, low absorption, and long atomic coherence
times. It arises due to the simultaneous action of Sisyphus cooling of the atoms
and atomic bunching in wavelength-scale structures. Fields self-generated by the
light-matter interaction have a large affect on the center-of-mass motion of the
atoms in a single pass through the medium, giving rise to self-assembled spatial
structures in the absence of a cavity. These structures act back on the fields,
giving rise to long coherence times, slow light, and quantum optical patterns
arising from an absolute instability (phase transition). The investigators are
using this light-matter interface to: 1) Observe a low-light-level (potentially
single-photon) nonlinear phase shift when the laser-driven gas is placed in an
interferometer; 2) Measure the quantum statistical properties of the radiation
scattered by the driven gas of atoms near the phase transition to test recent
predictions of an associated Dicke-like model; 3) Measure spontaneous pattern
formation in the driven gas and correlate to the atomic spatial reorganization;
4) Observe three-dimensional (3D) Sisyphus cooling when pumping the gas with
counterpropagating Bessel beams, thereby dramatically increasing the quantum
coherence time of the interaction; 5) Develop a self-consistent model of the
light matter interaction that accounts for propagation of the optical fields,
polarization of the atoms, center-of-mass atomic motion, and Sisyphus cooling in
3D; and 6) Extend the free-space Dicke-like model to account for the new physics
found in this system. This work will provide new experimental and theoretical
understanding of a unique physical system that has applications to quantum
nonlinear optics, especially in the development of single-photon nonlinear
interactions and the study of classical and quantum phase transitions in a well-
controlled environment. The program has also has implications for the study of
far-from equilibrium quantum phase transitions, cold-atom physics, and condensed
matter physics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: From a broad perspective,
the program has the potential to improve the performance of nonlinear optical
devices by increasing the nonlinear optical sensitivity making it possible to
shrink the size of the device and lower the power requirements. From an
educational perspective, the program will results in the training of two
graduate students in an interdisciplinary environment in both experimental and
theoretical techniques in the enabling field of optical physics. It is
noteworthy that the PI has been very effective in mentoring women and minority
scientists and has undertaken substantial outreach in the local area elementary
and middle schools to help attract more people to the science disciplines.