* 1206628
* 2012 High Pressure, Research at GRC/GRS; GRS: June 23-24, 2012 - GRC: June 24 - 29, 2012; University of New England; Biddeford, ME
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2012
* Gilbert Collins, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 12/31/2012
* USD 10,000.00

NSF funds will be used to support (registration and travel) the attendance of
junior and early career scientists at the 2012 Gordon Research Conference (GRC)
and Gordon Research Seminar on Research at High Pressure. The biennial GRC
brings together world experts and young scientists in a broad range of fields -
condensed matter physics, chemistry, engineering, geoscience and biology - to
discuss open questions in behaviour of materials at high density, to disseminate
the latest theoretical and experimental research results, and to hear of the
latest experimental facilities available around the world. For the first time in
its 50-year history, the 2012 meeting will have an associated Gordon Research
Seminar (GRS), beginning immediately prior to the GRC, where graduate students
and early career scientists can come together in a highly-stimulating
environment to discuss their current research, and build informal networks with
their peers. To cement the relationship between the GRS and GRC, the four
invited discussion leaders at the GRS will give talks at a special first-day GRC
session devoted to "Young Investigators". Further sessions will be devoted to
high-density hydrogen, new facilities, and new frontiers. The format of the GRC
will include formal presentations by experts, followed by extensive time devoted
to questions, free-ranging discussions and "brainstorming". A selection of the
most exciting poster submissions is made close to the start date of the
conference, and the presenters are allocated "Invited Poster" status, and given
5-minute presentations to "advertise" their work. The 2012 GRC will provide an
ideal environment for advanced graduate students and postdoctoral researchers to
present and exchange their latest ideas and results, and to hear and explore the
latest theoretical and experimental methods in high-pressure science. Members of
underrepresented groups have been recruited as conference speakers to provide
role models and potential mentors for the young scientists who will participate.