* 1206409
* Sterically Congested and Stiffened Alternating Copolymers:Â  Synthesis, Solution and Solid-State Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Richard Turner, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2016
* USD 390,015.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alternating copolymers of functional
stilbene monomers with maleic anhydride or maleimides are new sterically
crowded, chain stiffened, and precisely functionalized macromolecules. The
recently established semi-flexible nature of these backbones, arising from the
steric crowding of the 1,2-diphenyl groups from the stilbene monomers and the
stiffening effect of five-member cyclic anhydride or imide units is the origin
of interesting optical, surface area, and block copolymer solution complexation
behavior exhibited by these materials. One thrust of the research in this
project will focus on the solution properties, including rheology and self-
assembly characteristics, of these semi-flexible polymers in organic solvents
(non-ionic copolymers) and in aqueous media (ionic copolymers). The properties
of interpolyelectrolyte complexes (IPECs) of small libraries of new all anionic
and all cationic semi-flexible macromolecules under various external stimuli
such as salt concentration and pH will be studied and the effect of charge
density, placement, and chain stiffness on the IPECs elucidated using dynamic
light scattering and other techniques. In addition, the effect of charge density
and charge type on the aqueous solution behavior of self assembled complexes of
new double hydrophilic block copolymers, containing a semi-flexible alternating
copolymer block, will be investigated. A second thrust will involve studies of
the effect of the semi-flexible contorted alternating copolymer structures on
polymer properties such as surface area, gas permeability, and adsorbent
properties in the solid state. New hybrid block copolymers based on poly(arylene
ether sulfone) middle blocks will be synthesized with alternating copolymer end
blocks and will be cast into films and the mechanical, morphological, and gas
permeability properties studied. The nanoporous properties of hypercrosslinked
polymer particles, containing semi-flexible alternating structures with selected
types of functional groups, will be studied using a nitrogen adsorption
method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
technologies that are critical for the health, sustainability, and security of
our society are dependent on the discovery and development of new polymeric
materials that enable various types of devices in the optical and electronic
areas to function or that can deliver payloads of therapeutics across biological
membranes. The new polymeric materials resulting from the fundamental studies of
this grant have potential for applications in a number of areas where enabling
polymeric materials are indispensable components in successful innovations to
products. Potential applications range from high surface area polymers for
adsorbents for gases such as hydrogen and carbon dioxide, new water soluble
polymers with tailored stimuli responsiveness for biomedical processes, and new
hybrid polymer membranes for gas separations. Results from this research will be
presented at major conferences and published in leading journals. Graduate
students involved in this project will master the fundamentals of polymer
science and engineering and will learn to work in a fast-paced interdisciplinary
environment. These graduate students will have the opportunity to mentor
undergraduate students in an NSF Research Experience for Undergraduates program
at Virginia Tech and interact with industrial researchers in numerous outreach
programs from the Virginia Tech polymer community. Participation in this
research will provide students with a well-rounded education platform for
preparation for successful careers in the science and technology based
enterprise of our nation