* 1206045
* Diffusion of Confined DNA
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Kevin Dorfman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2016
* USD 305,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1206045 PI: Dorfman, Kevin ORG: University of
Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Diffusion of Confined
DNA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Nanochannel confined DNA is an
emerging technology for obtaining sequence specific information directly from
genomic DNA. The development of this new technology has been accompanied by a
renewed interest in the physics of confined, semi-flexible chains. While the
classical theories developed more than 30 years ago by de Gennes and Odijk
provide a complete description for the extension and diffusivity of a flexible
chain, experimental data indicate that these theories do not describe semi-
flexible chains such as DNA over most of the range of confinement. Simulations
have provided concrete evidence for the existence of two regimes between the
limits described by Odijk and de Gennes: an "extended de Gennes" regime and a
"transition regime," but these state-of-the-art theories remain untested. The
specific aims of this experimental proposal are: (1) test the predictions for
the extension of DNA in the transition and extended de Gennes regime, (2)
develop a proper definition for the effective width of confined DNA that
accounts for surface properties, and (3) test the predictions for the diffusion
coefficients of DNA in the transition and extended de Gennes regimes. The
proposed experiments take advantage of a new approach to fabricate relatively
inexpensive prototype nanochannels with the precision required for physical
studies. This project should lead to a comprehensive, quantitative understanding
of the extension and diffusion of DNA in
confinement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: Nanochannel confinement is an
emerging method for DNA barcoding, where the DNA is stretched and fluorescent
genomic information is optically "read" from the linearized DNA. DNA barcoding
rapidly provides genome-scale information with kilobase pair resolution, serving
as an important complement to second-generation genome sequencing and
hybridization microarrays. The nanochannel sizes used for DNA barcoding normally
lie in the transition regime or the extended de Gennes regime. The fundamental
results gained from this project will provide the foundation for the further
engineering of these devices. The research in this project will train graduate
and undergraduate students in nanofabrication, polymer physics, and transport
phenomena. The participation of underrepresented minorities will be increased
further through a summer research program with the Chemistry Department at
Grambling State University, an HBCU. Participation in the "Energy and U" program
will promote interest in science and engineering in students in grades 3-12.
"Energy and U" is an interactive program that teaches the first law of
thermodynamics in an age-appropriate manner through dramatic demonstrations of
energy conversion. Thousands of students attend the program each year, including
many students from inner city and underprivileged schools.