* 1206700
* Crystalline Hybrid Semiconductors: A systematic Approach to Develop Nanostructured Materials with Enhanced Properties and New Functionality
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Jing Li, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 05/31/2015
* USD 420,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crystalline and nanostructured inorganic-
organic hybrid compounds assembled on semiconductor nano-modules and organic
molecules represent a unique class of functional materials that are of both
fundamental and technological importance. The incorporation of organic and
inorganic components in a single crystal lattice not only leads to integrated
and improved properties over their parent semiconductors (e.g. broad band gap
tunability, enhanced optical absorption/emission power, and reduced thermal
conductivity), but also gives rise to intriguing phenomena and new functionality
that may not be achievable by either inorganic or organic constituents alone.
The primary objective of this project supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry (SSMC) program is to (a) modify the II-VI (II: Zn, Cd, Mn; VI: S, Se,
Te) based hybrid-nanostructured family in order to further optimize and improve
their electronic and optical properties, and (b) expand the series to new hybrid
families constructed on other important semiconductor groups, including binary
I-VII (I: Cu, Ag; VII: F, Cl, Br, I) and III-VI (III: Ga, In), and ternary
I-III-VI phases. Similar structure designing strategies and synthesis methods
built on the previous success will be adapted and applied to develop these
compounds. The project attempts to address some fundamental questions concerning
the chemistry and physics occurring at the inorganic-organic interfaces, to
facilitate an in-depth study employing both experimental and theoretical methods
in order to understand the correlations between the crystal structure,
composition, chemical bonding, and properties, and ultimately, to offer insight
that will contribute to further improvement of material properties crucial for
practical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A very exciting field of on-going materials
research centers on hybrid materials, namely compounds that are made of chemical
species from distinctly different categories. Inorganic materials are best known
for their framework integrity and thermal stability, superior electronic,
magnetic, optical and transport properties, while organic materials are well
recognized for their structural diversity, flexibility, processability, low
cost, and light weight. This project will develop and optimize properties of
crystalline inorganic-organic hybrid materials composed of semiconductor
nanomodules and organic molecules that form periodically ordered structures.
These functional nanostructured materials have attracted enormous attention due
to their integrated and enhanced properties as a result of blending the two
components in a single structure. Research on these materials has shown great
promise for their utility in optoelectronic applications, including
photovoltaics (solar cells), solid state lighting (LEDs) and sensing. This
highly interdisciplinary, collaborative and integrated project will serve as an
excellent platform for student training, and will offer unique opportunities for
a large number of participants, including undergraduate and graduate students,
postdoctoral research associates, visiting scientists, and especially women and
individuals from underrepresented groups, to work on chemical problems that are
both scientifically important and societally relevant. An important component of
the project involves numerous educational, training, and outreach activities
within and beyond Rutgers University, including new course and course module
development, international exchange programs, and partnership with regional
colleges and schools. The project seeks to continue and further collaborations
with the local industries on areas of common interest.