* 1206278
* Engineering Interface Magnetism via Defect Control in Complex Oxide Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Christopher Leighton, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2015
* USD 360,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Complex oxide materials have proven to be
an extraordinary platform for discovery of new and useful physical phenomena.
Assembling these materials into artificial heterostructures provides a plethora
of further opportunities, both for discovery of new science, and for
applications in areas such as ferroelectric RAM, fuel cells, and spintronics.
However, in order to fully exploit these materials some serious open issues must
be resolved, particularly with respect to interfacial strain and defects. The
goal of this project is to achieve exactly this, using cobalt oxides as model
systems to understand the interplay between strain state, oxygen vacancy
formation and ordering, and interface magnetism/electronic transport. Specific
opportunities include the use of strain-control over oxygen defects to precisely
engineer interfacial magnetic and electronic properties, and the possibility of
synthesizing defect-free materials to probe new physics recently predicted by
theory. The research will have impact well beyond the immediate disciplines in
which it is performed, due to its relevance to emerging technologies, the
exceptional educational opportunities provided to students, and inclusion of
under-represented groups. Outreach to the public will also be achieved via
development of an interactive presentation for the Properties of Matter module
in the Minneapolis Public School System, impacting hundreds of 8th grade
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Complex
oxides, formed by bonding atoms of multiple metallic elements with oxygen, are a
set of materials that display extraordinary diversity in physical and chemical
properties, yielding some of the most important discoveries in physics. The
recently recognized ability to incorporate these materials into artificial
structures where multiple oxides are laminated together, with atomic-scale
precision, provides a means to fully exploit their properties in a wide variety
of applications. These include zero boot-up time memory, clean-burning fuel
cells, and low power consumption high-speed electronics. However, critical
unsolved issues hinder progress in this area, particularly the formation of
unwanted defects associated with missing oxygen atoms. In this project a
specific set of complex oxide materials are being used to understand what
factors control the formation and arrangement of these defects, the influence
they have on properties, and the means by which we can control them. The
ultimate goal is to be able to precisely control electronic and magnetic
behavior at oxide interfaces in order to fully exploit their unique properties
in a wide variety of new devices. The research will have broad impact due to its
relevance to emerging technologies, the exceptional educational opportunities
provided to students, and inclusion of under-represented groups. Outreach to the
public will also be achieved via development of an interactive presentation for
the Properties of Matter module in the Minneapolis Public School System,
impacting hundreds of 8th grade students.