* 1206334
* Nanoclusters with High-Temperature Superconducting Pairing: Detection and Deposition
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Vitaly Kresin, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 405,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The project is concerned with high-
temperature superconducting pairing in nanoclusters composed of tens to hundreds
of atoms in size. The distinct character of their electronic states - "shell
structure" ordering - makes such clusters especially promising nanoscale systems
for this research. Particles of specific sizes are anticipated to display
pairing that is greatly enhanced relative to bulk samples, with a concomitant
increase in the critical temperature. The implication is a path towards
superconductivity at unprecedented temperatures of 200 K or higher, possibly at
room temperature. In the first stage of the project, the influence of pairing on
the electronic spectrum will be pinpointed in free clusters by a measurement of
photoionization thresholds as a function of temperature and size. In the second
stage, prototype circuits will be produced by soft-landing size-selected
nanoclusters on suspended nanotubes. The deposited clusters will form a discrete
chain along the nanotube, and the nanotube's conductivity will be modified by
the proximity effect. This approach combines high sensitivity to individual
nanoparticles with the ability to tune their parameters. The ultimate goal is to
merge an orders-of-magnitude increase in superconducting current capacity with
an orders-of-magnitude increase in the operating temperature, leading to
advances in, and applications of, nanoscale superconducting transport. The
project offers students and postdocs excellent training in a wide range of
experimental and theoretical aspects of an inherently interdisciplinary
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The
phenomenon of superconductivity, discovered 100 years ago, is one of the most
fascinating, complex, useful and important effects in physics. Some materials
completely lose their electrical resistance when cooled below their "critical
temperature." For many decades it appeared that critical temperatures may be
limited to very low values, close to the absolute zero. Thus applications were
valuable (e.g., medical MRI, particle accelerators) but expensive and limited.
In the last twenty years the field has blossomed, as scientists realized that
superconductivity "lurks" in many more materials and at higher temperatures. An
aspiration is to discover systems with still higher critical temperatures,
desirably even at room temperature. This project will advance this goal by
combining the pursuit of high-temperature superconductivity with the realm of
nanoscience, by detecting the superconducting transition in nanoclusters.
Nanoclusters are aggregates of a finite number of metal atoms, from tens to
hundreds, and can be precisely size-selected. It is anticipated that
nanoclusters of certain sizes will display superconductivity at temperatures of
200 Kelvin or even higher, possibly reaching room temperature levels.
Furthermore, circuits built out of such nanoclusters can transmit high currents
without resistance. The graduate and undergraduate students and postdocs
participating in the project will receive training in a wide range of skills
associated with this interdisciplinary field of science. The subject matter is
also fruitful for outreach programs for undergraduate, elementary-school, and
high-school students.