* 1206242
* First Principles Description of Strongly Correlated Electrons Using Quantum Monte Carlo
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Lucas Wagner, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 228,870.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and theoretical
research and education to advance quantum Monte Carlo methods and study strongly
correlated materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will calculate reduced density
matrices from accurate quantum Monte Carlo calculations and use the information
to develop a method to determine the nature of correlations in strongly
correlated materials. The study of the metal-insulator transition in Vanadium
dioxide will be a specific focus of study. The PI will use the methods to peform
a survey of various correlated materials, including the cuprate superconductors.
The PI aims to develop a model for the dependence of correlation on doping that
will lead to a low-energy model for high temperature superconductor
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a result of this work, both publications and
computer code to perform the calculations will be broadly distributed in the
form of the open source program QWalk. This project will also train students in
advanced computational modeling of strongly correlated materials at the
frontiers of materials research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and theoretical research to
develop methods to gain insight into strongly correlated materials that exhibit
correlations in the motion of electrons that arise from strong interactions
between electrons. The research will focus on two classes of materials, vanadium
dioxide and high temperature superconductors. It is thought that strong
interactions between electrons lead to vanadium dioxide turning from a metal to
an insulator. The high temperature superconductors exhibit superconductivity, a
state of matter which can conduct electricity without loss, up to the highest
temperatures at which superconductivity has been observed. It is believed that
electron correlations are an important ingredient to achieving high temperature
superconductivity.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PI wil develop a method based on
the solution of the fundamental equation of quantum mechanics, the Schroedinger
equation for a large number of electrons. The PI will use advanced methods to
solve the equation with a minmum number of assumption which is computationally
very intense. The PI will develop a method for analyzing the results which will
provide information that can be used to develop a simplified model that is more
computationally tractable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a result of this work, both
publications and computer code to perform the calculations will be broadly
distributed in the form of the open source program QWalk. This project will also
train students in advanced computational modeling of strongly correlated
materials at the frontiers of materials research.