* 1206256
* Collaborative Research: Impurity Incorporation into Epitaxial Graphene on SiC
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Leonard Feldman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 05/31/2016
* USD 100,000.00

Technical Description: The goal of this research project is to develop a novel
method to place controlled amounts of substitutional impurities into graphene
grown on SiC, to physically and electronically characterize the doped
structures, and to evaluate the changes in the film's properties. Impurities are
implanted into a SiC wafer prior to graphene formation. The wafer is annealed to
bring the impurity distribution near the surface. Then graphene is grown by
sublimation of Si, simultaneously driving the impurities into the graphene film.
After this process, the impurity distribution is characterized by surface
analytical techniques as well as by electrical transport measurements. If
successful, the method can also be applied to other two-dimensional
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: Graphene, a single
layer of carbon atoms bound together in a honeycomb lattice structure, has
unique electrical and mechanical properties. Effective use of these properties
requires the inclusion of predetermined amounts of impurity atoms (doping) in
the films. The project develops a new method to incorporate controlled amounts
of atoms into a single atomic layer of graphene, and provides graduate student
training in an interdisciplinary environment. In addition, undergraduate
students at the University of Minnesota and at Rutgers University, as well as
high school teachers working at Georgia Tech, obtain direct hands-on research
experience in the project as well as study materials and new understanding
resulting from the project in courses taught by the principal investigators.