* 1206474
* Mechanisms of Cyclic Loading Induced Microstructure Evolution and Damage in High-Sn Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2017
* Peter Borgesen, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 01/31/2017
* USD 420,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Ongoing changes in the electronics industry provide for an
urgent need for a quantitative understanding of the behavior of SnAgCu solder
alloys in both isothermal and thermal cycling. This kind of materials system is,
however, also of considerable scientific interest in its own right. The
tetragonal Sn crystal structure provides for extremely anisotropic properties,
and the addition of a few percent of Ag leads to cyclic twinning structures with
unique properties and behavior. This has particular consequences for overall
sample dimensions well below a millimeter. Notably, thermomechanical properties
vary strongly with various aspects of the microstructure and its evolution over
time. The goal of the proposed research is to establish a quantitative
understanding of the evolution of fatigue damage in high-Sn alloys with a few
percent Ag and Cu under cyclic loading. Recent work has led to the formulation
of a general hypothesis involving direct causal links between dislocation
generation and recovery, the build-up of dislocation cell structures, the
thermal and strain enhanced grain growth and coarsening of secondary
precipitates, the formation and rotation of sub-grains, and the eventual
initiation and growth of cracks. It is anticipated that much of this picture
will apply to a number of other precipitate hardened metals as well. A
systematic study will be conducted to validate and, if necessary, improve upon
or revise the above hypothesis. Experimental efforts will focus on the in-depth
characterization of dislocation cell structures and eventual sub-grains in
selected high-Sn alloys before and after carefully designed combinations of
thermomechanical loading. Cycling with varying amplitudes will be particularly
effective for the characterization of the underlying mechanisms. Microstructure
studies will rely heavily on cross polarized microscopy, scanning electron
microscopy, electron backscatter diffraction, focused ion beam sectioning and
transmission electron microscopy.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Electronics are serving critical roles in ever more
aspects of modern life and of the general functioning of society, and the
premature failure of a microelectronics product may have consequences ranging
from economical to loss of life. The inexpensive availability of many
electronics products may have tremendous consequences in areas ranging from
military preparedness and public safety to education, social services and the
development of poorer countries around the world. The long term life of a
product is most often limited by wear out of the solder joints that connect
components to each other or to a printed circuit board. As the industry is
forced to transition even high reliability products to environmentally friendly
lead free solders there is an urgent need for a level of understanding of damage
and failure mechanisms that has yet to be established. This is the focus of the
proposed research. Results will help the industry design and manufacture more
durable, reliable electronics at lower costs. Graduate and undergraduate
students, including a number of minority students, will be trained on state of
the art equipment and conduct experiments both at the university and in the
laboratory of industrial partner Universal Instruments. At Universal Instruments
the students will work closely with Ph.D. level industry engineers. Students
will present results at regular meetings of a large industry consortium, as well
as at regional conferences and at major scientific conferences. They will also
publish their work in peer reviewed journals. Results and experiences will
furthermore contribute to the ongoing development of undergraduate and graduate
level courses.