* 1206288
* CIF: Small: Energy Efficiency in Wireless Communications under Queueing Constraints
* CSE,CCF
* 06/30/2011,01/31/2014
* Mustafa Gursoy, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2014
* USD 222,485.00

Abstract ? NSF 0917265&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two key characteristics of
wireless communications that greatly impact system design and performance are
randomly-varying channel conditions and limited energy resources. In wireless
systems, the power of the received signal randomly fluctuates over time and
distance due to multipath fading, mobility, and changing environment. Moreover,
mobile wireless systems can only be equipped with limited energy resources, and
hence energy efficient operation is a crucial requirement in most applications.
In many wireless communication systems, in addition to energy-efficient
operation, satisfying certain quality-of-service (QoS) requirements is of
paramount importance in providing acceptable performance and quality. For
instance, in voice over IP (VoIP), interactive-video (e.g., videoconferencing),
and streaming-video applications in wireless systems, latency is a key QoS
metric. Therefore, the central design challenge in next-generation wireless
systems, which has the vision of providing communications anytime, anywhere in a
reliable and robust fashion, is to provide the best performance levels while
making efficient use of energy resources and satisfying certain QoS constraints
(e.g., latency, packet loss, buffer violation probability).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this research is to identify the
fundamental limits on the energy efficiency of wireless systems operating under
queueing constraints through a unified analysis of information- and queueing-
theoretic aspects. The investigators will employ a novel approach to analyze the
energy efficiency by combining information-theoretic tools, such as minimum bit
energy and wideband slope, with queueing-theoretic tools, such as effective
bandwidth and effective capacity. This project seeks to establish a strong
analytical framework by rigorously establishing fundamental limits on the energy
efficiency under buffer constraints, and also at the same time has the goal of
conducting experiments with a testbed and making comparisons with the
theoretical findings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;