* 1206187
* Hadron Physics and Non-Perturbative QCD Modeling
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Peter Tandy, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

This research project addresses mechanisms underlying the strong interaction of
subatomic physics in terms of the confined quarks and gluons described by that
part of the Standard Model known as Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD). We implement a
continuum nonperturbative approach based on the Dyson-Schwinger equations of QCD
which preserves the short distance renormalization group behavior of
perturbative QCD while the infrared domain is described by one parameter to
generate the empirical amount of dynamical chiral symmetry breaking. The latter
phenomenon is the source for the generation of at least 98% of the mass of known
stable matter in the universe, and it guides the development of our theoretical
methods.

This work will analyze and interpret information about the quark and gluon
structure of sub-atomic particles produced by the Jefferson Laboratory at
Newport News Virginia (JLab), and provide predictions for the experiments
anticipated from the upgrade currently being undertaken. Theoretical work of
this type informs and motivates a portfolio of fundamental physics programs at
sub-atomic physics laboratories across the world. Specific physics issues
addressed include parton distributions of the pion and kaon mesons, the
transition or generalized parton distributions of the pion and kaon mesons, the
elastic and transition form factors of pions for a complete range of momentum
transfer, and an extension to nucleon parton distributions, and their ratios. We
anticipate a by-product will be a new understanding of the mass scale for
transition from non-perturbative to perturbative dynamics in the pion charge
form factor.

Broader impacts of the program include the cross-fertilization of nuclear and
particle physics, a return on the investment in the experimental facilities at
JLab and RHIC, and integration of research and education through the research
training of graduate students in connection with undergraduate teaching. The
interactions of graduate students with scientists who are prominent nationally
and internationally is a contribution to the nation's infrastructure for
research and education. The PI uses examples from this research program to
illustrate key elements of core graduate classes in Quantum Mechanics and
Nuclear and Particle Physics. The PI supervises an informal seminar course for
graduate students and postdoctoral associates to discuss and present aspects of
QCD and field theory that underly this research program. The collaboration with
overseas colleagues will enhance international cooperation in science research
and education.