* 1206044
* Physics at the LHC with CMS
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Will Johns, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 07/31/2016
* USD 979,797.00

With the Compact Muon Solenoid Experiment at the Large Hadron Collider at CERN,
Geneva, Switzerland, the range and scope of possible new physics signatures is
vast. The Vanderbilt High Energy Physics group has carefully designed a science
roadmap that tackles promising and physically well-motivated models/theories,
while maintaining sensitivity to more general exotic signatures. This program
capitalizes on their established expertise in tau lepton reconstruction and
identification and their growing expertise in top quark physics. They exploit
this focused toolset to perform searches for physics beyond the Standard Model
(BSM), targeting interesting new physics such as the so far elusive Higgs boson,
new high mass resonances, Supersymmetry, grand unification of the fundamental
forces, and dark matter. This program of utilizing tau and top expertise to
search for new physics also provides the backbone for a more extensive long-term
vision aimed at providing precision measurements that will help the physics
community distinguish between the vast range of physics
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In broader impacts of their research effort, the
Vanderbilt HEP group's collaborative efforts with computer scientists are
breaking new ground in the area of data logistics through two projects funded by
separate NSF awards: REDDnet and DYNES. REDDnet is designed to provide a large
distributed storage facility for data intensive collaboration among the nations
researchers and educators in a wide variety of application areas. Its mission is
to provide working storage to help manage the logistics of moving and staging
large amounts of data in the wide area network. REDDnet is serving researchers
from a wide variety of application domains, including a digital archive project
in the Library of Congress, the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope project, and
HEP. DYNES is a nationwide cyber-instrument spanning about forty US universities
and eleven Internet2 connectors. A collaborative team including Internet2,
Caltech, the University of Michigan, and Vanderbilt University is working to
support large, long-distance scientific data flows from the LHC and other
leading programs in data intensive science. The Vanderbilt HEP group has also
led a Vanderbilt campus-wide effort to develop a researcher-driven campus-
computing center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Vanderbilt HEP group benefits
greatly from the participation of undergraduates in their program. And the group
is operating a very active local QuarkNet center that has been an important
component of the national QuarkNet Program for nearly a decade.