* 1206809
* Quantum phenomena in solids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Leon Balents, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 345,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research aimed at understanding and controlling
quantum correlations in solids. In the long term, the two goals of this research
program are:

(1) Design and development of new materials and structures with useful
functionalities that are not currently available, and

(2) Extending the basic scientific framework to understand matter in novel
regimes and phases.

The three main topics to be studied to achieve these goals are: (1) highly
quantum magnetism, (2) materials derived from topological insulators, and (3)
correlated oxide interfaces. It is envisioned that there will be synergy between
these areas. The research will be carried out using a diverse set of theoretical
techniques including phenomenological modeling, statistical mechanics, field
theory, ab initio simulations, density matrix renormalization group, and
symmetry analysis.

The general style of this research program is to develop and bring deep
theoretical ideas in the theory of solids into fruition in real materials.
Quantum magnetism, the first topic, is the most ideal arena to test theories of
exotic, non-locally entangled quantum states. Research on quantum spin liquids
and magnetization processes is very timely, coinciding with a burst of
experimental discoveries and questions raised by them. The second topic defines
new directions for the active area of topological insulators, focusing on
problems where fundamental theoretical issues still reside, and where
opportunities are present for materials synthesis. In the third topic on
correlated interfaces, essential issues in this field, such as the driving
forces behind the metal-insulator transition and the nature of carriers induced
by polarization discontinuities, will be addressed.

This award also supports the education of a graduate student and a postdoctoral
research associate at the frontiers of condensed matter theory. The PI will
incorporate the methods and results from the research into teaching materials,
and involve undergraduate students in research providing motivation for them to
pursue higher education in physics. The PI will also be involved in
disseminating the research results to specialist as well as non-specialist
audiences via the group's extensive web site and review articles.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research aimed at understanding and controlling
quantum mechanical correlations in solids. Focusing on novel phenomena which
have been observed or can be engineered in modern materials, the goal of the
research is to devise new types of functionalities for these materials, and to
expand the theoretical framework which describes quantum phenomena. At the most
fundamental level, the work will describe new phases of matter with remarkable
properties, and determine how to study and harness those properties in the
laboratory. This award also supports the education of a graduate student and a
postdoctoral research associate at the frontiers of condensed matter theory. The
PI will incorporate the methods and results from the research into teaching
materials, and involve undergraduate students in research providing motivation
for them to pursue higher education in physics. The PI will also be involved in
disseminating the research results to specialist as well as non-specialist
audiences via the group's extensive web site and review articles.