* 1206009
* Forward Meson Production and Spin Asymmetries at RHIC
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Steven Heppelmann, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2016
* USD 495,000.00

Proton high energy structure and the high energy proton-proton interaction
depend on the spin and angular momentum of the underlying quarks and gluons.
Unique tools are available at the Brookhaven Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider
(RHIC), which make it possible to study the role of the spin of the proton
constituents in polarized proton collisions. RHIC is the first high energy
polarized proton collider, where experimentalists can prepare the spin
orientation of high energy protons before they collide. These polarized proton
collisions are studied in the STAR detector with center of mass energies up to
500 GeV. When relativistic protons collide, they produce high energy fragments
including neutral pions, etas and jets of particles. It is in the very forward
region where particle production is most sensitive to the orientation of the
proton spin. This research involves measurement of forward fragments in
relativistic proton-proton collisions. In particular, transverse spin dependence
is studied using a lead-glass calorimeter called the FMS, which is located in
the forward region of the STAR detector. The goal is to characterize the
dependence of this production on event kinematics. We test QCD related
predictions of how the spin of the proton correlates with the spin of quarks and
how this can modify the observable cross sections. This grant supports the
collection of new RHIC FMS data and the analysis of that data. The objective is
better understanding of the most basic questions about the nature of the proton.

The proton is understood to consist of quarks and gluons bound together by the
strong force. This project investigates the role quark spin plays in the
structure of the proton. This investigation involves the construction and
ongoing operation of the FMS calorimeter in the STAR detector at Brookhaven
National Lab. The FMS apparatus is available to all the other collaborators in
STAR. The over 500 STAR collaborators work on a diverse range of physics topics,
many of which are enhanced by the presence of the FMS. This research involves
participation of undergraduate students who assist in fabrication of electronics
and in analysis of data from the experiment. It involves graduate students, both
those supported by this grant and others who use our apparatus. We also
introduce interested middle school or high school students to our work and
involve them where possible.