* 1206971
* Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics of Nanoscale Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Christopher Jarzynski, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2015
* USD 435,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by the Division of
Materials Research and the Chemistry Division. It supports theoretical research
and education related to the nonequilibrium behavior of small systems, from
biomolecular complexes to artificial molecular machines. The primary aim of the
research is to advance basic understanding of the laws of thermodynamics and how
they apply to nanoscale systems, where fluctuations are important and
unavoidable. The PI's approach will include exact analysis of tractable models,
theoretical and numerical modeling of systems studied experimentally, and the
formulation of general principles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two central questions
to be addressed are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) What fundamental constraints does
statistical thermodynamics impose on the processing of information by molecular-
level systems?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) What are the principles by which the
directed motion of artificial molecular machines can be generated and controlled
by the variation of macroscopic external parameters?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
first question is motivated both by the reality that biomolecular systems do
perform information-processing tasks, and artificial molecular machines are
beginning to show this capability. The PI will develop models that capture
essential features of information processing by autonomous molecular systems,
while remaining accessible to exact analysis or numerical simulation. By
exposing explicit, transparent mechanisms of operation, such models will offer
simple paradigms for investigating the thermodynamics of information processing
in situations where thermal fluctuations dominate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
in the second question was originally motivated by experiments involving the
manipulation of ring-like molecules, catenanes, by the variation of external
stimuli. The aim is a systematic control theory for artificial molecular
machines in the presence of substantial thermal noise. The PI will approach this
problem within the general theoretical framework of stochastic pumps, in which a
system makes random transitions among a network of discrete states, with time-
dependent transition rates. Here the topology of the network plays an important
role in the analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports graduate student
and postdoctoral level training in the methods of theoretical and computational
statistical mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by the Division of Materials
Research and the Chemistry Division. It supports theoretical research and
education on biomolecular systems and materials far from the steady state of
equilibrium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nature teaches us that small systems such as
individual molecules and molecular complexes are capable of exhibiting a rich
diversity of dynamical behavior. Prime evidence of this diversity is found in
the biomolecular machines that perform the numerous and often sophisticated
tasks required to maintain life: they harness energy, convert it from one form
to another, and faithfully copy and translate genetic information. In recent
years there has been growing interest and progress not only in understanding the
details of how biological molecules accomplish these tasks, but also in
synthesizing artificial molecular machines that mimic such capabilities. This
award supports theoretical research and teaching that aims to uncover and
clarify the basic physical laws that govern these
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will develop a better understanding of
the means by which nanoscale systems are able to perform tasks that involve the
processing of information, as occurs in the replication and repair of DNA. A
deeper understanding of the thermodynamics of information processing will
suggest strategies for the synthesis and improvement of programmable artificial
molecular machines. The PI will also analyze how microscopic systems respond to
time-dependent variations in temperature, chemical conditions and laser light.
This research aims to advance the ability to manipulate events on the scale of
molecules in a controlled manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities funded by
this award will prepare graduate students and postdocs for the challenges of
research in rapidly evolving topics at the intersection of physics, chemistry
and biology.