* 1206745
* Micellular Electrospray Synthesis of Magnetic Quantum Dots
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Jeffrey Chalmers, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2016
* USD 340,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1206745 PI: Winter, Jessica ORG: Ohio State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Micellular Electrospray Synthesis of
Magnetic Quantum Dots&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: This research
will examine new synthesis routes to unite quantum dots and magnetic
nanoparticles. These magnetic quantum dots are fluorescent and respond to a
magnetic field and could thus be used in a variety of applications, including
multimodal imaging, separations, and studies of the role of force in cell
function. These nanocomposites will be produced by combining a bottom up
assembly strategy (micellular self-assembly) with a top down process
(electrohydrodynamic spraying). In the proposed approach, electrospray will
generate continuous, uniform, large surface area emulsion droplets that will be
transformed to micelles via their interfacial instability with water. Because
the morphology of electrospray particles is tightly controlled, micellular
electrospray should enable greater process control and improved particle
uniformity, reproducibility, and scale. Given that electrospray has not
previously been used to examine micellular structures, we will first explore the
influence of reaction conditions on empty micelle production, and then
investigate the influence of nanoparticle loading on micelles. Particles
produced will be characterized through single nanocomposite analysis techniques.
Single particle magnetic characterization at the nanoscale has not previously
been demonstrated. This approach could be applied to virtually any hydrophobic
structure smaller than the micelle core, thus producing a wide variety of
nanocomposites. These studies will also increase understanding of micelle-
nanoparticle assemblies, which are distinct from empty micelles or micelles
encapsulating molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: This research
will be executed by diverse teams of graduate, undergraduate, and high school
researchers. Research results will be disseminated through a unique educational
strategy that combines teaching and outreach to develop course materials and
experimental demonstrations for K-14 students. Additionally, the proposed work
will be incorporated into an educational video game developed by non-profit
partner EdHeads to increase K-12 STEM and nanotechnology awareness.