* 1206208
* Adsorption on Individual Carbon Nanotubes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* David Cobden, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 06/30/2017
* USD 580,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This project will pursue experiments to
investigate fundamental aspects of the behavior of matter in low dimensions,
such as the dynamics of phase transitions in one or two dimensions. It will also
investigate methodically the interactions between atoms adsorbed on a carbon
surface and electrons in that surface, which is of wide-reaching relevance to
uses of graphitic carbon in sensing, filtration, and storage of gases and of
electrical charge. The technique used is to adsorb atomic and molecular layers
on individual single-walled carbon nanotubes suspended like miniature guitar
strings. The change in vibrational frequency due to mass loading yields the
density of atoms to near atomic precision while the effect on the current along
the nanotube simultaneously reveals the effect of the atoms on the electrons
with better than single-electron precision. The approach will in due course be
extended to lower temperatures where exotic quantum fluid and solid behavior may
occur confined to the cylindrical geometry of the nanotube surface, and also to
graphene and other substrates. The project will support the education of two PhD
students and several undergraduates in the wide range of techniques and
principles of nanoscale physics and
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Carbon materials play crucial roles in many technologies,
such as filtering, gas storage, and lithium ion batteries, which rely on the
interactions of the surface of the carbon with atoms and molecules. Those
interactions are complex and surprisingly poorly understood. This project will
pursue experiments on the nanoscale that will allow far more precise and
methodical determination and understanding of the interactions than has been
possible before. The technique involves exposing carbon-nanotube "nanoguitar
transistors" and later graphene "nanodrums" to gases at carefully controlled
temperature and pressure. By measuring the change in pitch of the nanoguitar or
drum, the number of atoms stuck to the surface can be accurately measured, while
at the same time by measuring changes in the electrical resistance the
interaction with the electrons can be determined with extraordinary precision.
On the other hand, the same techniques will be employed at very low temperatures
to investigate the fundamental physics of superfluidity and quantum confinement
of matter restricted to the surface of a long thin cylinder. The project will be
carried out by two PhD students and several undergraduates who will be
familiarized with the wide range of techniques and principles of nanoscale
physics and nanotechnology.