* 1206394
* Digitization PEN:   Digitization of North American Bryophyte and Lichen Specimens from Florida Herbaria
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Norris Williams, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2016
* USD 92,757.00

ABSTRACT: Digitization PEN: Digitization of North American Bryophyte and Lichen
Specimens from Five Florida Herbaria This award joins the ongoing Thematic
Collections Network project on North American Lichens and Bryophytes: Sensitive
Indicators of Environmental Quality and Change. In this Network, individual
projects provide extensive documentation on the role of bryophytes and lichens
in ecosystems, groups known to be sensitive to the immediate microhabitat and to
environmental changes of many kinds, both physical and chemical, and which
respond rapidly to such changes. Bryophytes and lichens have been featured in
studies of acid rain, climate warming or drying, grazing pressure, water
quality, and ecological continuity. The addition of specimen data from Florida
herbaria to the ongoing TCN Lichen/Bryophyte database will significantly enhance
holdings from Florida. Additionally, models developed from these digitized data
will aid future mapping projections of large scale species distributions and
identification of biodiversity hotspots as prime candidates for protection. The
environment in Florida is experiencing rapid change due to development and
climate change. These data will help to elucidate regions where changes are
imminent and likely to have substantial impact in Florida. The data will also
facilitate proactive initiatives to alleviate such changes. Florida includes
subtropical and tropical communities, contrasting with the temperate and boreal
communities represented in more northern herbaria that are part of the Network.

To provide training for future workers the award will fund one graduate student
to coordinate and manage the project and will fund the supervision and training
of two or more undergraduate students to perform label imaging/digitization. The
Florida Museum of Natural History and the University of Florida has utilized a
small number of highly skilled volunteers for many years, and with this project
we will be integrating volunteers into the museum community, and we will
increase public awareness of the importance of these organisms and their
responses to climate change. This award is made as part of the National Resource
for Digitization of Biological Collections through the Advancing Digitization of
Biological Collections program and all data resulting from this award will be
available through the national resource (iDigBio.org).