* 1206215
* Studies of Supersolidity in Solid 4He
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2019
* John Reppy, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 05/31/2019
* USD 520,150.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The recent discovery of a "supersolid"
phase in solid 4He at temperatures below 200mK by the Eunsong Kim and Moses Chan
provides the realization of a prediction made more than a quarter of a century
ago. The initial suggestion for a supersolid state in crystalline 4He is based
on the possibility that Bose-Einstein condensation might occur in solid helium
at sufficiently low temperatures. It is crucial to establish whether or not the
supersolid state represents a new type of superfluid. In an attempt to clarify
this issue several approaches will be pursued. First, the hydrodynamics of the
supersolid will be examined in non-circular geometries where the predicted
behavior based on ordinary superfluid hydrodynamics is clear. Second, multiple
frequency compound oscillators will be used to distinguish a true superfluid
from effects arising from the anomaly, discovered by Day and Beamish, in the low
temperature properties of the elastic shear modulus. Third, the question of the
existence of a thermodynamic phase transition to the supersolid state will be
addressed through measurement of the expected heat capacity anomaly associated
with the transition utilizing ultra sensitive SQUID technology. This project is
expected to involve one to two undergraduate students who should profit greatly
from working in a fast evolving area at the current forefront of condensed
matter research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;One of the most exciting recent discoveries in condensed
matter physics has been the observation of the so-called "supersolid" state at
temperatures only a few tenths of a degree above absolute zero. This supersolid
state has the remarkable property that a fraction of a helium solid can actually
pass through itself as a frictionless flow provide the temperature is low
enough. This property of the supersolid is counterintuitive and is at odds with
our instinctive concept of a solid. The supersolid may be another example of a
superfluid system to take its place beside the previously know superfluids;
superfluid 3He and 4He, superconducting electrons, and the superfluids observed
in low density trapped atomic gases. One of the most important questions to be
addressed is whether the supersolid phenomena thus far observed is actual a true
superfluid state in solid helium or is it a manifestation of the unusual elastic
properties of the solid know to appear in the same temperature region as the
supersolid phenomenon. This research project will address this question on
several fronts. The approach asks the question, does the superfluid obey
superfluid hydrodynamics and can the effects of elasticity be separated from
those of a superfluid by multi-frequency experiments? The second approach will
examine the nature of the phase transition to the supersolid state by a ultra
sensitive heat capacity measurement utilizing state-of-the-art superconducting
technology. These projects will involve several undergraduate students and will
give them a head start in scientific research.