* 1206010
* Confinement in Electrospun Polymer-Based Nanocomposites, with Research Opportunities for Deaf and Hard of Hearing Interns
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Peggy Cebe, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2016
* USD 550,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Using the electrospinning (ES) technique for processing nano-scale fibers, the
effect of confinement on fundamental physical and structural properties will be
investigated. Confinement refers to restrictions on the mobility of the polymer
chains brought about by addition of fixed barriers inside the fibers. Besides
the crystals of the polymer, additives such as carbon nanotubes, organically
modified silicates, or silica, lead to formation of nanocomposites in which
these nanofillers also serve as fixed barriers leading to chain confinement. The
relaxation properties of the nanocomposite are altered, leading to beneficial
improvement of properties, for example an increase in the use temperature, and
an increase in the mechanical modulus. The phase structure and physical
properties of ES polymer-based nanocomposites will be studied as they relate to
the fiber orientation, degree of crystallinity, filler type, and amount. The
objectives are to: 1. Provide fundamental understanding about the relationship
between crystals or nanofillers and the non-crystalline portions of the
semicrystalline electrospun nanocomposite fibers, especially through new methods
of quasi-isothermal heat capacity analysis and fast scanning chip calorimetry;
2. Correlate the fiber properties (e.g., diameter, crystallinity, chain
orientation, filler type, amount, and dispersion) to the degree of constraint;
and 3. Separate the confining effects of the filler from those of the crystals.
Techniques to be used in the work include high precision, high accuracy heat
capacity measurements by temperature modulated differential scanning calorimetry
to quantify the level of confinement. For the first time, the techniques of fast
scanning chip calorimetry on ES fibers (through international collaboration with
the Schick group in Rostock, Germany) will be applied to study homogeneous
nucleation in ES fibers. Also for the first time, dielectric relaxation
spectroscopy (DRS) will be used to characterize the dipolar relaxations of ES
fibers. These studies will provide a knowledge base which will enhance the use
of ES fiber materials in technologically important areas such as non-woven
textiles, regenerative medicine, and transport and catalysis.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Non-woven membranes will be created using very small diameter fibers, on the
nano-scale, by applying a high electric field to a solution containing polymer
and additives (such as carbon nanotubes or clay). Nanofibers formed this way are
stronger and more heat resistant compared to conventional large diameter fibers.
The processing conditions and nature of the additive will be varied to see which
combinations yield nanofibers with the best properties. These non-woven fabrics
are candidate materials for use as filtration membranes, in catalysis, for drug
delivery, and as a component of smart clothing materials. Both national and
international collaborations have been established for conducting this research
using specialty equipment and novel processing conditions. To provide research
opportunities for students with disabilities, four deaf and hard of hearing
undergraduate students will participate in an internship, and perform research
on the project during the summer months. These interns will learn to make the
non-woven nanofibers, heat treat them, and study their physical properties.