* 1206120
* Variability of Tropical Elongated Convergence Zones
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Gudrun Magnusdottir, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2016
* USD 539,798.00

Intertropical convergence zones (ITCZs) are narrow, zonally elongated regions of
enhanced precipitation which can be identified near the equator over all ocean
basins in time-averaged plots of precipitation, cloudiness, and surface wind
convergence. In addition, an elongated region of enhanced mean precipitation
known as the South Pacific Convergence Zone (SPCZ) extends across the Western
Pacific to the south of the equator, with a somewhat southeastward orientation.
This project examines the variability in the aereal coverage and location of
these features using a novel spatial-temporal statistical model that will be
applied to various datasets including a recently available high-resolution
30-year satellite dataset. The statistical method is a Markov random field (MRF)
model, which identifies pixels contained in an ITCZ based on the clustering of
ITCZ pixels in space and time. The MRF model is used to examine the variability
of ITCZs caused by transient phenomena including easterly waves, extratropical
disturbances, and the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO). Research on the impact of
extratropical disturbances focuses in particular on the role of these
disturbances in creating the conditions for intense moisture transport in
"atmospheric rivers". Research on easterly waves seeks to determine the
proportions of such waves which propagate through an ITCZ without interaction,
become immersed in the ITCZ, or result in the breakup of a well-formed ITCZ.
Other issues of interest include the formation of double-ITCZs, parallel to each
other on either side of the equator, which occur in nature but are greatly
exaggerated in many climate models, and the relationship between ITCZs and
underlying sea surface temperatures. In addition to the MRF model and other
observational diagnostic tools, the project uses a regional climate model (RCM)
to simulate ITCZ behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The behavior of ITCZs is of
practical importance as well as theoretical interest, as ITCZ variability is
associated with El Nino events, the MJO, and atmospheric rivers, all of which
have implications for severe weather in the United States. In addition, the work
provides education and training for two graduate students, who will be trained
in both atmospheric science and statistical modeling, thereby contributing to
the development of an interdisciplinary science workforce. The two students also
participate in an outreach and education program for elementary and middle
school children, known as the Climate Literacy Empowerment and iNquiry program.