* 1206259
* Functional Polymer Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Kenneth Wynne, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2015
* USD 430,800.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is aimed at generating
polymer surfaces with novel or improved function by an approach that insures
compositional economy and facile, conventional processing. Desired surface
functions will be generated via a modifier that spontaneously concentrates at
the surface based on synthetic approaches to be used in this project. The focus
will be modification of soft polymer surfaces, including polyurethanes and
silicones. Such research is challenging because of high nanoscale mobility for
near-surface polymer chains that can drive phase separation and negate surface
modification. Recently, a new hybrid bottlebrush-nanoglass (BB-NG) strategy has
resulted in restriction of near-surface modifier chain mobility. Thus, BB-NG
surface modification will be a primary focus of future research. Preliminary
results with a modified polyurethane system indicate stable surface-concentrated
quaternary charge. Zeta potentials are being investigated to test the limits of
charge stability. Another result suggests broad applicability for BB-NG
modifiers. BB-NG modification for a hybrid fluorooxetane system led to an
unexpected self-layered soft surface/ tough bulk. This unusual compositional
stratification will be the subject of further research, as initial results show
very low ice adhesion. Potential applications include coatings for wind turbines
and power lines. Finally, new ways to introduce surface function into silicones
will be explored that also involve balancing desired surface function and near-
surface phase separation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This research is aimed at introducing special
surface properties into conventional polymers that are commonly encountered in
coated or molded objects. For example, incorporating a small amount of surface
modifier is leading to coatings with combinations of desirable properties such
as oil and water resistance as well as easy release of ice. Such coatings may
have applications for coating power lines, airplane wings and wind turbine
blades. Broader impacts of this research will include interdisciplinary training
and curriculum development. Another impact is the participation of
underrepresented minorities in the research program by collaboration with
Virginia State University. On a national level, support for this research will
facilitate K-12 leadership activities that bring new knowledge to high school
and secondary school teachers who, in turn, will incorporate this knowledge into
classroom science instruction. Internationally, collaborative activities with
Japan and Italy have led to productive student exchanges and will continue
through this project.