* 1206337
* GOALI: Design of Crystal Growth Inhibitors for Kidney Xenostones
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Michael Ward, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2016
* USD 480,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program
unites research scientists from New York University and Afferent Pharmaceuticals
to investigate the crystal growth of a family of small molecules, first in class
P2X3 receptor antagonists, administered as an oral formulation, which are being
developed as novel treatments for poorly managed chronic pain, including that
arising from cancer, arthritis and visceral disorders. Although these materials
exhibit promising therapeutic potential, animal studies performed by Afferent
have demonstrated that the compounds are renally cleared and thus concentrated
in urine, and can crystallize in the kidney and ureter. These "xenostones"
(i.e., foreign stones) have potential to obstruct urine egress from the kidney,
which if present clinically can pose a risk to patients. The potential for this
adverse side effect is expected to be worse in the event that high dosages are
required for optimum therapeutic effect. The NYU-Afferent team will employ real-
time in situ atomic force microscopy to investigate the crystal growth modes for
these materials at the near-molecular level, providing the information necessary
for selection of crystal growth inhibitors drawn from a large and structurally
diverse library of Afferent compounds. Such analogs could act as "molecular
imposters", binding to select crystal growth sites through molecular recognition
and thereby blocking the approach of xenostone solute molecules from these and
surrounding growth sites. As such, the project provides a unique opportunity to
develop fully the molecular imposter principle for crystal growth inhibition and
expand understanding of crystal growth at the molecular level. The deliverable
of the proposed project will be a crystal growth inhibitor selected from a
diverse library of congeners with molecular structures that mimic promising lead
P2X3 receptor antagonists. Compounds identified as the best inhibitors in vitro
will be tested by Afferent for their in vivo efficacy through separate Afferent
funding.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The motivation for this project is driven by its potential impact on human
health through a research plan that encompasses fundamental organic solid-state
chemistry subjects, including solid-state structure, crystal growth, defects and
dislocations, and crystal growth inhibition at the nanoscale. Specifically, the
aim is to identify crystal growth inhibitors - to be included eventually in
pharmaceutical formulations along with an active pharmaceutical ingredient (API)
- that will mitigate crystallization of the API in the upper urinary tract
(kidney and ureter), which poses a considerable risk to patients. If successful,
the project will provide unique formulations for poorly managed chronic pain,
including that arising from cancer, arthritis and visceral disorders. The
project hinges on a collaboration between investigators from New York University
and Afferent Pharmaceuticals. As such, graduate students involved in the project
will benefit from increased awareness of the industrial sector, particularly the
pharmaceutical arena, and of the increasing recognition of the importance of
materials science in pharmaceuticals. Moreover, students will enjoy a unique
opportunity to pursue fundamental research tethered to a practical outcome with
clear societal impact. The NYU PI has been hosting a high school student each
summer through the American Chemical Society Project SEED program, providing a
research experience for an economically disadvantaged student each summer. This
GOALI project will provide such students with an additional benefit, namely a
view into the industrial sector. As Director of the NYU Materials Science and
Engineering Center and a co-PI on the Xavier-NYU Partnership for Research in
Materials and Education, the PI hosts undergraduates and faculty from minority-
serving institutions for summer research experiences, and the participation of
these undergraduates in this project also will be encouraged. The PI anticipates
co-organizing an East Coast Solid State Chemistry Symposium designed to elevate
skills and confidence among graduate students and postdocs in scientific
communication, which is essential for their professional development as career
scientists.