* 1206202
* Understanding the Design and Conduction of Materials for Organic Electronics at the Molecular Level
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Latha Venkataraman, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2015
* USD 525,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program
(EPM) in the Division of Materials Research (DMR) and the Chemical Structure,
Dynamics and Mechanisms Program (CSDM) in the Division of Chemistry
(CHE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Organic materials as
alternates to standard silicon-based semiconductors are fast becoming viable in
areas of flexible electronics, sensors and photovoltaics. However, the physical
mechanism by which charge transfer occurs in relation to the chemical structure
in these systems is not well understood. In this project, important
architectural elements of polymers that exhibit the best performance in organic
electronics and photovoltaics are dissected to their molecular analogues to
study their electronic and photo-induced transport characteristics at the
single-molecule level. A series of oligomeric thiophenes are analyzed as
analogues of polythiophene and its derivatives to understand the transport
characteristics as a function of chemical structure. The scanning tunneling
microscope-based break-junction technique is used to measure single-molecule
charge transport characteristics and to probe photoconductivity in single-
molecule junctions. Finally, analysis to correlate results from single-molecule
transport measurements to bulk organic semiconducting device characteristics is
used, enabling a multi-scale approach to understanding structure and function of
efficient organic semiconductors. Through a combination of synthesis and
measurements at the single-molecule level, this project provides molecular
design rules for the development of novel materials used for organic electronics
and photovoltaics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: There is a
need to understand the governing factors enabling the development of organic
semiconductor materials with advanced transport properties to complement their
inorganic counterparts. This project bridges the gap between the single-molecule
electronic structure components of polymeric semiconductors that exhibit high
mobilities and photovoltaic characteristics. Using the fundamental understanding
gained from single-molecule experiments enables the design of a new class of
materials, which are tested in single molecule junctions as well as device
architectures. In addition to developing new compounds that impact organic
electronics, an integral part of the project introduces interdisciplinary
science to high school, undergraduate and graduate students, aiming to instill a
desire to pursue careers in science. The nature of the project requires a close
collaboration between the graduate students in the Venkataraman and Campos
groups, from Applied Physics and Chemistry. A focus of the PIs is also to
recruit undergraduate women and/or minority students to participate in the
research and prepare them as competitive applicants for graduate school in the
sciences. Finally, basic concepts in organic electronics are adapted for
demonstrations at schools in Manhattan.