* 1206356
* Crystal Structure, Ionic Conduction, and Electrochemistry of Novel Garnet Oxides Li5+x+2yLa3Ta2-x-yZrxScyO12
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2017
* Wei Lai, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2017
* USD 405,099.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The liquid electrolytes in the state-of-the-art
lithium ion batteries contain volatile and flammable organic solvents and have
raised safety concerns over the wide adoption of these batteries in large-scale
applications. In contrast, solid electrolytes with high ionic conductivity and
stability could potentially revolutionize the battery design and provide
superior safety. This project studies the fundamental structure-property
relation of a new family of solid electrolytes, namely lithium garnet oxides. A
better understanding of the structure of these complex oxides will provide
insight into the ionic conduction path and provide guidance in the search for
other high performance materials. This project also enables a unique Materials
in Batteries Around You (MBAY) outreach program to inspire the interests of K-12
students in the materials science and engineering principles involved in
batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This project aims to study
the crystal structure, ionic conduction, and electrochemistry of a new family of
lithium garnet oxides, Li(5+x+2y)La(3)Ta(2-x-y)Zr(x)Sc(y)O(12) covering lithium
content per formula from 5 to 9. The scientific goal is to find the effect of
the total lithium content and lithium disorder in tetrahedral/octahedral sites
on the ionic conduction mechanisms, through a combined experimental and modeling
effort. The average structure and local structure is being studied by the Bragg
scattering (Rietveld refinement) and diffuse scattering (pair distribution
function). This total scattering investigation, along with a novel mean-field
energetic modeling approach, is helping to unravel the atomistic features of
lithium disorder and conduction mechanisms in these complex oxides. The
electrochemical performance of these oxides is being evaluated as solid
electrolytes in lithium batteries. This project provides multidisciplinary
research activities for students at both the graduate and undergraduate levels
and could enable the discovery of solid electrolytes essential to a renewable
energy future.