* 1206728
* Order, Topology and Transport in Quantum Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Ashvin Vishwanath, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 320,000.00

Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
and education on quantum condensed matter. It seeks to deepen our understanding
of novel quantum states of matter that emerge in many body systems, and to
identify experimental signatures and realizations in solids and ultracold
quantum gases. While the Landau paradigm of condensed matter accounts for
conventional metals and broken symmetry states, here the focus is largely on
phases that lie beyond this framework. For example, topological insulators and
Weyl semi-metals are phases that admit a description in terms of non-interacting
particles, but they possess certain characteristic topological properties.
Transport of charge, energy and momentum in the presence of external
perturbations are expected to reveal fundamental properties of such phases.
These and the interplay with conventional orders, in particular topological
defects such as vortices and domain walls, are proposed for study in the first
part of this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second part of this project
addresses strongly correlated topological phases. Promising experimental regimes
to realize them, such as flat bands of frustrated lattices and frustrated
quantum magnets, will be investigated. Theoretical studies on analogues of
fractional quantum Hall states, as well as generalizations to three dimensions
are also proposed. Pinpointing the subtle correlations that characterize such
states requires new probes, in particular those that can measure non-local
properties. Proposing and evaluating such approaches will form the third focus
area of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the
education of a graduate student and a postdoctoral research associate at the
frontiers of modern theoretical condensed matter physics. The PI will develop a
new graduate-level course that cuts across traditional disciplines and
integrates the methods and results from the research above. The results will
also be disseminated via public lectures and non-technical summaries posted on a
public website. From a technological perspective, the novel properties of the
quantum states of matter to be investigated in this project can potentially lead
to discovery of new materials with useful functionalities and future
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NonTechnical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on novel states of condensed matter systems. Although quantum
mechanical laws govern the microscopic building blocks of matter, the properties
observed on a macroscopic scale are often classical; the magnetization of an
iron-based magnet being one well-known example. More recently, however,
attention has been focused on states of matter which are intrinsically quantum
mechanical even at the macroscopic scale, such as "quantum Hall states" as well
as "quantum spin liquids" which are actively being sought for in magnetic
materials. A key feature of these novel phases is a long range entanglement that
is a unique feature intrinsic to quantum mechanical behavior. In this project,
the PI and his group will seek to deepen our understanding of such states of
matter in order to determine promising arenas for their realization and to
propose experimental tests that would signal their presence. It is hoped that
these advances in our understanding will eventually lead to a better control
over these novel states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the
education of a graduate student and a postdoctoral research associate at the
frontiers of modern theoretical condensed matter physics. The PI will develop a
new graduate-level course that cuts across traditional disciplines and
integrates the methods and results from the research above. The results will
also be disseminated via public lectures and non-technical summaries posted on a
public website. From a technological perspective, the novel properties of the
quantum states of matter to be investigated in this project can potentially lead
to discovery of new materials with useful functionalities and future
applications.