* 1206614
* Pan-Pacific Advanced Studies Institute. Genomic Applications to Marine Science and Resource Management  in SE Asia
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2014
* Kent Carpenter, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Akaysha Tang
* 02/28/2014
* USD 98,993.00

Title: Pan-Pacific Advanced Studies Institute. Genomic Applications to Marine
Science and Resource Management in Southeast Asia&lt;br/&gt;Abstract
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The emerging field of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) is
expanding capabilities for cutting-edge scientific genomic research, with
applications that can improve sustainable management of natural resources. This
Advanced Study Institute will draw together leading scientists from both sides
of the Pacific to understand the potential of the emerging field of NGS to
marine science and resource management in Southeast Asia. It aims to build on
the knowledge gained by traditional Sanger sequencing methods that are beginning
to identify corroborated patterns of marine population structure in the
Southeast Asian region. These patterns test hypotheses about the ecological and
evolutionary origins of the high marine biodiversity in the region and provide
guidelines on how to protect and sustainably manage these resources. Advanced
genomics has demonstrated potential to greatly enhance this line of research.
Participants will come together from Southeast Asia and the United States to
present lectures, guide computer tutorials, and hear from experts in next
generation molecular ecology with an emphasis on marine ecology, conservation
genetics, and resource management. The institute will focus on six main topics:
a) Genetic diversity in natural populations, phylogeography, and applications to
marine management in Southeast Asia; b) Genetics of local adaptation; c) Genomic
signatures of natural selection; d) Functional ecology based on global gene
expression profiling; e) Restriction-site Associated DNA sequencing (RAD-seq)
approaches to marine and conservation sciences; and f) Single Nucleotide
Polymorphisms versus microsatellites in population ecology. Synthesis workshops
will recommend a program of NGS applications to marine science and resource
management in Southeast Asia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The success of this
institute will pave the way for future workshops spanning the Pacific basin. It
will demonstrate how a collaborative research base can be catalyzed between
scientists in the United States and Southeast Asia This broader impact will work
synergistically with the overarching goals of research and education started by
the ongoing National Science Foundation -supported Coral Triangle-PIRE project.
The Coral Triangle-PIRE project objectives of training a new international
cohort of young scientists focused on Southeast Asia and of establishing long-
lasting research collaborations will be directly amplified by this institute.
The institute will help to dissolve barriers for United States researchers in
Southeast Asian countries, while facilitating the transfer of cutting-edge and
powerful molecular ecology methodologies to emerging research teams and
institutes in these countries. Such exchanges will allow developing nations to
benefit rapidly from these advances that will help preserve imperiled food
stocks and centers of biodiversity.