* 1206039
* RUI: Precision Muon Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2012,11/30/2015
* Frederick Gray, Regis University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Hicks
* 11/30/2015
* USD 142,000.00

This award will enable the Regis University nuclear physics group to make
substantial contributions to two precision muon physics experiments over the
next three years: the MuSun measurement of nuclear muon capture in deuterium at
the Paul Scherrer Institute (PSI), and the Muon g-2 experiment at Fermilab. The
MuSun collaboration will measure the rate of muon capture on the deuteron from
the doublet spin state of the muonic deuterium atom to a precision of better
than 1.5%. This will be the most precise determination to date, by an order of
magnitude, of the rate for any two-nucleon weak-interaction process. The Regis
group will develop low-power preamplifier circuits that will function in the
cryogenic environment of this experiment, implement the response of the detector
in the simulation software framework, and participate in the physics analysis.
The Muon g-2 experiment will measure the anomalous magnetic moment of the muon
to a precision of 0.15 parts per million (ppm), a substantial improvement from
the 0.5 ppm that has been achieved in previous measurements. The current result
disagrees with the prediction of the Standard Model by more than three standard
deviations: enough to hint at the possibility of "new physics,'' but not yet
enough to claim a discovery. This is one of a very small number of observables
that cannot be understood in the context of the current Standard Model, and it
provides an important constraint on extensions to it. The Regis group's initial
responsibility will be to test, refurbish, and modernize the scintillating fiber
beam monitors that are used to record the dynamic motion of the beam.

The Muon g-2 experiment has the potential to uncover entirely new particles and
interactions, perhaps even before they can be directly observed in experiments
at the energy frontier. Similarly, the MuSun measurement will enable a precise
characterization of proton-proton fusion, which is responsible for releasing
energy in stars like our Sun, and also of the reactions that have been used by
the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory to detect solar neutrinos. This science is at
the forefront of subatomic physics, and a primary purpose of this award is to
allow undergraduate students to become involved in it as research assistants.
Regis University is a teaching-focused, primarily-undergraduate institution that
is currently initiating formal majors in physics and computational physics as
part of an ambitious expansion of its traditional liberal-arts programs. This
award will complement the University's undergraduate research initiative,
strengthening our students' education in mathematics, the sciences, and
computing. Several students will be able to travel to PSI and Fermilab to
participate in the construction and data collection for these experiments.
Travel to collaboration meetings, for collaborative work with research
university partners, and to academic conferences will also be supported.