* 1206351
* Shear Jamming, Diffusion, Reversibility, Anisotropy, and Fluctuations in Dense Granular Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Robert Behringer, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2018
* USD 820,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This project involves novel experiments to
understand the dynamical, static and statistical properties of granular
materials near jamming. These materials are of great technical importance, yet
their properties remain poorly understood. The Duke group and collaborators at
Brandeis, recently showed that near-jamming properties of frictional granular
systems are much richer than previously thought, and exhibit an order-disorder
transition, shear jamming, involving complex networks of contacts and forces.
This project explores these networks, the physical processes involved in their
formation, and the impact that these networks and processes have on static and
dynamical granular properties. Experiments in two and three dimensions, using
novel photoelastic and laser scanning techniques, will address several issues:
1) structural and mechanical properties of granular materials near shear jamming
and their dynamical response to strain; 2) the role of friction in shear
jamming; 3) variables needed for a good statistical characterization of states
near jamming; 4) particle dynamics, diffusive motion, and time scales near
(shear) jamming; 5) near-jamming rheological response of granular material; 6)
differentiation in the structure and response of 3D vs. 2D granular systems.
Post-docs, Ph.D. students and undergraduates will be actively involved at all
stages of research. The PI, post-docs and students will be actively involved in
outreach to elementary and middle schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-
Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Sand, cereal, salt, and pills are commonplace
examples of a special type of matter, granular materials. Besides being part of
daily life, granular materials, e.g. coal, grain, plastic feed stock, among many
others, form a large part of our economy. They have properties that are both
fascinating and poorly understood. Under the right conditions, they flow like a
fluid, but they also can become solid and support weight. The fluid-like to
solid-like transition is particularly important for practical applications, and
it is the focus of the present project which focuses on fundamental questions.
The solid granular state is controlled by networks of inter-grain contacts. In
recent work, the PI and collaborators at Brandeis showed that these networks,
which control the fluid-solid jamming transition, have much richer and more
novel properties than was previously thought. This project seeks to understand
the mechanisms leading to the formation of the networks, and the impact that
these mechanisms have on both fluid and solid granular states. This project
integrates training at all levels. Ph.D. students and post-docs learn by leading
research projects. Undergraduate and high school students routinely participate
via related projects. The PI, Ph.D. students and post-docs are actively involved
in outreach involving elementary and middle school students. The PI is also
actively involved with technology transfer through interactions with industrial
users of granular materials, for instance through the International Fine
Particle Research Institute.