* 1206774
* FRUSTRATED MAGNETISM IN SPIN-ORBIT COUPLED MATERIALS
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Oleg Starykh, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 270,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
aimed at achieving a fundamental understanding of various frustrated quantum
magnets, both of localized and itinerant kind. It consists of three research
directions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) The first addresses the unusual features of
the magnetization process of frustrated antiferromagnets, and in particular the
appearance and the stability of magnetization plateau phases in the system of
strongly correlated, but itinerant, electrons on a triangular lattice. The PI
and his group will study the transition to the metallic state at fixed
magnetization and explore the sensitivity of the quantum critical point
separating the co-planar and cone phases with respect to exchange anisotropy and
interlayer interactions between spins as well as the magnitude of the
microscopic spin. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) The second direction is devoted to
exploiting spin-orbital interactions, which are always present in experimental
materials of interest, in order to probe fractionalized spinon excitations of
the spin-liquid ground states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3) The third direction
consists of the development and application of a novel numerical approach,
called Diagrammatic Monte Carlo, to finite temperature properties of frustrated
antiferromagnets. This method is free from the finite-size effect which severely
restricts more traditional numerical approaches and is expected to open a new
route for describing the cooperative paramagnetic states of experimentally
relevant materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the PI's
educational activities that are closely tied with the outlined research plan.
These include the training and education of graduate and undergraduate students
in analytical and numerical condensed matter physics. In addition, the PI will
develop a novel graduate course, Physics of Modern Materials, that is aimed at
exposing the students to newest developments in condensed matter physics. The PI
will continue to maintain a research website which summarizes the main research
developments in terms accessible to graduate students as well as to professional
colleagues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research aimed at achieving a fundamental
understanding of "frustrated" magnetic materials. Frustration is a technical
term used to describe situations when different microscopic elements, such as
microscopic magnetic moments inside a magnetic material, are unable to find
equilibrium configurations in which all members of the ensemble have minimal
possible energy contributions. Thus, a finite fraction of microscopic moments
can be viewed as being constantly "on the move" to look for a more satisfactory
arrangement, which never materializes. This situation leads to the appearance of
very unusual magnetic structures and peculiar quantum dynamics which persists
over a wide range of temperatures, magnetic fields and other experimentally
controlled external parameters. The PI will use analytical methods and develop
new numerical techniques to explore a variety of fundamentally important
frustrated magnet systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the
PI's educational activities that are tied closely with the outlined research
plan. These include the training and education of graduate and undergraduate
students in analytical and numerical condensed matter physics. In addition, the
PI will develop a novel graduate course, Physics of Modern Materials, that is
aimed at exposing the students to newest developments in condensed matter
physics. The PI will continue to maintain a research website which summarizes
the main research developments in terms accessible to graduate students as well
as to professional colleagues.