* 1206111
* Elementary Particle Physics Using High Energy Colliders
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Henry Lubatti, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 05/31/2015
* USD 2,476,000.00

The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN has produced 5 inverse femtobarns of
collision data to date and the data set is expected to increase to 15 inverse
femtobarns by the end of 2012. The University of Washington Experimental
Particle Physics group, a member of the ATLAS collaboration, is continuing an
ambitious program to take full advantage of the unprecedented discovery
potential of the LHC. The research is focused mainly on the search for the
mechanism of Electroweak Symmetry Breaking (EWSB). In the Standard Model (SM) as
well as in Supersymmetric (SUSY) extensions of the SM, the Higgs mechanism is
the most compelling explanation of EWSB. The Washington research program
addresses this open question from two directions: searches for a low-mass SM
Higgs and for the neutral SUSY Higgs bosons using decays into tau leptons; and
searches for non-standard light Higgs decays to neutral particles that can be
long-lived. In addition to the ATLAS physics program, the group continues to
expand its contributions to the ATLAS detector and software. The group designed,
built and commissioned a large part of the ATLAS forward muon chambers and has
significant responsibilities in the operations and online and offline data
quality assurance of the muon system. Group members are active participants in
the fabrication of the IBL (Insertable Barrel Layer) for the ATLAS pixel
detector and will participate in the IBL installation in 2013-14. The group also
continues to be strongly involved in the development of b-quark tagging and muon
triggering algorithms and the reconstruction and identification of tau-leptons.

The program at the University of Washington provides a significant opportunity
for undergraduate training, an important feature given that UW has one of the
largest physics undergraduate programs in the country. The group plans to
continue its long tradition of involving undergraduates in all aspects of the
research work. Washington is also actively engaged in outreach efforts to local
high school teachers and students as part of the national QuarkNet program.
Notably, the Washington group has recently opened a new direction in its
QuarkNet participation by involving teachers and students in the analysis of
ATLAS data. Their commitment to broader education and outreach is also
demonstrated by the fact that one of the group's faculty members has recently
become a co-principal investigator of QuarkNet at the national level.