* 1206451
* Quantum State Resolved Spectroscopy of Excitonic and Multi-Excitonic Dynamics in Quantum Confined Nanostructures and Heterojunctions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* John Wright, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 07/31/2015
* USD 460,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiresonant Coherent Multidimensional
Spectroscopy (CMDS) is a new and potentially transformative approach for
characterizing complex nanostructures. It is based on using multiple tunable
laser beams to excite different quantum states to form multiple quantum
coherences (MQCs) that re-emit output beams during the time the MQCs retain
their quantum mechanical phase coherence. This program, supported by the NSF
Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program, uses the resonances with the
quantum states to create multidimensional signatures of the individual
substructures within complex nanostructures. It isolates the individual
coherence pathways that contribute to the output intensity and uses these
pathways to obtain the coherent and incoherent dynamics with quantum state
resolution. The coherent dynamics includes both dephasing interactions and
coherence transfer and the incoherent dynamics includes charge transfer and
population relaxation. The program is particularly interested in developing
methods for quantum state resolution of the charge transfer dynamics between
donor-acceptor substructures within larger nanostructures. The quantum states of
interest include the quantum confined excitonic and multiexcitonic states of the
substructures as well as surface states. The multidimensional spectra and the
coherent and incoherent dynamics of the multiexcitonic states identify the
mechanisms responsible for multiexciton generation (MEG). Higher order wave
mixing probes the potential energy surface of different energetic excitons.
Alternative CMDS methodologies include 3-color pathways and multiplex detection.
The nanostructures used in this program are simple, well-characterized model
systems that represent the different quantum confined substructures and
morphologies that are of interest in developing new nanotechnologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Providing the
energy required for the future is an enormous challenge that requires new
technologies that efficiently harvest solar energy and turn it into the
electrical power and solar fuels needed for growing economies. Nanotechnology is
a promising direction for providing this capability because the quantum effects
that occur at small dimensions provide opportunities for engineering complex
nanostructures that are efficient and robust solar converters. The small size of
these nanostructures dictates the creation of new technologies that can access
the individual quantum states within the individual substructures and follow the
flow of energy from the initial absorption of light to the final conversion into
electricity or solar fuels. The laser methods developed in this program will
provide these capabilities. Not only will this methodology define the
fundamental scientific principles controlling how the energy is harvested and
used but it will be disseminated to the wider scientific community through web
site tutorials, scientific conferences and public lectures, on-line course
materials, and the training of undergraduate and graduate students. The
dissemination will be transformative because this new methodology provides
deeper insights into how materials function and can address questions that
cannot be answered by current technologies.