* 1206636
* Revealing Exchange Interactions in Magnetic Bilayers at the Atomic Scale
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Arthur Smith, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 06/30/2016
* USD 450,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program
(EPM) and Condensed Matter Physics Program (CMP) in the Division of Materials
Research (DMR).

Technical Description: This project is aimed at exploring and revealing magnetic
exchange interaction mechanisms in magnetic bilayer systems down to atomic
scale. It includes three research components: 1) magnetic polarizability of
normally non-magnetic materials in contact with magnetic layers; 2) fundamental
origins of exchange bias; and 3) effects of long-range interactions in magnetic
bilayer systems. In all cases, spatial variations are of particular interest, as
a function of which exchange interactions may depend strongly. Bilayer ultra-
thin films are prepared using either molecular beam or pulsed laser epitaxy.
Following the materials synthesis step, the bilayer systems are studied using
the technique of spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy. Magnetic,
electronic, and topographical information down to the atomic scale is obtained
simultaneously from constant current images and from differential conductance
data by using magnetic probe tips. Comparing to theoretical calculations, the
results can provide new insights into the fundamentals of these important and
technologically impactful material systems.

Non-technical Description: In order to miniaturize devices further and further,
it is critical to have fundamental understanding of the underlying physics. A
general phenomenon called exchange coupling is at the heart of the most advanced
magnetic device technologies today. An important example is exchange bias, in
which two types of thin magnetic layers - a ferromagnetic and an
antiferromagnetic layer - are put into direct contact. This can result in a
unique behavior called hysteresis shift and increases in a parameter called the
coercivity. These effects underlie modern high-density read head technology; but
despite many theories designed to explain it, its ultimate origins remain a
mystery. In this project, by employing a magnetically sensitive probe technique
having atomic-scale resolution, scientists aim to unravel exchange coupling
effects, and hopefully to provide new insights which can have important impacts
on future magnetic technologies. The project also aims to provide key
educational and outreach opportunities for students ranging from K-12 through
the Ph.D. level. Both undergraduate and graduate students are active
participants in all phases of the project, on their way to becoming future
scientists. At the same time, two new outreach activities are undertaken - one
involving presentations in K-12 schools, the other involving after-school,
university-campus activities for K-12 students - whose overall purpose is to
inspire the children of Southeast Ohio to pursue science and engineering career
paths.