* 1206652
* Layer-Structured Semiconductor Alloys: Growth, Characterization, and Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2012,10/31/2015
* Hongxing Jiang, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 10/31/2015
* USD 450,000.00

Technical Description: This research project is to investigate layer-structured
(BN)x(C2)1-x semiconductor alloys with an emphasis on materials growth by metal
organic chemical vapor deposition, basic material properties studies, and
exploration of potential applications. (BN)x(C2)1-x semiconductor alloys
represent a unique material system for exploring the evolution of optical
properties from far infrared to deep ultraviolet and transport properties from
insulator to semi-metal in the same crystal structure. Research tasks include
the probe of fundamental optical and electrical properties such as the energy
bandgap and its variation with temperature and alloy composition, free, bound,
and localized exciton transitions, impurity energy levels, feasibility of n- and
p-type conductivity control, and carrier transport properties.&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical Description: The project trains postdoctoral researchers, graduate and
undergraduate students in the areas of novel materials growth, characterization,
nano-fabrication techniques and material/device processing using the state-of-
the-art facilities. (BN)x(C2)1-x material system has the potential to complement
nitride wide-bandgap semiconductors and carbon based nanostructured materials
and enable the realization of chip-scale multi-spectral light sources and
detectors and full spectral multi-junction solar cells. Ultimately, the
materials developed could have a major impact on energy, medical, security, and
communication.