* 1206695
* IEEE Life Sciences Grand Challenges Conference, October 4 - 5, 2012, Washington, DC
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Bin He, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 06/30/2014
* USD 25,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;1206695, He&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to organize
the IEEE Life Sciences Grant Challenges Conference, which is aimed at providing
a public platform for debate and exchange of ideas on how to engineer the life
sciences in a broad sense. The Conference will review significant progress that
have been made in the past decade and identify grand challenges facing the
scientific community in engineering life sciences and healthcare in the next 10
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful organization of the conference will
bring together leading scholars, government officials, representatives from
industry, and outstanding young investigators to discuss and identify critical
issues and challenges facing the biomedical engineering community and larger
society. The outcome of the conference will provide guidance to the scientific
community, government and industry with regard to how to engineer the future of
life sciences and healthcare. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed conference will
include a two-day workshop consisting of invited presentations and panel
discussions by leading scholars, government officials and representative from
industry both from the United States and other countries. General participants
are welcome but will be limited to up to a total of 200 participants. The two
days meeting will consist of a single session platform presentations and debates
on the six topics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A white paper summarizing the grand
challenges identified to the scientific community through the vast networks if
IEEE, to be published in one of the well circulated magazines such as IEEE
Spectrum, IEEE PLUSE, ort Science/Nature, and to the public via media
coverage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IEEE has strong international representations in
the global biomedical engineering community. It is anticipated that a
substantial portion of the participants will come from international community.
Every effort will be made to encourage the participation of women, racial/ethnic
minorities, and person with disabilities in the conference.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of
the conference will be to identify grant challenges facing the biomedical
engineering community in the next 10 years, provide guidance to the scientific
community, government and industry with regard t how to engineer the future of
life sciences and healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the meeting will include identification of important
challenges for the large society, broad dissemination of the conference outcome
via IEEE network and media coverage, publication of special issue in
international well-circulated magazine, and strong international participants.