* 1206784
* Nonadiabatic Transport in Quantum Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Andrei Kogan, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2017
* USD 348,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** This award supports experiments which will probe
dynamics of strongly interacting electronic states in nanostructures with the
goal of identifying characteristic time scales that separate adiabatic and non-
adiabatic regimes, and improving our understanding of non-adiabatic transport in
such systems. Using Kondo-correlated states in single-electron transistors as
the model, we will characterize transport through the device by measurements of
time-averaged current and by a direct measurement of the frequency-dependent SET
impedance, a complementary technique which is expected to provide a direct link
between experiments and theory. Dynamic aspects of transport in quantum point
contacts will be investigated, which will help further understand the role of
spin correlation in this fundamental mesoscopic system. The work will complement
existing studies of correlated dynamics in bulk materials and will benefit
researchers pursuing coherent control of elementary quantum states and those
interested in general aspects of quantum dynamics on the nanoscale. The proposed
project will integrate research and education goals by supporting the training
of a graduate student and undergraduates in modern science and technology,
developing teaching experiments for a new course on modern experimental methods
and the "physics of everyday life" online course, and offering a summer research
camp for a physics teacher and several students on experimental projects related
to the main program.

****Non-Technical Abstract**** Quantum mechanics describes behavior of small
building blocks of matter, such as electrons in conductors. Understanding
quantum behavior on the most basic scale which involves but a few electrons is
widely believed to lead to an improved ability to synthesize materials with
finely tailored properties and to advances in developing a fundamentally novel
class of electronic devices. One of the challenges is to find accurate methods
for predicting behavior of a quantum system that strongly interacts with its
environment. This project will focus on the quantum mechanics of a single
electronic spin embedded in a conductor, known as Kondo state, and investigate
how the state responds to a time-dependent perturbation. The combination of
strong interactions with the environment and presence of time-dependent signals
is to occur in any solid-state quantum electronic device, and insufficient data
are presently available in such a regime for testing theoretical models. One of
the questions is how the response of the quantum system with strong interactions
changes with the frequency of the applied signal. This project will identify
relevant characteristic frequencies and examine the predicted connection between
those and the strength of the interaction with the environment, and generate
data in the "fast" regimes where novel theories are being developed. The work
contributes to the training of skilled technical workforce and contains an
integrated education plan to develop a course on modern experimental methods,
offer a summer research camp to a physics teacher and several students on
experimental projects related to the main program, and construct demonstrations
that convey complicated physics topics in a clear visual form to be used in an
online "physics of everyday life" course for non-science majors.