* 1206468
* Molecules to Materials - Multiscale Interfacial Phenomena in Biological and Bio-inspired Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2013
* Derk Joester, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 01/31/2013
* USD 5,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1206468 PI: Dillen, J. A. ORG: Materials Research
Society&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Spring 2012 MRS Symposium RR: Molecules to
Materials - Multiscale Interfacial Phenomena in Biological and Bio-inspired
Materials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Buried interfaces, i.e.,
interfaces that are occluded within the final composite material or functional
structure, are crucial to a variety of biological processes and applications,
including: (1) biological wet/dry adhesion in barnacles and geckos; (2)
biological control over mineral growth and functional properties in biominerals;
(3) tissue engineering; and (4) bio-lubrication, for example, in joints.
Rational design of bio-inspired materials for applications from biomedicine to
sensors and from catalysts to high toughness composites depends on a detailed
understanding of the structure, chemistry, routes of assembly, mechanical
properties, and wear-processes at these interfaces. With typical length scales
ranging from the subnanometer to macroscopic dimensions and the complexities
arising from the hybrid (hard/soft, organic/inorganic, etc.) character of these
materials, the synthesis, simulation, and in situ functional characterization of
such buried interfaces is a significant challenge. These challenges are
currently addressed by experts from a number of communities that do not
generally interact, as they currently have no common platform. The proposed
symposium seeks to create such a multi-disciplinary forum and will actively
recruit contributions from materials science, chemistry, biochemistry, medicine,
biotechnology and state-of-the-art in situ characterization methodologies (e.g.
Xray, electron imaging and tomography, spectroscopy, cryo-
techniques).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The organizers are
particularly interested in increasing the participation of underrepresented
groups (women, minorities, and disabled persons), undergraduate institutions and
historically black colleges and universities, and young researchers (students,
postdocs, and young faculty). To this end, they are requesting funds to support
the participation of these groups through travel grants for two exceptional
female young faculty invited speakers and to up to nine others from these groups
who have been accepted to make oral or poster presentations.