* 1206754
* Thermodynamic Cycles and Relaxation Timescales in Surface Hybridization
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Joel Wein, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2016
* USD 375,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1206754 PI: Levicky, Rastislav ORG: NYU Polytechnic
Institute

Title: Thermodynamic Cycles and Relaxation Timescales in Surface Hybridization

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Analysis of nucleic acids is becoming increasingly
integrated into health care and clinical diagnostics. A technology that
especially excels in combining throughput with affordability is multiplexed
surface hybridization (SH). Clinical SH tests are becoming available for
applications that include cancer diagnostics, cystic fibrosis prescreening,
pathogen detection, and assessment of drug metabolism. These tests function by
monitoring the extent of hybridization, or association, between two nucleic acid
strands, one a "probe" immobilized on a solid material surface and the other a
sample "target" sequence present in solution. Arrival of SH technologies in
clinical diagnostics greatly intensifies the need for fundamental understanding,
so that diagnostic performance can be optimized. This project addresses two
outstanding challenges about the material surfaces used in SH applications: (1)
the link between hybridization thermodynamics at the surface with those in
solution, and (2) the timescales for approaching equilibrium when many target
sequences compete for the probes. The first topic is essential for enabling
decades of solution hybridization research to be applied to SH applications, for
example, to the design of optimized probe sequences and the development of
corrective algorithms for cross-hybridization. The second topic centers on
identification of rate-limiting bottlenecks in competitive SH, when many target
sequences compete for the probes, with the goal to advance strategies for
minimizing kinetic biases and for enhancing sensitivity to lower copy target
sequences. As part of these studies, benchmark thermodynamic data will be
obtained on molecular interactions, including between probes, that affect
hybridization reactions on densely modified material surfaces. By elucidating
the thermodynamic connection between surface and solution hybridization, and
identifying kinetic bottlenecks to equilibration, this project will formulate
design principles central to material surfaces used in research and emergent
clinical technologies based on surface hybridization.

BROADER IMPACTS: The complex molecular phenomena underlying SH have long
hindered development of universal guidelines for diagnostic applications.
Results from this project will therefore be immediately useful for design of
probe-modified material surfaces as well as for interpretation of experiments
performed in hundreds of research and, increasingly, clinical laboratories. The
research effort will be integrated with an educational initiative on development
of educational gaming software that will introduce general concepts from science
and engineering through direct integration into game mechanics. The pedagogical
strategy of the software is to develop qualitative familiarity with STEM
concepts through an enjoyable gaming experience that can heighten interest in
students before they encounter related concepts in formal coursework. The
software will be developed in collaboration with the Game Innovation Laboratory
at the Polytechnic Institute of NYU, at a level accessible to middle school
students. The initial concept for the gaming software is to use fairy tale
characters to solve problems through relying on molecular concepts. The software
will introduce notions of molecules, of selective interactions between molecules
(e.g. assembly of supramolecular structures), and of simple renditions of
thermodynamic concepts through use of "molecular bricks" to build fortifications
with different energy scores, all as an integral part of game mechanics.