* 1206960
* FRG: Structural Phase Transformations in Polymorphic Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Matthew McCluskey, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 08/31/2016
* USD 609,981.00

Technical Description: This project aims to understand the underlying mechanisms
of crystalline-amorphous and polymorphic crystalline-crystalline phase
transformations in phase-change nanostructure materials, particularly In2Se3
nanowires, and to understand the multi-level phase-change memory switching
process. Specific tasks include (1) understanding the thermodynamics of phase
transformations by constructing the temperature-pressure phase diagram; (2)
investigating the phase transformation kinetics; (3) establishing the structure-
property relation; and (4) elucidating the multiphysics process that underlies
the multi-level memory switching. The approach combines experimental and
theoretical investigations. The experimental approach utilizes a combination of
transmission electron microscopy, Raman and infrared spectroscopy, x-ray
diffraction, and multi-functional scanning probe microscopy techniques, with the
capability to adjust the temperature and pressure in situ. Complementing the
experimental aspect, the theory component based on first-principles calculations
investigates the phase stability and its dependence on temperature and pressure,
kinetic pathways of the phase transformation, and phase-specific electronic
structures and physical properties.

Non-technical Description: This project provides a fundamental insight into the
structural phase transformation in a technologically important phase-change
material. Compared to current mainstream non-volatile memory technologies, such
as the Flash memory, phase-change memory offers faster random access time,
higher endurance and scalability to the 10-nm range. The knowledge acquired in
this study establishes a fundamental basis for developing next-generation non-
volatile phase-change memory with multi-level storage capabilities in a single
material system. This project provides training opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students, including those who are members of underrepresented
groups. A new seminar course focusing on providing a coherent understanding of
phase-change nanomaterials is developed and is team-taught by the PIs. The
outreach to the general public is facilitated by developing visual materials,
including images and movies, which are posted on YouTube. These materials are a
part of the Explore Nano! exhibit in a local science museum.