* 1206191
* Kinetics of Polymer Interfacial Reactions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Jeffrey Koberstein, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 07/31/2015
* USD 405,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The overall goal of the proposed research is to develop a
fundamental understanding of the factors that influence interfacial reactions of
long chain polymer molecules. The grafting of polymers to a surface is an
important aspect in a myriad of applications ranging from biosensors, wherein
bio macromolecules such as DNA are tethered to substrates to prepare
microarrays, to steric stabilization, wherein a synthetic polymer is tethered to
a surface to form a brush that prevents particle agglomeration. An intimate
knowledge of these interfacial grafting reactions is essential to optimize these
applications. Toward this end, model interfacial "click" reactions between a
substrate modified with an azide function monolayer and a polymer terminated
with an alkyne group are studied by infrared spectroscopy using a multiple
internal reflection technique that samples the absorbance of the azide
absorbance band which disappears upon reaction. Azides and alkynes react to form
triazole groups in a process referred to as "click" chemistry due to its high
yield and high chemoselectivity. The kinetics of solution reactions at
interfaces are mediated by the effects of crowding as already grafted molecules
inhibit additional polymer molecules from approaching and reacting to the
surface. Factors that influence surface crowding are therefore under
investigation including the nature of the solvent, the polymer molecular weight,
the density of surface functional groups, the surface tension and the nature of
polymer surface interactions. Interfacial reactions between the functional
polymers and azide-functional nanoparticles are also monitored by transmission
infrared spectroscopy in order to assess the effects of surface curvature.
Interfacial melt reactions are investigated in a parallel program of research to
be executed by undergraduates. The data collected are used to validate
theoretical treatments of polymer interfacial reactions. NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
Long chain polymer molecules are often attached by their ends to a surface to
meet the needs of many high-tech industrial applications. Microarray sensors,
for example, used to detect biological warfare agents or to map genomes, are
prepared by attaching natural biological polymers such as DNA, carbohydrates and
proteins to the surface or a silicon wafer or microchip. Polymer brushes,
synthetic polymers attached by their ends to solid substrates, are used in a
myriad of applications including the stabilization of colloidal particles,
imparting biological stealth to drug delivery vehicles and providing protein
resistance in microfluidic devices to name but a few. The common feature in all
of these applications is the need to covalently bond a polymer chain by its end
to a substrate of interest at controlled surface density. The focus of this
research proposal is to gain a fundamental understanding of such polymer
reactions at surfaces and the factors that affect them. The rates of reactions
of two complementary reactive functional groups are well understood for
reactions in solution, however, the rates of reactions at surfaces, are not
fully understood because they are influenced by a number of physical and
thermodynamic parameters that are associated with the presence of a surface. The
rates of polymer surface reactions are studied by an infrared spectroscopy
technique that can quantitatively and directly measure the reaction rates of the
surface bound reactive chemical group without disturbing the progress of the
reaction. Parameters under investigation include the nature of the solvent if
present, the size of the polymer molecule, the properties of the underlying
surface, and the surface density of functional groups. The knowledge generated
by this research will help in the design of industrial products ranging from
biological sensors that can rapidly identify disease to devices that can resist
biological fouling. The fundamental principles identified by the research are
incorporated into several courses taught by the PI including the physical
chemistry of macromolecules and polymer surface phenomenon. A diverse group of
undergraduate and PhD students working on the research project receive training
in materials and surface science, exposure to how intellectual property is
protected, and learn how to communicate research results to the public, skills
that are important in any field they decide to pursue after graduation.