* 1206795
* Synthesis and Electrochemical Studies of Intercalated and Framework Substituted Silicon Clathrates
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Candace Chan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 08/31/2016
* USD 390,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program, this project will undertake a detailed structural and
electrochemical investigation of silicon clathrates. These materials consist of
silicon covalently bonded in cage structures comprised of face-sharing Si20,
Si24, and/or Si28 clusters that can be doped by the incorporation of alkali or
alkaline guest ions inside the cages. Framework substituted clathrates involve
replacing silicon atoms with other metals such as Al and Cu. Key objectives of
this project are to understand the electrochemical properties of these materials
and how their structure affects those properties, as well as how the structure
of the silicon clathrates changes upon electrochemical insertion of guest ions.
Direct synthesis methods such as thermal and arc melting will be utilized to
make framework substituted silicon clathrates, followed by electrochemical
methods to insert and remove guest ions. The project aims are the synthesis and
both structural and electrochemical characterization of Li, Na, and Mg
intercalated silicon clathrates. Potential outcomes are: (1) the synthesis of
new clathrates doped with Li and Mg, (2) the creation of fundamental knowledge
regarding the electrochemistry of guest atom insertion and removal in silicon
clathrate structures, and (3) the correlation of redox processes with structural
changes in silicon clathrates. These outcomes have implications for the
development of new anodes for Li, Na, and Mg-ion based rechargeable batteries.
In addition, the new knowledge gained related to the synthesis of novel silicon
clathrates (such as Li and Mg intercalated clathrate) may be of interest to
researchers who study silicon clathrates for other applications such as
thermoelectric, superconducting, magnetic, and hard materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Electrochemical energy
storage is increasingly becoming an important component of technology and
society, with widespread use in portable electronics and soon to be larger roles
in electric vehicles and photovoltaic-grid applications. The search for new
electrode materials with higher energy and power densities is necessary in order
for the future energy storage demands to be realized. Silicon clathrate
materials have cage-like structures that can naturally hold guest ions, a
feature that may be exploited in energy storage applications. This project seeks
to establish fundamental understanding on how the structures of silicon
clathrates affect the type and number of guest ions that can be
electrochemically inserted and removed, key properties that can lead to the
development of new battery electrode materials with improved charge storage
capabilities, mechanical integrity, and cycle life. This project will also
provide broad training in materials chemistry and electrochemistry for students
at the graduate and undergraduate level through the experimental and
computational techniques involved. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While batteries are
used on a daily basis by the general public, most people do not understand the
intimate details of these devices. Therefore, the importance and impact of basic
materials research as it relates to energy storage devices will be disseminated
through teaching at the undergraduate and graduate level, as well as through
outreach programs to target K-12 students and the general population. The broad
dissemination of the results of this project will enhance scientific
understanding in the general public of how ubiquitous energy storage devices
work and may also stimulate further research in the scientific community on the
application of silicon clathrate materials in other energy and electronic
applications.