* 1206416
* RUI: Chirality and the Phase Behavior of Globular Proteins
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Neer Asherie, Yeshiva University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2017
* USD 275,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
Yeshiva University is cofunded by the Biomolecular Dynamics, Structure, and
Function program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, the
Directorate for Biological Sciences. The goal of this project is to better
understand the role of chirality in the phase behavior of globular proteins.
Chirality is central to protein function, but its relation to protein phase
behavior has yet to be investigated thoroughly. The phase behavior of several
globular proteins will be examined in the presence of chiral additives by
determining the solubility of the protein-additive crystalline complexes and by
characterizing the liquid phases of protein-additive mixtures. For each protein,
both enantiomers of the additive will be studied separately and as a racemic
mixture. In addition to the experimental work, molecular dynamics simulations
will be carried out to elucidate the details of the protein-chiral additive
interactions. As a knowledge of protein phase behavior is central to
understanding many biophysical phenomena, the proposed activity would develop
our understanding of protein crystallization and biomaterial design through the
use of chirality to control protein self-assembly, and this knowledge base may
directly benefit society in potential biomedical applications. An additional
impact of this project is its educational aspect in a primarily undergraduate
institution. The proposed research will be carried out solely with undergraduate
students, who will become proficient in biophysical lab techniques such as
ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy, high-performance liquid chromatography, and
static and dynamic light scattering among others.

The goal of this project is to understand how proteins pack together into
different arrangements by making use of the built-in handedness of proteins,
which is known as chirality. If we knew how to pack proteins into whatever
arrangement we wanted, many scientific advances would become possible. For
example, we could use protein crystals to figure out the structure and then the
function of any protein. Also, the researcher plans to design new materials made
out of protein or purify proteins rapidly and reliably on an industrial scale.
In this project, a combination of experiments and computer simulations will be
used to discover how the handedness (chirality) of protein controls their
packing arrangement (known as "the phase behavior"). In addition to the research
component, there are important educational and outreach aspects to this project.
The work will be carried out only with undergraduate students who will learn
science by carrying out cutting-edge research. These students are expected to
become proficient in advanced research techniques and they will be trained to
pursue careers in science and engineering. Also, new physics courses will be
offered to first-year, intermediate and advanced students. Finally, activities
designed to stimulate the interest of non-science majors in science will be
organized, such as a periodic lecture series for general audiences that explains
the work behind the Nobel Prizes in Physiology and Medicine, Physics, Chemistry,
Literature, Peace and Economics.