* 1206405
* Statistical Problems in Phylogenetics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Elizabeth Housworth, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

Model-based phylogenetic analyses (maximum likelihood, Bayesian, and distance-
based methods) rely on complex models of evolution of genetic data, models whose
statistical properties are not well-understood. Particularly, software employs a
discretized Gamma distribution and important statistical properties of that
model, such as model identifiability and how many rate classes can be or need to
be used, are unknown. We propose to determine the statistical properties of such
models. Moreover, even the most sophisticated models fail to mimic many real
data sets analyzed in phylogenetics: for instance, while the general time
reversible model allows for arbitrary base frequencies, it requires that all the
species under study have the same base frequencies as each other. The natural
non-parametric alternative is the method of maximum parsimony which suffers from
the phenomenon of long branch attraction: when data are generated under some
model of genetic evolution on certain types of trees and then analyzed under
parsimony methods, parsimony methods return an incorrect tree with some
probability that does not tend to zero as the amount of data increases to
infinity. Thus, it is often said that the method of maximum parsimony is not a
consistent statistical method for phylogeny reconstruction. However, this
criticism has the potential of applying to all phylogenetic reconstruction
methods, including model-based methods, when the data are not generated under
the model used to analyze them. We propose to determine the model conditions
under which the natural non-parametric alternative, parsimony, is a consistent
method for phylogenetic estimation. The goal of both projects is to provide
solid mathematical foundation for phylogenetic reconstruction
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phylogenies are trees describing the evolutionary
relationships of species. Having an accurate description of these relationships
can help researchers discover the genetic basis of human diseases and the
reasons for varying pathogenicity of viruses and bacteria. This project aims to
understand the mathematical properties of the statistical methods used to infer
phylogenies from genetic data. These mathematical properties tell which methods
are most appropriate for use on specific kinds of data and whether a method can
be useful at all on any data. This information, in turn, will lead to more
accurate phylogenies.