* 1206764
* Crystal Size Effects on the Lattice Parameter of Nano-scaled Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Siu-Wai Chan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2017
* USD 440,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Prof. Siu-Wai Chan is examining how nanosized
crystals expand or contract at the atomic level, and how they are affected by
crystal size, temperature, pressure, and the presence of structural
irregularities. The intellectual value of her research lies in understanding how
small structural changes make profound changes in material behavior. This
enhanced understanding will help in the development of new materials with
improved properties. A better understanding of bonding should contribute to the
development of nanoparticle synthesis methods with greater control over critical
properties. Insight into the structure and defects in metal oxide nanoparticles
may provide a knowledge base for the rational design of more efficient and less
costly catalysts for cleaner air and sustainable energy. Undergraduate,
master's, and doctoral students are being trained in conducting research, and
new demonstration units (that incorporate the results of this study) are being
developed for a New York City high school visitation
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Prof. Siu-Wai Chan is
examining changes in the lattice parameter of metal oxides with crystallite-
size, defect formation, temperature, and pressure. She employs both traditional
and synchrotron-based, time-resolved X-ray diffraction. The coefficient of
thermal expansion is calculated through measurements of the lattice in response
to temperature variations. Similarly, measuring how the lattice responds to
pressure allows for a calculation of the bulk modulus. She is interested in
determining if these quantities are dependent on particle size in the nanoscale
regime. The intellectual value of her research lies in the fact that small
structural changes often generate profound changes in properties. Therefore,
this project will provide a window to view the nature of bonding in
nanoparticles and will enable a better understanding of surface stress and
surface energy to be gained. It will also help to determine if the macroscopic
based theory of surface stress, which has successfully predicted the lattice
contraction in noble metal crystallites, can be used for ionic solids. The
opportunity to tackle these issues is timely because mono-dispersed
nanoparticles are now widely available.