* 1206043
* RUI: Testing QCD Symmetries via Precision Measurements of Light Pseudoscalar Mesons
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Liping Gan, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2017
* USD 208,959.00

The Standard Model (SM) is a theory that describes fundamental particles in
nature and the interactions between them. While the SM has been successful in
explaining many phenomena observed in the laboratory to date, it offers no
insight into experimental facts such as the dominance of matter over anti-
matter, nor the nature of dark matter and dark energy, which are associated with
the rotation curves of the galaxies and the accelerated expansion of the
universe. Searching for physics beyond the Standard Model is therefore a well-
motivated and important task for physicists. A good way to search for new
physics is through tests of fundamental symmetries in different interactions.

The goal of this project is to test fundamental symmetries in the
electromagnetic and strong interactions via precision measurements on the
properties of neutral particles: neutral pion and eta. The radiative decay width
of the neutral pion plays a key role that bridges chiral symmetry spontaneous
breaking and our understanding of QCD (a theory describing the strong
interaction). On the other hand, the measurement of the eta radiative decay
width will reveal the effect of explicit symmetry breakings of chiral symmetry,
isospin, and SU(3) by the light-quark masses. In addition, the measurements of
branching ratios or upper limits for various rare and forbidden decays of the
eta will provide sensitive probes to test the violations of charge conjugation
C, parity P, and time reversal T, as well as CP symmetries, and search for new
physics beyond the Standard Model. The results of this project will provide
clues to some important questions, such as: "why is our observed universe
dominated by matter over anti-matter?", and "what are the masses of the light
quarks?"

This project will engage undergraduate students as key contributors. It will
create a research-enriched learning environment, explore new approaches to
recruiting prospective students, and develop new courses which are research
related. Students working in an international collaboration will enhance their
international experience and gain global perspectives.