* 1206118
* Quantum Post-Selected Optomechanics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Dirk Bouwmeester, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 670,000.00

Quantum Post Selected Optomechanics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research deals
with a recently proposed scheme for producing and detecting quantum states of an
opto-mechanical system. The scheme is based on nested-interferometers and
quantum post-selection techniques. Consider a photon entering a Mach-Zender
interferometer. The photon encounters an optomechanical system in one arm of the
Mach-Zender interferometer. If the photon does not succeed in changing the
phonon excitation of the optomechanical system the photon will leave the
interferometer in one specific output of the interferometer. However in the rare
event of a phonon excitation the photon can leave the interferometer at the
second output of the interferometer. Photon detection in this second output will
post-select for a strong optomechanical interaction. Combining this with a
second interferometry method for the same photon, based on optical delay lines,
can yield information on the decoherence of the optomechanical system. This
method relieves several of the challenges associated with previous optical
schemes for measuring macroscopic superpositions, and only requires the devices
to be in the weak coupling regime. With the implementation of this new scheme
combined with advances in the design and fabrication of optomechanical systems
(based on the use of Graphene, Silicon Nitride films, Boron Nitride and Carbon
nanotube technology) it is expected that significant progress towards testing
quantum mechanics at the macroscopic scale can be
made.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photons take a quantum
Mulligan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Imagine a game of golf in which you are allowed
millions of do-overs, so-called "Mulligans," until finally hitting that hole-in-
one. This research on "Quantum Post Selected Optomechanics" aims precisely at
doing this. Since the famous Schr√∂dinger's Cat thought experiment, physicists
have tried to observe quantum effects in larger and larger systems, in order to
better understand the transition from quantum to classical behavior. In
particular, interest has focused on optomechanical systems, tiny mechanical
devices that can be pushed by light. However, it has proven extremely difficult
to design a so-called "strongly coupled" device, one that is flimsy enough to be
pushed significantly by a single photon. This research deals with a way to send
many individual photons and then, after the fact, pick only those hole-in-one
events where, thanks to a quantum fluctuation, the push was significant. After
the interaction with the mechanical device, the photon interferes with itself,
and usually travels one way. It only travels the other way if it has actually
given a quantum of motion to the device (a hole-in-one). This method of post-
selection should enable the study of quantum dynamics of mechanical systems.