* 1206631
* RUI: Catalytic Aerogel Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2012,12/31/2016
* Mary Carroll, Union College
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 12/31/2016
* USD 298,677.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Existing catalytic converter systems use rare
precious metals to catalyze exhaust gas. Decreasing the use of these metals has
the potential to transform automotive pollution clean-up methods. This has
important economic implications for the nation because a typical automobile
catalytic converter contains about $100 of precious metals, adding about 700
million dollars per year to the total cost of cars sold in the US. Moreover, it
has major environmental and geopolitical implications; mining of precious metals
is environmentally damaging, and many of the best sources are outside of the US.
Aerogels are lightweight, nano-porous materials with lots of surface area and
good thermal properties. Catalytic aerogel materials have the potential to
replace the precious metals while being both cost-effective and environmentally
friendlier than current automotive catalysts. This project funds an
interdisciplinary team of faculty and undergraduate students in Mechanical
Engineering and Chemistry at Union College who are undertaking fundamental
studies of catalytic aerogel materials and demonstrating the utility of these
materials as catalysts to alleviate automotive pollution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Catalytically active aerogels have the
potential to transform automotive pollution mitigation technologies by
eliminating the use of rare precious metals in internal combustion engine
exhaust after-treatment applications. Aerogels' unique physical properties,
including high surface area, low density and good thermal stability, offer
significant advantages for use as automotive catalysts. Union College
researchers have developed a novel rapid supercritical extraction (RSCE) process
for fabricating aerogels. This process offers significant potential advantages
for cost effectively preparing catalytic aerogel materials, and for casting them
in forms suited to practical applications in automotive catalysis. In this
project the interdisciplinary Union College team is undertaking a systematic and
iterative series of experiments to prepare, test and optimize catalytically
active aerogel materials for eventual applications in automotive pollution
mitigation. Specifically, the team is: (1) developing a fundamental
understanding of the effect of aerogel precursor chemistry and processing
conditions on the bulk physical properties of catalytic aerogel materials
prepared via their RSCE process, (2) extending knowledge of the performance of
catalytic aerogel materials through strength testing and measurements of the
thermal stability, flow-through characteristics, hydrophobicity and catalytic
ability of the catalytic aerogel materials, and (3) demonstrating that RSCE
catalytic aerogel materials can be fabricated into forms rugged and robust
enough for ultimate application as three-way automotive catalysts under
realistic service conditions. This project provides undergraduate students from
Union's Mechanical Engineering and Chemistry Departments with exciting and
relevant cross-disciplinary research experiences, which encourages them to
consider graduate studies and careers in research and, therefore, impacts
positively the US scientific infrastructure.