* 1206849
* Blackbody Radiation in the Nanothermodynamic Limit
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* BC Regan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 08/31/2015
* USD 375,000.00

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the construction and
study of thermal radiators that contain millions of atoms but are small in
comparison to a typical thermal wavelength, using filaments constructed with
carbon nanotubes, graphene, and tungsten nanowires. Incandescent radiators in
this size regime operate in an area that is wholly in neither the quantum
mechanical nor the thermodynamic limit. This investigation will require an
improved understanding of thermal transport in extreme temperature gradients at
the nanoscale. Combining microfabricated devices and transmission electron
microscopy characterization, these studies will extend unique imaging single-
color pyrometry techniques and complement them with time-correlated single
photon counting (TCSPC) correlation measurements. Because the nanolamps are
approximately black and operate in the same exotic size-to-wavelength regime,
benchmarking their coherence properties may provide further insight into the
quantum physics of black holes and Hawking radiation. This project will support
the training of a PhD student, who will necessarily master a wide array of
skills in critical areas on the technological frontier, including
microfabrication, electronics integration, and
nanomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****NON-TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the construction and study of tiny
incandescent lamps. The nanolamps have carbon filaments much like those
originally used by Edison, but a billion times smaller. A typical incandescent
lamp has dimensions that are large in comparison to the wavelengths of the light
that it emits. Only recently has microfabrication technology advanced to the
point where it is now possible to build "small" lamps that operate in the
opposite limit and emit easily detected optical photons. The study of such lamps
will probe the mechanisms of heat transport in devices where the temperature
changes by thousands of degrees on sub-micrometer length scales. Furthermore,
small lamps are ideal for elucidating the coherence properties of thermal
radiation, which contrary to the common misconception, is not completely
incoherent. New measurements of incandescent radiation in this unexplored regime
will improve the current understanding heat transport at small length scales,
the coherence properties of thermal photons, and the relationships between
quantum mechanics and thermodynamics. Such measurements may even shed light on
the physics of black holes, which are also thought to be "small" in comparison
to the thermal Hawking radiation that they emit. This project will support the
training of a PhD student, who will necessarily master a wide array of skills in
critical areas on the technological frontier, including microfabrication,
electronics integration, and nanomaterials.