* 1206981
* Algorithms for subgroups and automorphisms of right-angled Artin Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Matthew Day, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2016
* USD 121,873.00

A finitely-presented group is a right-angled Artin group (RAAG) if the only
relations between the generators are that some pairs of generators commute. The
P.I. will study the subgroup structure and automorphism groups of RAAGs. The
main goal of this project is to develop algorithms for analyzing RAAGs; these
algorithms will generalize classical algorithms including Nielsen reduction,
Stallings folding, column reduction, and Whitehead's algorithm. Goal
applications include an algorithm for testing membership in automorphism group
orbits in RAAGs, and restricted versions of the subgroup membership problem. A
second goal is to define combinatorial and topological objects on which
automorphism groups of RAAGs act, and to use these actions to better understand
the automorphism groups. A third goal is to prove homological finiteness results
about important subgroups of automorphism groups of RAAGs; this part of the
project will focus on automorphism groups of free groups specifically.

A right-angled Artin group (RAAG) is a type of algebraic structure in which all
equations are consequences of equations asserting that certain pairs of elements
commute (equations of the form "x*y=y*x"). The P.I. will research the structure
of general RAAGs, specifically the substructures of these objects, and their
symmetries (automorphisms). RAAGs and their substructures and symmetries are
important objects of study in geometric group theory; these groups include
special cases that have been studied since the origins of group theory. Free
abelian groups (for example the lattice of integer points in coordinate n-space)
are examples of RAAGs; their automorphism groups are matrix groups, and many
questions about their structure and symmetry can be answered using familiar
matrix techniques such as row and column reduction. A class of groups called
free groups are also examples of RAAGs. Nielsen reduction and Whitehead's
algorithm are combinatorial algorithms from the 1920's and 1930's for analyzing
certain aspects of free groups, and Stallings folding is a related graph-
theoretical technique from the 1970's. The main goal of the project is to
construct common generalizations of these classical free group algorithms and
matrix techniques that would simultaneously apply to all RAAGs, or to prove that
no such generalizations exist.