* 1206808
* Acoustic Probes of Granular States
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Karen Daniels, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 07/31/2016
* USD 345,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** It is difficult to assess the stability of a granular
material, or to determine whether failure is imminent. The ability to non-
invasively characterize changes in the mechanical state of a granular material
would aid our understanding of the transition to failure. In both ordinary
atomic/molecular systems and idealized jammed systems, the density of states
provides a wealth of information about the state of the system. Acoustic
measurements are a promising route to a similar characterization for granular
materials, due to their ability to transmit vibrational energy into the bulk of
the material, and to gather information in return. We will develop such
techniques both in static and sheared systems where internal stresses are
visible, as well as in more realistic three-dimensional materials which are of
natural and industrial importance. Objectives are: (1) Simulations and analytics
predict that an increased abundance of low-frequency modes is associated with an
impending loss of rigidity. Do real granular materials exhibit this feature as a
universal hallmark of incipient failure, e.g. under shear? (2) Simulated jammed
materials with different shapes (circles vs. ellipses vs. dimers) each have a
characteristic density of states. Do real granular materials, for instance those
with corners, exhibit similar shape-dependent features? (3) The properties of
force and contact networks may depend on the dimensionality of the system.
Results from shear experiments may improve our understanding of earthquake
nucleation and rupture. Connections to geophysics are possible by analyzing
results in light of current ideas about foreshocks, tremors, triggering, and
monitoring fault damage.

****Non-Technical Abstract**** Many energy-related industries rely on granular
materials: extraction from oil sands, the handling of pellets within
manufacturing facilities, the stability of rocks surrounding oil, gas, or carbon
dioxide sequestration reservoirs, or flows within fluidized-bed reactors. It is
difficult to assess the stability of a granular system: is failure imminent?
what is the most stable direction to load the pile to avoid failure? The ability
to non-invasively characterize changes in the mechanical state of a granular
material would provide a means to evaluate such questions. Physicists have built
a quantitative understanding of the mechanical stability of a broad class of
materials such as foams, emulsions, and granular materials. Despite a decade of
measurements within computer simulations, experimental progress has been slowed
by the difficulty of making measurements in the interior of an opaque granular
material. Acoustic techniques are a promising route due to their ability to
penetrate the interior of opaque materials. We will develop new acoustical
measurements which will open avenues for non-destructive testing of granular
materials, research which will be conducted by undergraduate and graduate
students. These new techniques will allow us to seek acoustical signatures of
how close a system is to slipping, the direction of largest applied forces, or
the degree of particle alignment/disorder. Beyond applications in the energy
industry, the new techniques may be able to improve our understanding of how the
granular material between tectonic plates becomes unstable and triggers
earthquakes. The research team will also develop a related set of hands-on
activities for use with local Girl Scouts troops.