* 1206382
* Digitization TCN: Collaborative Research: Southwest Collections of Arthropods Network (SCAN): A Model for Collections Digitization to Promote Taxonomic and Ecological Research
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Wendy Moore Brusca, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2017
* USD 333,559.00

Collaborative Research Digitization TCN: Southwest Collections of Arthropods
Network (SCAN): A Model for Collections Digitization to Promote Taxonomic and
Ecological Research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Southwest Collections of Arthropods
Network (SCAN) brings together 10 diverse arthropod collections at universities
and museums throughout the Southwest to create a virtual network of ground
dwelling arthropods which are notably responsive to temporal and spatial
environmental changes. These 10 collections document much of the Southwest's
biodiversity, but currently the data associated with millions of arthropod
specimens are not easily accessible. To overcome this, SCAN will develop methods
for integrating existing databases, catalogue-image specimens, develop new
electronic identification techniques, and produce a virtual library of ground-
dwelling arthropods (beetles, grasshoppers, spiders, ants). In addition the
project will work with the existing project Filtered Push to increase the
capacity of experts to provide remote identifications and annotations of data
that can be sent throughout the network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The comprehensive
SCAN online library and expert information will be available to the public as
well as professionals in taxonomy, ecology, and climate change science. Smaller
institutions will be provided increased access to large data sets for promoting
research. The SCAN datasets will support a number of ongoing projects examining
the effects of environmental and land-use change on individual arthropod
species. By increasing access to this information, SCAN will stimulate new
research and increased awareness in biodiversity conservation throughout the
region. Over 50 undergraduates also will be trained in cyberinfrastructure,
systematics, and ecology. This award is made as part of the National Resource
for Digitization of Biological Collections through the Advancing Digitization of
Biological Collections program and all data resulting from this award will be
available through the national resource, iDigBio.org.