* 1206309
* Classification of Lagrangian fibrations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Justin Sawon, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2016
* USD 158,888.00

Hyperkahler manifolds arise in many different areas of high energy theoretical
physics, for example as spaces parametrizing Yang-Mills instantons, magnetic
monopoles, and Higgs fields. In their algebro-geometric manifestation,
hyperkahler manifolds appear as holomorphic symplectic manifolds. Fibrations on
holomorphic symplectic manifolds are known as Lagrangian fibrations, since the
fibers must be Lagrangian with respect to the holomorphic symplectic structure.
In addition, the generic fibres must be abelian varieties, and Lagrangian
fibrations may be viewed as higher-dimensional analogues of elliptic K3
surfaces. The Hitchin system is a celebrated non-compact example. In this
project the P.I. will study the classification of (compact) Lagrangian
fibrations. The goals are to classify Lagrangian fibrations in some particular
cases: when the fibers are Jacobians of curves or principally polarized, when
the fibration is locally isotrivial, in dimension four (abelian surfaces as
fibers). The P.I. will also explore new constructions of Lagrangian fibrations,
and address the question of finiteness of deformation
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop some particular kinds of
geometry that are known to arise in theoretical physics, particularly in quantum
field theory and string theory. The main focus will be on hyperkahler geometry,
a class of spaces admitting Ricci-flat metrics, i.e., solutions to Einstein's
equations in a vacuum. The P.I. will also study generalized complex geometry,
which was invented by mathematicians to bridge complex and symplectic geometry,
on which type IIA and IIB string theory are based, and to help unravel the
Mirror Symmetry phenomenon predicted by string theorists. In short, these are
all innovative new kinds of geometry developed largely in response to the
demands of theoretical physicists, but also of inherent mathematical interest.
The P.I. will actively promote the exchange of ideas between mathematicians and
physicists by organizing and participating in cross-disciplinary conferences and
workshops, and is also involved in the training of graduate students in these
topics.