* 1206100
* Laser Spectroscopy of Dense Positronium
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Allen Mills, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2015
* USD 665,000.00

In this project Scientists at the University of California, Riverside (UCR)
produce short bursts of millions of positronium atoms and cool them far below
room temperature. The purpose is to prepare positronium ensembles suitable for
making precision laser spectroscopy measurements and producing a Bose-Einstein
condensed state. Positronium (chemical symbol Ps) is composed of an electron and
a positron, the electron's antiparticle, bound together by the attraction of
their opposite charges. Positronium is chemically like hydrogen but different
because a positronium atom weighs only one-thousandth as much as a hydrogen atom
and because the electron and positron in a positronium atom annihilate each
other within about 100 nanoseconds. In previous work the UCR team has used dense
bursts of positronium atoms at room temperature and above to measure Ps-Ps spin
exchanging collision rates and to observe optical transitions between the ground
and first excited states of Ps2 molecules. In the new work the team of UCR
scientists and their students will use a new ps chirped pulse laser instrument
developed under NSF MRI Award #1040590 to study the coherent excitation and
deexcitation of Ps atoms in the adiabatic fast regime most familiar from NMR
experiments. They will implement laser cooling of Ps in free space, using this
technique to produce the rapid cooling needed for these short-lived atoms. In
future experiments the methods developed in this project are expected to be used
to produce and study the first Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) formed from a
dense gas of Ps atoms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments of this project are
of wide and compelling interest. Precision spectroscopy of purely electron-
positron matter will give important information that can be compared with the
essentially exact theory of quantum electrodynamics, which in turn will enable a
unique search for new physics. The matter-antimatter BEC should exhibit
fascinating quantum properties associated with collections of identical
particles at comparatively high temperatures due to the light mass of the Ps
atoms. The availability of cold Ps atoms emitted from a Ps BEC would be
essential to possible measurements of the gravitational free-fall of Ps that
would give us direct information about the nature of antimatter gravity for the
first time. The possibility of a BEC producing stimulated electron-positron
annihilation photons might someday be the basis for a gamma ray laser with
important implications for defense and energy production. The project has a
strong educational component since it will be partly carried out by graduate
students who will receive high level training in a wide variety of leading edge
techniques, in data analysis, and in the writing of scientific papers for high
impact journals. The ongoing activities in the laboratory will form the basis
for antimatter-based programs directed toward pre-college students and will be
the centerpiece for laboratory tours and discussions for high school visitors
and summer intern high school teachers.