* 1206923
* Engineering integrated peptides for small molecule drug delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Gang Cheng, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2017
* USD 315,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
University of Akron is to design and study novel and integrated peptides to
carry all of required drug delivery functions (efficient drug encapsulation,
long blood circulation, and effective targeting) in one material for targeted
delivery of small molecule drugs. The proposed work is aiming to address key
challenges associated with current drug delivery systems in chemotherapy. The
proposed integrated peptides will be designed to self-assemble into stable nano-
sized liposome-like vesicles for targeted delivery of small molecule anticancer
drugs. This project will investigate how the peptide sequence and environmental
stimuli will affect the stability and drug release of peptide-based drug
carriers. This study will provide a better understanding on the self-assembly
properties and structure-function correlations of long peptides, which are
essential for the rational design of more advanced peptide-based materials for
drug delivery and tissue engineering. The proposed education and outreach
activities will stimulate students' interest in biotechnology, and motivate them
to face the challenges of interdisciplinary problems. As part of this
project,the concepts and results developed from this research will be
incorporated into an undergraduate and graduate elective 'Protein Engineering'
course. Undergraduates with an emphasis on underrepresented minorities and women
will be recruited and trained to conduct research in this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the sustained prevalence of cancer, numerous drugs
have been developed for cancer therapy, and chemotherapy is still prevalent in
the treatment of cancers. The goal of this project is to improve the therapeutic
outcome of chemotherapy by developing more advanced drug delivery platforms. If
successful, these drug delivery platforms will have a great potential to be
translated into clinical applications to benefit public health. The proposal
also supports a comprehensive education and outreach plan that will cover from
K-12 to graduate education. As part of this project, the researcher plans to
introduce cutting edge and multidisciplinary bio-technologies to high school
students and their teachers. One of the goals of this research team is to
involve 100% of the undergraduate students in research. This approach will
significantly enhance hands-on research experience for students from the lab
components of 'Protein Engineering' course. The investigator plans to work with
College of Engineering programs such as 'Increasing Diversity in Engineering
Academics' and 'Women in Engineering' to recruit undergraduates to conduct
research in this project. The proposed activities will help to cultivate a high-
tech environment in northeast Ohio through science and engineering education.