* 1206718
* Novel Strongly Correlated-Electron Materials with Rock-Salt Related Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2016
* Viktor Poltavets, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 04/30/2016
* USD 398,440.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

With support from the Solid-State and Materials Chemistry Program in the NSF
Division of Materials Research, the proposed research focuses on transition
metal oxides AMO2 (A = alkali metal, M = 3d metal) with CdI2-type layers. AMO2
phases demonstrate a large variety of physical properties, including
geometrically frustrated magnetism, spin, charge and orbital ordering,
thermoelectricity, and nonconventional superconductivity. In all known AMO2
phases, transition metals are only in the 3+ or 3+/4+ oxidation states. Beta-
NaFe2O3 is the only known compound with a layered rock-salt related structure
and double layer transition metal-oxygen block. The main components of this
proposal are synthesis, crystal structure and physical properties investigation:
(1) of novel layered phases with CdI2-type layers and M in uniquely low (for
such phases) 2+/3+ mixed valent oxidation states and (2) of new n = 2 and n = 3
members of the layered rock-salt related homologue. It is envisioned that
implementation of the stated proposal objectives will not only result in novel
strongly correlated-electron oxides, but also provide new synthetic
methodologies for the preparation of highly unusual phases as well as result in
new fundamental insights into correlated-electron behavior, leading to the
discovery of compounds with potentially useful thermoelectric and/or magnetic
properties.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY In a special class of metal compounds electron - electron
interaction results in a variety of physical properties important from
fundamental and technological points of view. Properties of these so called
strongly correlated-electronic materials depend on details of crystal structure,
as well as on transition metal oxidation and spin states. New synthetic
methodology developed in this proposal will enable preparation of strongly
correlated-electronic materials in a predictable way. Investigation of
structure-property relationships will provide deep insights into correlated-
electron behavior and enable development of design principles for new materials
capable of converting heat via a temperature gradient into electric energy
(thermoelectric materials), as well as compounds with interesting magnetic
properties. Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in the areas of
inorganic synthesis, electrochemistry, crystallography, magnetism, and various
characterization techniques. The PI will lead the organization of the Midwestern
Symposium on Undergraduate Research in Chemistry. This symposium, spearheaded by
the PI targets the undergraduate to graduate school transition and is designed
to increase the number of domestic applicants to graduate programs.