* 1206231
* RUI: Origins of Mechanical Fragility in Disordered Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Kevin Aptowicz, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 07/31/2016
* USD 204,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Within the field of condensed matter
physics, our understanding of disordered systems lags far behind our
understanding of crystalline ones. In crystalline systems, defects are known to
control mechanical fragility, but there are no obvious counterparts to defects
in disordered solids. This experimental program explores the source of
mechanical fragility in disordered solids by using a recently developed laser-
poking technique to perturb disordered colloidal solids and track induced
particle rearrangements using video microscopy. Critical to this project is
employing a new data analysis approach that has been shown to greatly reduce the
complexity of disordered solids, perhaps even identifying structurally weak
regions. The results from this project will be a great interest to both the
scientific and engineering communities as our current limited understanding of
disordered materials impedes the progress in both modeling materials as well as
designing new materials with improved mechanical properties. Beyond addressing
an important and open question in the field of condensed matter physics, the
project will also provide critical experience to undergraduate researchers who
will conduct the research and broadly disseminate the results through student-
coauthored papers as well as talks at national conferences. Furthermore, the
proposed research will offer opportunities to student researchers from a diverse
range of backgrounds found at a state institution and encourage them towards
careers in science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This experimental program explores the mechanical
properties of amorphous solids. In contrast to crystalline solids, amorphous
solids have a disordered atomic structure. Because of this complexity,
physicists lack a clear physical picture of how the structure of disordered
solids relates to their mechanical properties. This limited understanding of
disordered materials has hindered the application of such materials as bulk
metallic glasses, amorphous thin films, and nanoparticles assemblies. Using a
recently developed laser-poking technique, this project will explore the
mechanical response of colloidal disordered solids to stress. The experimental
results from this research will serve to validate or disprove current theories
relating to amorphous solids, aid in the development of a clear physical picture
of amorphous solids, and provide a framework to support the development of new
materials as well as improve the design of current ones. Beyond addressing an
important and open question in the field of condensed matter physics, this
project will also provide critical experience to undergraduate researchers who
will conduct the research and broadly disseminate the results through student-
coauthored papers as well as talks at national conferences. Furthermore, the
proposed research will offer opportunities to student researchers from a diverse
range of backgrounds found at a state institution and encourage them towards
careers in science and technology.