* 1207631
* Point Spread Function Determination: Unlocking the Full Scientific Value of Adaptive Optics
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2012,09/30/2016
* Mark Morris, California Association for Research in Astronomy
* Standard Grant
* Peter Kurczynski
* 09/30/2016
* USD 684,000.00

Although the advent of adaptive optics (AO) has ushered in an era of dramatic
discoveries that make use of the superb resolution of large ground-based
telescopes, lack of knowledge of the point spread function (PSF) still stands as
a fundamental limitation. Extragalactic, galactic and solar system AO science
programs currently rely on non-synchronous PSF calibration stars, which results
in increased random and systematic errors in astrometry, photometry, morphology
and kinematics. The future of quantitative AO science, and the goal of the
project proposed by Dr. Peter Wizinowich and his collaborators at the California
Association for Research in Astronomy, lies in reconstructing synchronous PSF
knowledge based on real-time telemetry collected from the telescope and AO
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will develop PSF determination tools
for on-axis both natural and laser guide-star AO science observations and
demonstrate the quantitative science improvements that can be realized with
these tools using the 10-m diameter Keck telescopes. The significantly improved
capabilities produced through this program will be directly available to
astronomers at the California Institute of Technology, the University of
California, and the University of Hawaii through their time allocation
committees, while the entire U.S. community will benefit due to their access to
Keck through NASA and the NSF Telescope System Instrumentation Program.
Moreover, success at the Keck Observatory would enable PSF determination to
become a reality for AO on large telescopes worldwide, as the algorithms and
techniques will be made publically available. Keck will also reinforce its role
in the training of AO experts and continue to offer educational programs and
services to work with local residents, educators and especially students,
including its strong participation in the Akamai Workforce Initiative aimed at
local Hawaiian students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for the development of
real-time PSF assessment techniques is being provided by NSF's Division of
Astronomical Sciences through its Advanced Technologies and Instrumentation
program.