* 1207259
* Locally unusual and tunable aromatic rings for pi-conjugated polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* John Tovar, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2016
* USD 359,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on exploration
of pi-conjugated polymeric organic semiconductors that are derived from unusual
and tunable aromatic segments positioned along the main chains of conjugated
polymer backbones. The aspect of unusual aromaticity will be manifested in
research on the use of non-benzenoid aromatic building blocks, that is, repeat
units that depart from the classical 6 pi-electron aromatic nuclei of benzene,
thiophene, pyrrole, etc. The focus of the non-benzenoid polymers will center on
methano[10]annulene, a non-planar 10 pi-electron hydrocarbon established as a
landmark in organic chemistry. Fundamental issues of aromaticity, torsional
strain and disorder in annulene-based polymers will be investigated with the
goal to optimize the resulting effective conjugation lengths and the
processability of soluble polymers for solution processing necessary for many
organic electronic applications. The primary metrics to determine how these
conjugation lengths are attenuated will be electronic absorption and
photoluminescence, but the research will also consider computational, thermal
and charge carrier measurements. The aspect of tunable aromaticity will be
manifested in research on the use of photochromic building blocks, that is,
repeat units capable of specific and reversible changes in electronic structure
upon exposure to UV or visible light. A new polymer design is proposed that
decouples the photochemical switching event from polymer macromolecular
conformational changes thereby offering the prospect for rapid and efficient
tuning of electronic properties as a function of an applied photochemical
stimulus. Electronic properties of these polymers will be assessed through
electrical measurements before and after photoinduced switching events. The
focus of this program will be on the exploratory creation of complex functional
organic polymers and detailed characterization of their electronic properties.
Materials identified in this effort as having electronic and/or processability
properties well-suited for a specific application (e.g. for use as active
components for field-effect transistors, photovoltaics or thermoelectrics) will
be so transitioned through collaborative efforts already in place at Johns
Hopkins and externally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is significant interest in the development
of electrically conductive plastics derived from organic polymers as viable
alternatives to more established inorganic materials. Organic polymers are much
easier to process, allowing them to be fashioned into lightweight, large area,
and even flexible devices. Applications for these plastic devices range from
portable photovoltaic cells, light-emitting displays and paintable electronics
to new biocompatible medical materials. This project is focused on novel
polymeric materials having unusual electrical or optical properties, ehnanced
processabilities or greater environmental stabilities. At the same time,
researchers working in Tovar's group will gain valuable training in the
synthetic chemistry of advanced polymer systems and with sophisticated
analytical electrochemical and spectroscopic techniques. Opportunities to
participate first-hand in multi-disciplinary research collaborations will
provide broader exposure to many cutting-edge avenues where materials chemistry
can lead to new properties and potential applications. The Tovar group will
foster increased exposure to organic electronics research among high school,
undergraduate and graduate-level students within Baltimore City and beyond, as
exemplified by prior successsful activities.