* 1207220
* The Stability of Phases in Thin Multilayered Films
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Gregory Thompson, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 07/31/2016
* USD 375,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials in structures with large
surface area-to-volume ratios can exhibit size dependent physical and chemical
properties that are different than their bulk form. These changes can be related
to crystallographic transformations to new phases called pseudomorphs. This
research will elucidate the underpinnings of this phase stability behavior by
providing a systemic study using multilayered thin film architectures. Model
metallic systems whose length scales and compositions can be controlled with
near atomic processing precision will allow the influence of lattice misfit,
layer thickness, and composition on pseudomorphic phase formation and stability
to be determined. Real-time, in situ thin film growth stresses of these
materials will be measured and correlated to the interfacial stress evolution.
Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations will be used to explore the kinetics of
pseudomorphic formation during deposition, merging experiments with modeling.
These results will be related to post-growth structural and chemical
characterization of the phases and interfaces. The program will be able to
delineate how intrinsic film stress drives compositional intermixing across
interfaces which can thermodynamically promote phase transformations. Classical
thermodynamics will be used to predict and explain phase stability criteria. The
results will be developed within the framework of a predictive phase diagram,
where length scale is a state variable similar to temperature and pressure used
in traditional metallurgy phase diagrams, in determining phase transition
regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When
material sizes become very small, a material can alter how it arranges its atoms
within its structure. This atomic rearrangement often results in changes in the
materials properties such as its electrical conduction, its optical appearance
or its physical strength. Too often these atomic rearrangements are
serendipitously discovered. This research aims at developing a predictive
diagram to let scientists understand when atomic rearrangements occur as a
function of size. The results will provide maps on how to predict and engineer
atomic structure for ever decreasing material sizes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this grant, the technical workforce of the United
States will be grown. This will be achieved through the education of graduate
and one post-doctoral students. These individuals will engage industry through
their interaction in the multi-disciplinary research center, Materials for
Information Technology (MINT) situated on the campus of the University of
Alabama (UA). In addition, the program will engage local Alabaman high school
students through the Nanoscience and Engineering High School Research Internship
Program, successfully initiated during the principle investigator?s NSF Career
award. Materials education efforts during this grant will be broadened to
include instruction to middle and high school teachers through summer camps held
on the campus of UA. By directly educating secondary education teachers on how
to incorporate materials examples in their classroom, the impact of materials
education will engage a broader and more diverse number of students.