* 1207911
* NEESR: Novel Embedded Diagnostics Wireless Structural Monitoring Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Anne Kiremidjian, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 06/30/2017
* USD 397,568.00

Structural health monitoring has been the intense focus of research in
structural engineering with significant advances made over the past decade in
the development of wireless monitoring sensing systems. When empowered with data
interrogation algorithms, such systems can provide critical damage assessment
information to first responders immediately after an extreme event and can
greatly facilitate the recovery process. This research investigates a new
methodology for post-event structural damage assessment, using wireless sensors,
through the following tasks: (a) design a novel direct residual displacement
sensing unit, (b) develop new and identify existing damage algorithms suitable
for embedding in sensing nodes, (c) embed the damage detection algorithms on the
microprocessor of the sensing nodes, (d) calibrate the algorithms with available
data from previous laboratory or numerical experiments, and (e) verify their
predictive capabilities though three payload experiments on projects using the
George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES)
facilities and Japan's E-Defense shake table. The payload experiments will use
the multi-story reinforced concrete frame to be tested at the E-Defense shake
table facility in Miki, Japan, the full scale unibody light wood-frame structure
test to be conducted at the NEES shake table facility at the University of
California, San Diego, and the unbounded post-tensioned rocking wall test to be
conducted at the NEES shake table facility at the University of Nevada, Reno.
Each of these three types of structural systems has unique characteristics with
their specific challenges. Data from this research will be archived and made
available to the public through the NEES Project Warehouse/data repository
(http://www.nees.org). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new advanced method for direct
measurement of residual displacement, with confirmation of such measurements
through the payload experiments, can represent a major breakthrough in the
ability to monitor and assess structural performance after a major event in near
real time, thus providing critical information to first responders and owners in
a timely manner. Demonstration of embedding of complex damage detection
algorithms and verification of the functionality of these algorithms through the
three payload experiments will greatly enhance the ability to deploy wireless
sensors more effectively in the field. This award is part of the National
Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP).