* 1207432
* Collaborative Research: On-the-fly free energy parameterization in molecular simulations
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Eric Vanden-Eijnden, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 198,411.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

In this project, funded by the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory Program, a
new method is proposed for extracting free energies from molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations. The method is based on temperature-acceleration, wherein free
energy gradients in some desired set of collective variables are sampled in a
running MD simulation while simultaneously driving those collective variables
over free energy barriers that would otherwise render traditional MD hopeless at
such sampling. These gradients are used as inputs into an optimization that
minimizes the error associated with gradients of an analytical free energy by
evolving that free energy?s parameters. The method therefore takes as input an
MD system, the definitions of whatever collective variables in which one would
like to know the free energy, and a functional form for that free energy, and
then the method produces the optimal set of parameters. The method is formulated
in a general way and is therefore expected to be applicable broadly to almost
any desired collective variables. This project will be devoted to developing
this method particularly for applications involving deriving effective coarse-
grained potentials for multiscale simulations and to the study of conformational
statistics of large biomolecules. The project will also provide training and
mentoring of underrepresented students in state of the art computational and
numerical methods

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Whether in designing new drugs or new materials, or simply trying to understand
how Nature works, computer simulations are important in understanding how matter
behaves at the molecular level. Bringing such molecular-level understanding into
the realm of everyday perception requires statistical approaches that are not
always straightforward and often quite expensive. This project proposes a new
statistical method for extracting information from molecular-level simulations.
The method is potentially much more efficient than existing approaches. The
research undertaken in this project will develop and apply this method to test
systems relevant for biological and materials applications. The project could
significantly reduce the cost associated with obtaining high-quality information
from simulations at the molecular level that at the intersections of chemistry,
physics, and biology. The project will also provide training and mentoring of
underrepresented students in state of the art computational and numerical
methods. This work is supported by the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory
Program.