* 1207294
* Synthesis of Stoichiometric Pyrite Photovoltaic Absorbers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Colin Wolden, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 05/31/2015
* USD 196,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Two strategies will be pursued to produce phase-pure pyrite
(beta-FeS2) in a thin film form. First, we will leverage our experience
activating nanostructured hematite (alpha-Fe2O3) photoanodes for water
splitting. Thermodynamics suggest that hematite can be directly transformed to
pyrite, bypassing undesired phases that are encountered when using iron as a
precursor. The second approach will employ pulsed plasma-enhanced chemical vapor
deposition (PECVD), a cyclic technique that provides Angstrom-level control over
film thickness. A key element is the use of plasma-assisted fabrication
processes to provide enhanced S activity and precise control over exposure. The
investigations will be informed by unique in situ diagnostic capabilities and
comprehensive evaluation of material properties and device performance. In both
cases pyrite will be formed in intimate contact with a conducting tin
oxide/hematite structure that will allow interrogation of the opto-electronic
performance, in addition to providing an advanced front contact that facilitates
device fabrication.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: New low cost, earth abundant solar cell technologies are
required to generate the TW levels of power required for sustainability. Pyrite
is the most promising semiconductor for solar energy conversion in terms of
potential capacity and cost. It is a non-toxic, earth abundant compound that can
very efficiently absorb light for photovoltaic applications. Single junction
solar cells derived from this material are theoretically capable of >25%
efficiency, but the best results obtained in the limited studies to date are
<3%. The work described in this proposal will establish the scientific knowledge
base required to successfully produce phase-pure pyrite in a thin film form
required for photovoltaics. A major contribution of this project will be the
education and advanced training of both graduate and undergraduate students in
the materials science and advanced processing of inorganic thin film PV. The
PI's group will continue their K-12 outreach work, developing workshop materials
related to renewable energy for teachers in school districts with large
populations of underrepresented students.

This project is supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program.