* 1207284
* Extending the pi-Conjugation Length of Soluble Semiconducting Polymers to Effect Efficient Charge Transport
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Elsa Reichmanis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 06/30/2015
* USD 308,714.00

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Realization of polymer architectures
with well-defined dimensions and functions is one of the current research
challenges in the field of organic semiconducting materials. Materials that meet
requisite performance targets and will markedly reduce overall process
complexity are essential. The proposal focusses on the design, synthesis and
characterization of pi-conjugated polymers having the following characteristics:
a low bandgap, a low HOMO level, and effective pi-pi interactions. The aim is to
define a strategy for the effective extension of the conjugation length of
polymers having electro-optic characteristics. The materials are expected to
exhibit enhanced field-effect induced charge transport and photovoltaic
properties, features that an imperative for the successful introduction of
robust and reliable polymer based devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically,
the PI will (1) investigate the effectiveness of the vinylene linkage to extend
the conjugation length of targeted polymers, (2) investigate alternative alkyl
side chains and their ability to solubilize targeted polymers in common organic
solvents, allowing for solution processing, (3) synthesize alternative D-A
architectures, (4) perform requisite physical characterization of the targeted
materials, (5) fabricate field effect transistor and photovoltaic devices to
evaluate the impact of the approach. Through the studies defined above, it is
anticipated that identification of key, synthetically accessible structural
features will provide for an extension of the pi-conjugation length of
semiconducting polymers with requisite characteristics that will allow for
orientation and alignment that are favorable for charge transport. These studies
will identify means to achieve energy levels and bandgaps that not only afford
desired electro-optic performance, but also support robust and reliable
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conjugated polymeric materials in general, and
polymer semiconductors in particular, are of broad interest because of the wide
range of possible applications including organic light-emitting diodes (OLED),
organic field effect transistors (OFET), photovoltaic devices (PV), electro-
optic shutters, printed antennas, plastic-based actuators, and signal switches.
Further, polymers offer compatibility with high through-put, low cost processing
techniques. The proposed research program will provide essential insight needed
for the development and deployment of advanced polymer materials for electro-
optic device applications having significant societal impact, examples of which
are described above. Students participating in this effort will gain invaluable
experience working in a multidisciplinary program. This approach will allow them
to experience a broad education and to acquire a sound knowledge base in the
area of polymer science and engineering coupled with an appreciation of the
contributions of other disciplines. The research program will be integrated with
undergraduate and graduate students working in teams to further the objectives
of the proposal. Additionally, opportunities will be sought for high school
students to participate in these teams. Outreach activities will target the
local very diverse community, and both the PI and students will participate.
Through these activities, public understanding of STEM will be enhanced, thereby
positively influencing a diverse future generation of students to enter STEM
fields.