* 1207727
* Phased Array Feed:  Development of a Cryogenic 19 Element System for Radio Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2014
* Donald Campbell, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Bloemhof
* 06/30/2014
* USD 394,546.00

Radio telescopes operating at centimeter wavelengths have historically used just
a single feed system, equivalent to a single spatial pixel on the sky. This
makes for a very slow and laborious data-gathering process. In contrast, modern
instruments at optical and infrared wavelengths, and more recently those at
millimeter and sub-millimeter wavelengths, are able to gather data in parallel
from multiple (and in some cases many) independent pixels at once. The gains in
observing efficiency and scientific capability can be enormous. Multiple pixels
improve the ability to remove signal background and greatly increase the speed
at which large-area surveys can be carried out. An initial step at the
wavelength of 21 centimeters is the Arecibo Observatory 7-pixel Arecibo L-band
Feed Array (ALFA), installed on the 305-meter telescope in 2004.

A future direction with even more impact on observing power is a planned
cryogenically-cooled 40-beam phased array feed (PAF) for Arecibo, also operating
at L-band. Feasibility studies have shown that Arecibo optics can support all 40
beams on the sky, and a demonstration dewar system that will house a 19-element
array is nearly complete. To further develop the technology needed to build
large arrays of the future, Drs. G. Cortes-Medellin and D. Campbell of Cornell
University plan to add low noise amplifiers to the cryogenic dewar and deploy
the full system for use on the Arecibo telescope. The goals will be to
demonstrate that a system noise temperature of less than 35 K can be achieved
with a multipixel array, investigate optimal beam-forming algorithms for
Arecibo's optics, and determine the system's overall temporal stability. The
new, more efficient generation of multi-element L-band receivers being advanced
by this project will mesh with phased array feed signal-processing backends
under development at Brigham Young University. Together, the studies will enable
the design of a larger, full-scale phased array feeds that will greatly
accelerate the capabilities of cm-wavelength surveys. Students and young
scientists employed throughout the project will help augment the next generation
of hardware-savvy researchers with expertise in signal detection and propagation
for the important radio regime.

Funding for this work is being provided by NSF's Division of Astronomical
Sciences through its Advanced Technologies and Instrumentation program.