* 1207656
* High-Frequency Search for New Sub-Millimeter Range Forces
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Joshua Long, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2015
* USD 223,022.00

This award supports an experimental search for spin-dependent forces below 1
millimeter. Present experimental limits allow for undiscovered forces in nature
several million times stronger than gravity acting over distances resolvable by
the unaided eye. Theoretical models developed over the past few decades that
attempt to explain why interactions involving the strong nuclear force always
conserve certain spacetime symmetries make specific predictions of spin-
dependent forces in the sub-millimeter range. The proposed experiment thus
represents an excellent opportunity for discoveries in this range. The
experiment uses 1-kilohertz planar oscillators as test masses with a thin shield
between them to suppress backgrounds, a technique that has demonstrated the
capability to probe micron-scale distances using relatively large (square-
centimeter) masses, and to operate at the limit of instrumental thermal noise at
room temperature. Spin-polarized materials with high spin density but low
intrinsic magnetism, including ferrimagnets that exhibit orbital compensation of
the magnetism associated with the aligned electron spins, will be investigated
as test masses. With modest aligned-spin densities but good control of magnetic
backgrounds, the projected sensitivity of the experiment is several orders of
magnitude greater than the current best limits at ranges below 1
millimeter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spin is a fundamental property of elementary
particles and a crucial aspect of quantum physics. The discovery of a
macroscopic force that depends on spin would have enormous implications for
physics from subatomic to cosmological scales. A variety of extensions to the
Standard Model (the most successful theory particle physics to date, but widely
believed to be incomplete) predict short-range spin-dependent forces. These
forces are mediated by particles that could contribute to the "dark matter"
hypothesized to pervade all of space in order to explain the apparent mass
distributions of galaxies. The mysterious "dark energy" postulated to explain
the observed expansion of the universe also seems to point to a length scale on
the order of tens of microns as a special range at which previously undetected
phenomena might appear. During its execution, this fundamental project will also
provide all participants (including several undergraduates who have contributed
to this proposal) with experience in mechanical design, vacuum technology, low-
noise electronics, semiconductor and magnetic materials processing, and other
practical techniques useful in a wide range of science and engineering fields.
The experiment will also be a key focus of the Indiana University Center for
Spacetime Symmetries (IUCSS), which was founded by the PI and his colleagues to
strengthen and publicize IU's growing expertise in the investigation of the
structure of spacetime. Success of the proposed experiment will support the
IUCSS goal to establish a long-term program of coordinated experimental and
theoretical investigation of new physics at sub-millimeter length scales.