* 1207748
* Optimal Coupling of Light to Spectrographs for Precision Radial Velocities
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Debra Fischer, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Evans
* 07/31/2014
* USD 361,000.00

A classic and extremely productive technique for detecting planets around other
stars is to measure the tiny reflex motion their gravity imparts to the parent
stars. The signature of that motion is the presence of small radial velocity
shifts in the stellar spectra. However, to detect the most interesting rocky (or
earthlike) planets (one of the top three scientific priorities laid out by the
2010 Decadal Survey "New Worlds, New Horizons") will require an improvement in
measurement precision by a full factor of ten over the current state of the art,
which is roughly 1 meter per second. Extraordinary control of systematic error
sources will therefore be required to detect a planet comparable to our Earth.
The "New Worlds, New Horizons" report indeed recommended improvement of radial
velocity techniques as the highest priority for ground-based exoplanet
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. D. Fischer and coworkers at Yale University
are investigating a number of aspects of the problem that involve determining
the optimal coupling of light from the telescope into the spectrograph, the
instrument that actually measures the radial velocity of interest. To control
variations in illumination of the optical fiber that first accepts light from
the telescope and then channels it into the spectrograph, octagonal fibers will
be investigated for their superior "scrambling" of input modes relative to a
slit or round fiber. Scrambling in this way makes the output intensity less
sensitive to details of the input illumination. A thorough study of this and
other effects, such as how the image is sliced into different contributions for
spectral analysis, will be performed, and when the comprehensive study is
completed, the conclusions are expected to lead to substantial reductions in the
systematic sources of error for radial velocity planet finding.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In situ tests of the recommendations emerging from this
work will be carried out using the highly stable cross-dispersed echelle
spectrometer CHIRON on the Cerro Tololo 1.5 meter telescope in Chile, as well as
on the HIRES spectrometer at Keck Observatory on Mauna Kea, Hawaii. However, the
results will have implications for all spectrographs targeted for extremely high
velocity precision. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this work is being
provided by NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences through its Advanced
Technologies and Instrumentation program.