* 1207474
* Interfacial Electromagnetic Coupling in Multiferroic Tunnel Junctions
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Qi Li, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 04/30/2015
* USD 260,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program
(EPM) and Ceramics Program (CER) in the Division of Materials Research
(DMR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Multiferroic tunnel
junctions, which combine magnetic tunnel junctions with ferroelectric barriers,
are potentially multilevel and multifunctional devices with low power
consumptions. They have potential to realize electric control of magnetic
states, which is critical for functional spintronic devices. This project aims
to study the mechanisms of interfacial magnetoelectric coupling effect and the
switching of the magnetic state by an electric field in multiferroic tunnel
junctions. Interfacial magnetoelectric coupling depends on the atomic and
chemical structures of both magnetic and the ferroelectric layers at the
interfaces. By combining the design and controlled growth of heterostructures of
different magnetic and ferroelectric oxides, measurements of the interfacial
magnetic states, and measurements of magnetic and transport properties of the
devices, the project seeks to understand the mechanisms of interfacial
magnetoelectric interaction in several systems. These studies may lead to
enhanced magnetoelectric coupling and new device concepts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: The project addresses a
materials science challenge which has potential impact on next generation of
electronic devices. By combining a very thin ferroelectric insulator, a material
with spontaneous charge polarization, as the barrier with magnetic tunnel
junctions that have been used for magnetic recording and sensors, new
functionalities can be achieved. Success of the research can have significant
impacts on realizing multilevel multifunctional devices with multiple
independent controls. The educational goals of the project are to provide
educational and training opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate
students, especially for female and underrepresented minority undergraduate
students, with a stimulating environment for interdisciplinary experience in
physics, materials sciences, and engineering. The PI has many years of
experience in advising female and underrepresented groups through several
established activities.