* 1207362
* Toxicity Mechanism of Biocidal Conjugated Polyelectrolyte Polymers and Oligomers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* David Whitten, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2016
* USD 390,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1207362 PI: Chi, Eva ORG: University of New Mexico

Title: Toxicity Mechanism of Biocidal Conjugated Polyelectrolyte Polymers and
Oligomers

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The goal of the proposed research is to gain a fundamental
understanding of the intermolecular interactions between a novel class of
synthetic phenylene ethynylene (PPE)-based conjugated polyelectrolyte polymers
(CPEs) and oligomers (OPEs) with various cellular assemblies that give rise to a
remarkably broad spectrum of biocidal activity. The design of this versatile
class of compounds is partly inspired by the naturally occurring antimicrobial
peptides (AMPs), but with the added advantages of manufacturability, chemical
and physical stability, and materials applications. Building on our previous
work in characterizing the biocidal activity of the CPEs and OPEs, the project
focuses on elucidating the mechanism of toxicity with the ultimate goal of
guiding the rational design of novel compounds with optimal toxicity and
selectivity. The CPEs and OPEs are cationic and amphiphilic in nature, which
provides them the ability to interact with and disrupt the structures, and
thereby functions, of multiple cellular targets. Specifically, the PIs plan to
evaluate the propensity of CPEs and OPEs with varying chain length, side and end
groups, charge density and distribution, and structures to interact with and
disrupt the structures of three major types of biological macromolecular
assemblies: lipid membranes (Objective 1), proteins and protein assemblies
(Objective 2), and nucleic acids (Objective 3). To accomplish this goal, the
multidisciplinary team proposes to use a suite of biophysical and materials
characterization methods to study the interactions between CPEs and OPEs and
their cellular targets. These studies, aimed at connecting the molecular
structure with the macroscopic properties, will employ simulations and molecular
modeling to gain further insights into the mechanism and nature of the
interaction of CPEs and OPEs with cellular substrates at a basic molecular
level. Comparing these findings with biocidal activities will enable the PIs to
elucidate the toxicity mechanism and structure-function relationship of this
novel class of synthetic biomimetic materials.

BROADER IMPACTS: The proposed research will elucidate the molecular mechanism of
a class of bioinspired synthetic antimicrobial compounds that holds the
potential to combat the global threat of antibiotic resistance. Elucidation of
the molecular interactions of amphiphilic macromolecules with biological
materials represents a fundamental scientific challenge that has the potential
to impact a number of other fields. These include naturally occurring AMPs,
natural and synthetic cell penetrating peptides with applications in targeted
drug delivery and gene therapy, and amyloid-forming proteins that are implicated
in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases. The proposed research
provides a multidisciplinary environment in which graduate and undergraduate
students will be trained in modern methodologies required to address important
problems at the interfaces between chemistry, physics, engineering, and biology.
The PIs are committed to furthering their contributions to expanding the
educational mission of the University of New Mexico (UNM) by establishing new
Biomedical Engineering degree programs and by taking leadership roles in the
Nanoscience and Microsystems Engineering graduate program. They will continue to
coordinate and participate in existing outreach efforts at UNM that encourage
the participation of under-represented groups, and to expand these existing
programs in new directions. Existing outreach programs that the PIs actively
engage in include: NSF-Partnership in Research and Education in Materials
(PREM), NSMS outreach program, Research Experience for Undergraduates, and the
Southwest Center for Microsystems Education. These programs allow the PIs to
train and educate K-12, undergraduate and graduate students, and teachers in
multidisciplinary methods of science and engineering. Finally, the PIs will also
expand the "Bioengineer for a Day" outreach activity to a rural Native American
elementary school to interest students in science and engineering at an early
age.