* 1207254
* Exceeding the Limit in Solar Energy Conversion with Exciton Fission
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,02/28/2013
* Xiaoyang Zhu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 02/28/2013
* USD 466,100.00

Technical Description: The maximum solar-to-electric power conversion efficiency
of a conventional solar cell is determined by the Shockley-Queisser limit of
about 31%, which comes from the loss of excess energies in hot electrons and
holes created from the absorption of photons with energies above the
semiconductor bandgap. A viable approach to exceed this limit is to create two
electron-hole pairs from the absorption of one photon in a process called
exciton fission. Exciton fission has attracted renewed interest because of the
great potential of designing molecules for optimal fission yields. To
successfully implement exciton fission for solar energy conversion, the PI and
his students are addressing three fundamental questions: 1) What are the
physical principles that govern optimal exciton fission yield? 2) How does
efficient energy transfer occur at organic semiconductor interfaces for singlet
and triplet excitons? 3) What is the best strategy to harvest multiple carriers
from singlet fission? The research team uses model organic semiconductors with
varying energetics or with different degrees of crystallinity to address the
roles of coherent electronic coupling vs. thermal activation and to probe the
effect of electronic delocalization in exciton fission. The team also uses model
organic semiconductor interfaces to probe energy transfer and charge transfer.
All these experiments serve to establish fundamental principles in the
implementation of exciton fission for efficient solar energy
conversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: In addition to new
scientific discoveries and developments that will form the foundation of future
solar energy conversion technologies with much improved efficiency, this project
also provides an excellent educational opportunity for the training of the
future high-tech workforce. The educational and outreach activities consist of
three major parts: 1) supervising K-12 students in solar energy research within
the Welch Foundation Summer Scholar program and as a member of the West Lake
High school's Independent Study Mentorship program; 2) collaboration with
emerging solar industries, in particular, with Konarka Technologies, Inc., a
pioneer and leader in polymer based photovoltaics; and 3) developing new
undergraduate curriculum on solar energy, which serves to prepare students for
the emerging job market in the solar energy economy.