* 1207605
* Study of the Highest Energy Cosmic Rays with the Pierre Auger Observatory
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Lawrence Wiencke, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 08/31/2015
* USD 588,972.00

The current measurements of energy spectra, anisotropy, particle composition,
and proton-air cross section demonstrate that the Pierre Auger Observatory has
an unprecedented view of the high-energy Universe and access to particle physics
at energies beyond the LHC. With Auger now operating in its full configuration
of Surface Detector (SD) stations and air Fluorescence Detectors (FD), the data
collected thus far presents interesting puzzles and exciting opportunities. The
suppression of the energy spectrum above 60 EeV implies a Greisen-Zatsepin-
Kuzmin (GZK) or GZK-like effect that screens the isotropic distant Universe.
Events above 55 EeV show hints of extra-galactic anisotropy within this horizon.
FD elongation rate measurements currently extend only to 30 EeV but suggest
either a transition from lighter to heavier primaries, or a glimpse of new
physics beyond LHC energies. These measurements have strong implications about
the nature of the highest energy sources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
support this group in leading the effort to complete an upgrade to the suite of
atmospheric laser test beam systems at the Observatory. Pulsed lasers probe
Auger's enormous dynamic atmospheric calorimeter and generate air shower-like
tracks in the FDs. Planned applications include monitoring the end-to-end
absolute photometric calibration of the FD to better than 5%, a necessary step
to reduce the uncertainty on the energy scale. This has implication in the
determination of the volume up to the GZK horizon. Other applications include an
independent precision measurement of the largest time-varying calibration term
(aerosol optical depth) via Raman LIDAR. This group will also extend methods
that they have developed to search for exotic particles. A technique to measure
the speed of extensive air showers has been benchmarked against laser shots and
then applied to stereo and hybrid events. The technique is sensitive to massive
exotic objects traveling at a fraction of the speed of light that are able to
generate an optical signature in the FD. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the Broader
Impacts planned under this award is the development of a relationship with an
area high school for at-risk youth. The group envisions a program of physics
demonstrations that make use of material developed for the Mines modern physics
courses, including a cloud chamber and coincident particle detectors. The role
of aerosols in climate forcing is not well understood. There are relatively few
aerosol profile measurements in the southern hemisphere. Raman LIDAR is a
standard technique that will both enhance the usefulness of the Auger
atmospheric data and enable more direct comparisons with data in the atmospheric
science community.