* 1207778
* Geometry and Mechanics of Nonthermal Packings
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Narayanan Menon, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 07/31/2016
* USD 360,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** The proposed experiments are designed to probe on the
same footing, the structure, linear response and failure of assemblies of (a)
compact grains, (b) extended one-dimensional filaments, and (c) two-dimensional
sheets. Since the elements in these packings are macroscopic, the packings are
nonthermal, and are therefore far from equilibrium. The award contributes to
understanding whether untargeted packing protocols lead to final states with
statistically reproducible properties. The proposed experiments will study the
three-dimensional structure of model systems of each type. At the same time,
forces of shear and compression will be applied to probe the mechanical strength
of the material. Simultaneously, small loads will be applied to characterise the
linear response. The spatial elements that bestow rigidity on a material are
often most clearly exposed by studying how the material fails under external
loading, so loads large enough to generate yielding will also be imposed. The
proposed work gives graduate and undergraduate students exposure to a variety of
techniques and the opportunity to work in newly-emerging areas of physics. The
PI is also an organizer of an annual summer school hosted at UMass Amherst for
early-career graduate students in soft matter physics.

****Non-Technical Abstract**** The mechanical properties and structure of
assemblies of large particles are much more poorly understood than that of
assemblies of molecules or atoms. The proposed work will study three
geometrically different classes of these systems: (1) Granular materials which
range from range from pharmaceutical powders to mineral ores, and from food
grains to the soils they grow in. (2) Fibrous materials are the main constituent
of plant matter, as well of human products ranging from paper to fabrics and
insulants. (3) Crumpled sheets appear in flowers and leaves, as well as in trash
compaction and shock absorption. The goal is to study idealized versions of
these systems by 3-dimensional imaging techniques that allow the structure to be
visualized while forces are applied to the material. This will give important
clues as to the structural elements in these materials that are responsible for
their mechanical properties. The proposed work gives graduate and undergraduate
students exposure to a variety of techniques and the opportunity to work in
newly-emerging areas of physics. The PI is also an organizer of an annual summer
school hosted at UMass Amherst for early-career graduate students in soft matter
and statistical physics.