* 1207065
* Thermodynamic and Atomic Vibrational Properties of Metal Nanoparticles: Size, Support, and Adsorbate Effects
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Beatriz Roldan Cuenya, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Yang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 345,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to gain insight into
the size-dependent evolution of the melting and Debye temperatures, thermal
expansion coefficient, sintering behavior and phonon density of states of
supported metallic nanoparticles. As nanoparticle size decreases, it becomes
progressively more difficult to produce samples with a well-defined size
distribution. Small changes in size produce a large change in the fraction of
atoms at free surfaces relative to those in contact with the support. Small
nanoparticles are expected to be strongly affected by their local environment,
such as the supporting materials and surface adsorbates. This study addresses
these challenges through a combination of highly controlled sample synthesis to
produce large volumes of well-defined ordered metal nanostructures through
inverse micelle encapsulation and highly sensitive in situ and ex situ
characterization techniques at shared user facilities (Brookhaven National
Laboratory-BNL and Argonne National Laboratory) as well as in the PI's research
lab. The material systems under investigation include Pt and Fe nanoparticles
supported on strongly (Al2O3, SrTiO3) and weakly (SiO2) interacting substrates.
The characterization techniques available for this project are: (i) atomic force
microscopy (AFM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning tunneling
microscopy (STM) for structural characterization, (ii) X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (XPS) for electronic and chemical characterization, and (iii) X-ray
absorption spectroscopy (EXAFS and XANES) and nuclear resonant inelastic X-ray
scattering (NRIXS) for structural, thermodynamic and lattice-vibrational
characterization. The intellectual merit of this application relies on: (i) the
improvement of our current understanding of the thermal properties of metal
nanoparticles &lt; 3 nm and (ii) how these characteristics change because of
particle size-effects, nanoparticle-adsorbate and nanoparticle-support
interactions. This study will contribute insight into the role of the support
and its pre-treatment on nanoparticle sintering phenomena, temperature-dependent
atomic order-disorder transitions and structural phase transitions involving
soft phonon modes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anomalous thermodynamic properties, such as
superheating, negative thermal expansion and ultra-low thermal conductivities,
have been reported for nanostructured metals. The origins of these effects are
heavily debated. This is due in part to the scientific challenge posed by the
complexity of these systems and the need to consider the influence of a number
of variables simultaneously, such as the nanoparticle geometry and environment.
Through this project, insight into the evolution of important characteristics,
such as the melting temperature, thermal expansion coefficient and sintering
behavior, of nanoparticles with decreasing size will be sought. A deeper
knowledge of the thermodynamic properties of nano-metallic systems may lead to
future advances in nanotechnology and materials science, including improving the
thermal stability and operation regime of nanoparticles, heat generation and
distribution in plasmonic nano-antennae, thermoelectric applications, and
nanostructured metal-organic composites for solar cell applications. This
project will contribute to the training of PhD and undergraduate students in
university and national laboratory settings and will provide the first research
experience to two K-12 students. The PI will work with the local Science Center
in the organization of an exhibit entitled "Art in Science, Science in Art,"
intended to draw the attention of the general public to state-of-the-art
scientific research in the nanoscience area through visually appealing posters,
including microscopy images from the proposed research.