* 1207976
* NEESR: Reserve Capacity in New and Existing Low-Ductility Steel Braced Frames
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Larry Fahnestock, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2017
* USD 716,451.00

This award aims to understand and characterize, at a fundamental level, the
influence of reserve capacity on the seismic performance of low-ductility steel
concentrically-braced frames up to the point of collapse. Although low-ductility
steel braced frames have brittle brace elements and connections, they can
achieve system ductility if their gravity framing and gusset plate connections
act partially-restrained after braces fracture. These partially-restrained
connections form a "reserve" moment frame system that can prevent sidesway
collapse even when the primary lateral force resisting system is significantly
damaged. Design provisions for steel structures in low and moderate seismic
regions implicitly rely on reserve capacity for collapse prevention, even though
the nature of this reserve capacity is not well-understood and can vary widely.
Thus, there is an essential need for clarity and consistency in considering
reserve capacity for seismic design in moderate seismic regions. Foundational
understanding of reserve capacity will provide broad national benefit by
establishing an economical and reliable framework for design of new buildings in
low and moderate seismic regions and for evaluation of existing buildings in all
seismic regions of the United States. These significant contributions will be
accomplished through integration of large-scale testing, design studies,
computational simulations, and reliability-based performance assessments. The
research team from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and Tufts
University will use the George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering
Simulation (NEES) facilities at Lehigh University. Collaboration with
complementary research being conducted at Ecole Polytechnique Montreal will
provide valuable synergistic opportunities and enhance the research impact. Data
from this project will be archived and made available to the public through the
NEES Project Warehouse/data repository (http://www.nees.org).

The philosophy and application of system reserve capacity developed out of this
research will open new possibilities for designing and assessing structures in
all seismic regions, with special importance for moderate seismic regions,
renovation in high seismic regions, and the design of special structures.
Engineers will have simple yet effective tools for rationally designing and
assessing low-ductility structures using reserve capacity to prevent seismic
collapse. This philosophy of reserve capacity, which prioritizes cost reduction
over achieving optimum levels of ductility, can also significantly impact design
in developing countries where the seismic details that have become standards in
the United States are not affordable or achievable with available technology.
While this work focuses on steel structures, the scope of reserve capacity is
much broader and more general. Once understood in the context of steel, reserve
capacity may also find uses in other materials and systems both in the United
States and abroad. This award is part of the National Earthquake Hazards
Reduction Program (NEHRP).