* 1207192
* Collaborative Research: Size Effects on Magneto-Mechanics of Ni-Mn-Ga Fibers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Peter Mullner, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 06/30/2016
* USD 346,345.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This project lays the foundation for a new class of active materials - magnetic
shape-memory fibers with tailored geometry, microstructure and magneto-
mechanical properties - to be used as transducers for micro-devices and as
building blocks for composites or cellular structures. Magnetic-field-induced
twinning is responsible for the high magnetoplastic strains achievable in
monocrystalline Ni-Mn-Ga. By contrast, polycrystalline Ni-Mn-Ga shows no
magnetoplasticity because twinning is inhibited by internal incompatibility
stresses developed between adjacent, misoriented grains. The PIs recently
discovered that porosity, because it reduces internal stresses, allows twinning
to occur in polycrystalline Ni-Mn-Ga foams, resulting in magnetoplastic strains
in the foam struts. Applying this concept to individual fibers, our hypothesis
is that tailored grain size (with respect to fiber size) and grain orientations
will allow tuning the magnetoplastic strain from polycrystalline (0%) to
monocrystalline (~10%) behavior.

In this basic study, we will develop a fundamental understanding of how fiber
geometry and grain microstructure enable magnetic-field-induced strains in
polycrystalline Ni-Mn-Ga fibers, leading to experimentally-validated models that
can quantitatively predict the magnitude of magnetoplastic strain for a given
fiber structure. Fundamental experimental and theoretical studies probing the
mechanisms responsible for magnetoplasticity in the fibers will be carried out.
First, the fiber geometry will be varied, in terms of cross-sectional shape and
diameter, by using two versatile manufacturing methods (Taylor wire drawing and
melt extraction). Then, the fiber grain size and texture will be tailored: the
ratio of grain to fiber diameter will be varied from <<1 (polycrystalline fiber)
to ~1 (bamboo structure) and compared to single-crystal fibers; grain
orientation will be varied from random to fiber texture. Third, the magneto-
mechanical properties of the fibers will be characterized and numerically
modeled on two length scales: (i) at a shorter length scale, models based on the
mutual interaction of twinning dislocations and dislocation-interface
interactions will predict the effect of free surfaces on the constitutive
behavior of Ni-Mn-Ga in small volumes; (ii) at larger length scale, finite-
element models will predict, based on the constitutive behavior, the magneto-
mechanical behavior of an assembly of bamboo grains within a fiber.
Collaborators will embed fibers in polymer matrix to create composites to study
their magneto-mechanical properties, or create fiber bundles to study their
magneto-caloric properties.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The present project is a coupled experimental-theoretical study of the magneto-
mechanics of magnetic shape-memory fibers, a novel class of materials. It
focuses on identifying, quantifying and predicting the effects of fiber geometry
and grain microstructure upon reduction of internal stresses and the resulting
enhancement in magnetoplastic strain, a phenomenon recently demonstrated in
struts of foams by the PIs. The results obtained will be general in nature and
thus applicable not only to Ni-Mn-Ga but also to the whole class of magnetic
shape-memory alloys.

Ni-Mn-Ga fibers with tailored grain structures are expected to show large
magnetoplastic strain (i.e. they deform when exposed to a variable magnetic
field) which are much higher than magnetostrictive material containing strategic
rare-earth elements. These Ni-Mn-Ga fibers may be implemented without further
processing in smart actuators and may thus grow rapidly in industrial
importance, resulting in a transformative effect on various sensor and actuator
technologies including bio-medical pumps, ink-jet printer valves, power-
generation transducers, and haptics devices. Beyond sensor and actuator
applications, fibers and fiber constructs may enable new applications such as
efficient magnetic cooling devices with high heat-transfer rates due to their
large specific areas. This project will educate two graduate students and
several undergraduate students, whose recruitment will emphasize women and
minorities. Beside research, the students will participate in various outreach
activities using the shape-memory materials to introduce materials science and
technology to young women, minorities, and grade school (K-12) students. This
project will leverage collaboration with four international partners (in Europe
and Asia) thereby generating high visibility and impact. The recent results of
the PIs resonated strongly with the scientific community and were highlighted in
national media. These contacts will be leveraged for disseminating results of
the proposed project. The PIs have submitted two patents and pursue a spin-off
project for transitioning the field to the US high-technology industry.