* 1207702
* Singularity Behavior in Some Geometric Variational Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Robert Hardt, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2016
* USD 242,153.00

This project lies in the area of geometric calculus of variations, which treats
the formation and behavior of singularities for various optimal or stationary
functions, fields, measures, or geometric structures, possibly subject to
constraints, both deterministic and stochastic. The first specific class of
projects involves continuing work with Thierry De Pauw (Paris VI) concerning the
study of chains, cochains, charges, and the higher dimensional calculus of
variations in general metric spaces with general coefficient groups. We consider
a variety of mass-type functionals and the notion of a flat chain which
generalizes the finite mass metric-space currents of Ambrosio-Kirchheim and the
rectifiable and flat Euclidean-space G-chains of B.White and Fleming, Homology
theories defined with such chains give an interplay between the topology and
geometry of a metric spaces. For example, preliminary work as shown how
Lipschitz path connectedness or the existence of finite mass spanning surfaces
may be characterized by a suitable 0 and 1 dimensional flat homology groups.
Variational cohomology may be treated by charges, which are cochains dual to
normal currents, suitably topologized, and which often admit representation by
pairs of continuous forms. Second we are continuing work with T. Riviere (ETH),
on relations between various energies of maps between Riemannian manifolds and
the homotopy classes of the maps. Following our recent work, we will consider
energies given by integrating powers of the norm of the differential, the
Hessian, etc. A key general question for critical dimensions is the minimum
energy required to produce maps with a given nontrivial topology, in particular,
how this minimum grows asymptotically as the topology degenerates. There are
interesting concrete problems here for the rational homotopy of 4 manifolds.
Third,with Betul Orcan (Rice) we propose to initiate work on geometric
structures arising in geometric measure theory from stochastic variational
problems with noisy data or noisy dependence on data. The work should be based
on quantitative low regularity results and quantitatively described probable
higher regularity for most data.

Solutions to many variational problems in both pure and applied mathematics
often are forced to have singularities, that is, to involve regions where large
oscillations occur. For example among the many classes of liquid crystals, the
optical axis may be forced to oscillate rapidly near points or along curves or
along walls between regions. Our research proposes to understand the
relationship between energies in such variational problems and the topological
barriers imposed by the physics of the problems. Geometric constraints which
occur naturally in many physical problems have led to new mathematical issues,
and we need to use the full language of geometric measure theory to have
sufficiently general geometric structures and objects to treat these issues.
Also in applications, the presence of impurities in materials or of noise in
measurements and data acquisition is important to consider. So it would be quite
useful to develop mathematical tools to incorporate noise and stochastic
considerations with the geometric structures. Two particular problems that we
propose studying involve flow problems in image processing and the growth of
higher dimensional ramified structures in biology with noisy data.