* 1207894
* Developing Indigenous Research Methodologies in the Arctic (IRM-A): Examining the Impacts of Settlement on Socialization and Youth Experience in Siberia and Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Stacy Rasmus, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2015
* USD 391,847.00

This innovative, collaborative, comparative ethnographic inquiry aims to explore
the ways indigenous research methodologies can be effectively utilized in the
study of arctic indigenous youth with special focus on local impacts of
settlement on socialization practices and experiences of growing up in two
arctic Indigenous communities: one in Siberia and one in Alaska. The design and
methods of the study arise directly from community requests and contemporary
circumpolar social exigencies to come up with more effective and culturally
responsive ways of working with Indigenous youth in arctic contexts. The
involvement of two native Alaskan and Siberian social scientists are crucial for
introduction of an innovative method of anthropological peer observation in each
community to document and address the complexities of conducting Native research
as a Native person. The process of peer observation will enable the intersection
of meaning systems through the cultural encounter of Indigenous observer
bringing to bear on the research process the following conditions: traditional
Indigenous knowledge, empathy, a native-point-of-view of the contemporary socio-
economic and global environmental context as well as a non-native?s perception
of local specificities. This participatory study will address the following
questions: What are the key characteristics of Indigenous research
methodologies? How are Indigenous research methodologies applied in arctic
Indigenous contexts and with youth? How can Indigenous research methods impact
critically upon important social issues in the communities? What are the
benefits and challenges of utilizing an Indigenous approach to research, and how
can Indigenous research methods apply more generally across cultural and
academic contexts? This study aims to impact the international Indigenous and
scientific communities by providing critical information on research process,
methods and outcomes from both the Indigenous community perspective as well as
from the Indigenous researcher perspectives.