* 1207881
* Matrix-Product-State Open Source Code and the Many Body Physics of Ultracold Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Lincoln Carr, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2017
* USD 529,393.00

We will develop matrix product state (MPS) codes for entangled quantum many-body
systems in one spatial dimension including long-range interactions, necessary
for the long-range dipole-dipole interaction inherent to ultracold molecules.
Our open source codes will be integrated into the ALPS (Algorithms and Libraries
for Physics Simulations) package as part of the ALPS collaboration. As more
complex molecules approach quantum degeneracy, the number and complexity of
many-body models to describe them will also increase substantially.
Additionally, searching for emergent phenomena such as quantum order requires
exploration of vast parameter spaces and extrapolation using many different
system sizes. This requires us to rethink the way in which we design and
dispatch simulations and collect and interpret data. Open source tools which are
to have a long term impact must be flexible to adapt to different physical
degrees of freedom, different Hamiltonians, and different dynamical processes;
they must be efficient to manage large parameter exploration; and they must
contain powerful tools for extracting data from large simulations. Our proposed
MPS algorithms enable us to meet these challenges and be prepared for the next
wave of ultracold molecular physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our creation of open
source code for matrix product state (MPS) and related methods has the potential
for new insights into strongly correlated systems, a standing problem in physics
on which we have been able to make only a little progress so far. Strongly
correlated systems include high-temperature superconductors, an outstanding
problem for energy technology as a sizeable fraction of energy resources are
squandered simply in transmission lines; high-temperature materials have the
potential to alleviate this loss. MPS methods allow us to explore different
models of a quantum computer, including in our main physical subject of
ultracold molecules, applied to quantum computing. Finally, the training of
students in rigorous numerical techniques and high-performance parallel
computing is key to success in a number of arenas in society, from the space
program to global climate change to monitoring and managing nation-wide
outbreaks of infectious diseases. This award will support such training, and
will support a principal investigator involved in that effort from the
undergraduate through graduate levels.