* 1207693
* Dynamics, Integrability and Control of Mechanical and Nonholonomic Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Anthony Bloch, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lora Billings
* 07/31/2016
* USD 170,000.00

This project is a continuation of the principal investigator's study of the
geometry, dynamics and control of mechanical systems including Hamiltonian and
Lagrangian systems, nonholonomic systems, and gradient flows. Nonholonomic
systems are a generalization of classical Hamiltonian and Lagrangian systems
where the system is subject to nonintegrable constraints on the velocities. The
investigator proposes to study the dynamics and control of mechanical systems
with such constraints, including nonholonomic systems with internal degrees of
freedom, nonholonomic systems with controls, systems with nonlinear constraints,
the Hamilton Jacobi equation in the nonholonomic setting, discrete systems,
infinite-dimensional systems, and certain optimal control problems. He also
proposes to study integrable Hamiltonian and nonholonomic systems and their
relation to gradient flows. In the course of this work the proposer will study
the role that symmetries play in the formulation of the nonholonomic equations
of motion and in their integrability, the new dynamics that arises when one has
a nonholonomic system interacting with a fluid, and how systems with nonlinear
nonholonomic constraints behave, including thermostats (systems interacting with
a heat bath). He will also study flexible nonholonomic systems. and the role of
Hamiltonization (transformation to Hamiltonian form) in understanding the
integrability of a nonholonomic system. In addition he will analyze gradients
flows in finite and infinite dimensions including flows on loops groups and
other infinite-dimensional spaces, and their relationship to
integrability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dynamics of mechanical systems is of
great importance in technology. The theory of nonholonomic dynamics in
particular is the study of mechanical systems subject to constraints imposed on
velocities. Such constraints arise for example in systems consisting of rigid
bodies rolling on surfaces without slipping Nonholonomic systems occur
frequently in many practical systems including wheeled vehicles such as cars (in
particular self steering cars) and robots. Control of such systems is an
important technological problem. In addition, the mathematics behind the control
of nonholonomic systems plays a key role in control of nonlinear systems in
general, such as the control of aircraft or underwater vehicles. Also important
is how dissipation (or friction) affects the behavior and stability of such
systems We are interested in describing the behavior of these systems, how to
control and stabilize them and how to simulate the dynamics and control on a
computer. It is hoped that this research will lead to advances in engineering
and the proposer will collaborate with engineers and physicists. The proposed
program has a strong educational impact. Material related to this research will
be used in an advanced dynamics class. The research will involve the work of
Ph.D students and undergraduates.