* 1207173
* A Biologically Inspired Material for Stem-Cell Induced Cartilage Repair
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Treena Livingston, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2016
* USD 330,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
New Jersey Institute of Technology will investigate a novel, semi-synthetic
derivative of cellulose, which is one of the most abundant natural materials,
for use as a tissue engineering scaffold for cartilage repair. Articular
cartilage has a limited capacity to heal. Specialized constructs incorporating
cells as well as materials that more closely mimic the structure of the
cartilage extracellular matrix during early development may be a promising
strategy for promoting the formation of functional cartilage tissue. Sodium
cellulose sulfate is water soluble and mimics the structure of
glycosaminoglycans. It is a linear polysaccharide that can be synthesized with
varying degrees of sulfation for improved bioactivity. Sodium cellulose sulfate
could impart functional qualities that are similar to glycosaminoglycans, direct
chondrogenesis and cartilage tissue formation. Sodium cellulose sulfate will be
combined with gelatin in a fibrous form to more closely mimic the natural
extracellular matrix of cartilage in both structure and function. The first aim
of the project will be the fabrication and characterization of sodium cellulose
sulfate -gelatin fibrous scaffolds with the goal of determining construct(s)
that best support cell growth and infiltration. Aim 2 will determine sodium
cellulose sulfate constructs that promote mesenchymal stem cell-induced
cartilage formation and integration with surrounding host cartilage in vitro.
The goals of this project are to develop a novel combination therapy for the
repair of cartilage defects and enhance the scientific understanding of the role
of biologically inspired materials and their effect on cell differentiation. The
research efforts here will also be disseminated in teaching, training, and
education. Of particular interest is the inclusion of underrepresented
minorities and women in the scope of its impact. The principal investigator's
laboratory is actively involved in the recruitment, training and mentorship of
underrepresented minority and female students starting at the junior high school
level through various community and university
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a
biologically inspired material for cartilage tissue repair. Joint repair
continues to be a significant challenge that demands the use of innovative
materials that can provide biological function. Specialized constructs
incorporating cells as well as materials that more closely mimic the structure
of cartilage tissue during early development may be a promising strategy for
promoting the formation of functional cartilage tissue. Sodium cellulose sulfate
mimics the structure of glycosaminoglycans present in cartilage tissue and can
be prepared with varying degrees of functional groups to improve its biological
performance. Sodium cellulose sulfate containing materials will be evaluated
with stem cells for the formation of cartilage tissue. The goals of this project
are to develop a novel combination therapy for the repair of cartilage defects
and enhance the scientific understanding of the role of biologically inspired
materials and their effect on cell function. The research efforts here will also
be disseminated in teaching, training, and education. Of particular interest is
the inclusion of underrepresented minorities and women in the scope of its
impact. The principal investigator's laboratory is actively involved in the
recruitment, training and mentorship of underrepresented minority and female
students starting at the junior high school level through various community and
university programs.