* 1207239
* Mesoscale modeling of self-assembly and transport in polymer electrolyte  membranes
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Alexander Neimark, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 383,803.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education to develop simulation methods to model
structural and transport properties of polyelectrolyte membranes. Polyelectric
membranes are one of the critical and most expensive components of the solid
polymer electrolyte fuel cells, a promising technology for energy production
from hydrogen and oxygen. A better understanding of the basic mechanisms of
nanostructure formation and conductivity of polyelectrolyte membranes could lead
to improvement of currently available solid polymer electrolyte fuel cells.
Separation and transport properties of polyelectrolyte membranes are determined
by their self-assembled nanostructure: upon hydration, the membrane segregates
into hydrophilic and hydrophobic subphases on the mesoscopic scale. The PI aims
to develop a mesoscale simulation method for studies of polyelectrolyte
membranes self-assembly and proton conductivity based on the dissipative
particle dynamics technique with coarse-grained interaction parameters
determined from ab initio and atomistic molecular dynamics simulations. The new
method includes the introduction of a mesoscopic model of proton transport along
the hydrophilic subphase of the self-assembled polyelectrolyte membranes. The
new method will be tested against available experimental data and earlier
simulations of ionomer fragments and traditional Nafion membranes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The simulation method will enable direct computational
investigation of segregated morphology and proton transport in coupled
polyelectrolyte membranes. The PI aims to advance fundamental understanding of
the physico-chemical mechanisms of self-assembly, water sorption and
permeability, and proton conductivity. The simulation methods that will be
developed and structure-property relationships that will be established have the
potential to have significant impact and accelerate the search of new
polyelectrolytes for permselective membranes for fuel cells, thus contributing
to the effort to develop novel materials for sustainable hydrogen-based energy
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This award supports graduate, undergraduate,
and postdoctoral training in theoretical and computational nanomaterials science
and engineering. Minority undergraduate students will be recruited through the
Rutgers special training programs. A dedicated webpage will be created for
making project reports and presentations available for educational purposes.
Computor codes together with instructive case study examples will be posted on
this webpage for free distribution to the scientific community. Simulation
methods developed and case-study systems will be included into a new graduate
course on "Nanoscale Thermodynamics and
Transport."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and education to
develop computational methods for modeling structural and transport properties
of polyelectrolyte membranes. Polyelectrolyte membranes are one of the critical
and most expensive components of polymer exchange membrane fuel cells, a
promising technology for the extraction of electric energy from hydrogen and
oxygen. Polyelectrolyte membranes are made of complex chain molecules composed
of hydrophobic and hydrophilic fragments. To function in a fuel cell, a
polyelectrolyte membrane separates the two electrodes, the anode and the
cathode, and allows only hydrogen ions or protons to pass through it leaving
electrons behind. Hydrogen atoms, composed of a proton and an electron, are
split at the anode liberating the electron that flows to the cathode through an
electric circuit, for example the motor in an electric car. The proton flows
through membrane to the cathode where it is reunited with the electron that has
traveled trhough the circuit and oxygen atoms to form water which is expelled
from the fuel cell. The ability of the polyelectrolyte membrane to conduct only
protons is crucial for the operation of the fuel cell. Under working conditions,
polyelectrolyte membranes exhibit a kind of self-assembly or restructuing of its
molecules - the hydrophobic fragments form a three dimensional network of
proton-conducting channels. The ability of the membrane to conduct protons
depends of the specifics of the chemical composition and structure of the
membrane that results from the self-assembly process. The PI will develop a
novel computer simulation technique to determine the relationships among the
chemical composition of the polyelectrolyte membrane, its structure under
working conditions, and its ability to conduct protons, with the aim of
determining optimal designs for novel fuel cell membranes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research could have impact across
disciplines, since it addresses currently unresolved topical problems related to
self-assembly and charge conduction in synthetic and biological polyelectrolyte
materials. Computer modeling tools developed in the course of the research can
be adapted and modified for simulation and optimization of other materials with
potential to have application to biomedical systems and biomedical technologies
involving DNA, proteins, and physiological membranes. This research contributes
to the effort to develop sustainable energy sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports graduate, undergraduate, and postdoctoral training in theoretical
and computational nanomaterials science and engineering. Minority undergraduate
students will be recruited through the Rutgers special training programs. A
dedicated webpage will be created for making project reports and presentations
available for educational purposes. Computor codes together with instructive
case study examples will be posted on this webpage for free distribution to the
scientific community. Simulation methods developed and case-study systems will
be included into a new graduate course on "Nanoscale Thermodynamics and
Transport."