* 1207807
* US-CHINA WORKSHOP FOR CYBER-ENABLED, USER-ORIENTED, INTEROPERABILITY MODELING FOR ENGINEERING SUSTAINABLE BUILT ENVIRONMENTS, Beijing, Summer of 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2011,11/30/2013
* Yong Tao, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 11/30/2013
* USD 59,822.00

(1207807-TAO) This workshop will be held at Tsinghua University in Beijing
during the summer of 2012. It is being organized by a steering committee
composed of researchers from both the US and China. The purpose of the workshop
is to develop a research agenda centered on bottlenecks in engineering, software
and social sciences, forming a nexus of critical issues impeding wider
application of net-zeroenergy (NZE) building technology. In particular, the
research agenda will focus on the needs for research in order to develop a
platform that allows multi-disciplinary, collaborative research results to be
shared so that a cyber-enabled, building user-oriented, interoperability
modeling approach can be implemented. Achievements from the existing research
and development initiatives and best-practices from the U.S. and China provide a
foundation for robust future collaboration among the next generation of energy
engineering researchers from both countries as the top energy consumers and CO2
emitters on the global scale. While the identification and development of new
building product-level technology may result from the research agenda, the focus
will be on fundamental scientific knowledge that will foster system integration
and universal (meaning cross-discipline and cross-country boundaries)
comparability, a mutual challenge. Specific objectives include, but are not
limited to, developing physics-based universal comparability of energy
efficiency criteria, quantification of energy, health and environmental benefits
for zero-net-energy buildings, and quantification of impact of user-building
interaction on the zero-energy building performance. The workshop will include
visits to partner research sites in China, extensive discussion and ample time
for U.S. students to become familiar with unique perspectives of Chinese
counterparts and to participate in research planning. It is expected that the
results of the workshop will provide the broader research and industrial
community with key issues and challenges for needed efforts at multiple levels
(individual PIs, multiple PIs, multiple institutions and
academic/industrial/private collaborations) for achieving wider penetration of
renewable and alternative energy in building sectors at a global scale. Results
may serve to inform principal investigators in NSF?s green building portfolio by
providing context for addressing a global cyber-enabled model for cooperation
and data sharing. Finally, the workshop will serve as a launching pad for a
U.S.-China net-zero-energy research network, where many of the research ideas
resulting from the workshop will be followed through and more substantial
collaborative research agendas will be developed and executed.