* 1207577
* Current-Driven Magnetodynamics in Metallic Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Maxim Tsoi, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2016
* USD 335,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This project explores high-frequency
magnetodynamics in metallic heterostructures driven by an electric current, both
from the fundamental physics point of view as well as from their relevance to
the technologically important area of magnetoelectronics, or spintronics.
Spintronics is built on a complementary set of phenomena in which magnetic
configurations influence transport properties and transport currents alter
magnetic configurations. An example of the latter is the so-called spin-
transfer-torque phenomenon which refers to a novel method to manipulate spins
using an electrical current. This method, based on quantum mechanical exchange
interaction, offers unprecedented spatial and temporal control of spin
distributions and attracts a great deal of attention because it combines
interesting fundamental science with the promise of applications in a broad
range of technologies. This project will exploit the recently developed magnetic
microcontact spectroscopy technique which is unique in its ability to probe the
current-driven magnetodynamics on yet unexplored length and time scales. The
advantages of the technique will be used to study spin-transfer-torque in
ferromagnets and also to look for novel spin transfer effects in
antiferromagnetic materials which have recently been proposed on theoretical
grounds. Coherent integration of research and educational activities will expose
PhD students to spintronics and prepare them to conduct research and development
of economically feasible and innovative
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Reducing power and increasing speed of logic and memory
devices are of perennial interest in electronics. For instance, in magnetic
memories, which make use of magnetic moments as the memory bits, it is pivotal
to reliably sense (read) and reverse (write) the moments fast and with minimum
energy dissipated. Spin-transfer-torque (STT) phenomenon, which refers to a
novel method to control and manipulate magnetic moments by an electric current,
can provide just that; here the current generates the STT torque on magnetic
moments and can be used to write (switch) magnetic bits in storage media as,
e.g. in STT Random Access Memory (STTRAM), being touted as a potential
"universal" memory incorporating many of the attractive attributes of other
memories like flash, SRAM and DRAM. Specifically, the packing density and speed
of such a memory should be improved. In this context, the proposed experiments
will be a test bed for the speed and scalability limits of such technology. This
project will explore high-frequency magnetodynamics driven by an electric
current both from the fundamental science point of view as well as from their
relevance to applications in high-speed high-density magnetic recording
technology. Coherent integration of research and educational activities will
prepare PhD students to conduct research and development of economically
feasible and innovative applications.