* 1207309
* Designing Intermolecular Interactions for High-Performance Small-Molecule Bulk Heterojunctions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Oksana Ostroverkhova, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2015
* USD 389,515.00

Technical Description: In this project, optoelectronic properties of small-
molecule donor-acceptor materials are systematically explored, with the ultimate
goal of developing soluble donor-and-acceptor molecules for efficient small-
molecule bulk heterojunction solar cells and novel sensitizers (acceptors) for
photorefractive devices with improved properties. The project aims to fulfill
the following three objectives: to establish dependence of charge
photogeneration, transport, and recombination on the relative energies of the
donor-and-acceptor molecules and molecular packing (macroscopic level); to
quantify contributions of the donor-and-acceptor domains and donor-acceptor
interfacial areas to charge photogeneration, transport, and recombination
depending on the donor-and-acceptor molecules and their packing (microscopic
level); and to determine molecular photophysics, three-dimensional alignment and
domain formation tendencies, of guest acceptor molecules in crystalline donor
hosts depending on the molecular structures of the donor-and-acceptor molecules
and disorder (single-molecule level). Effects of sample fabrication and
processing are also studied. In order to fulfill these objectives, measurements
of time-resolved photocurrent (including scanning photocurrent microscopy) and
time-resolved fluorescence (including near-field scanning optical microscopy and
single-molecule fluorescence spectroscopy) combined with numerical modeling are
carried out.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: One of the most
important aspects of the project is its potential impact on solar and
photorefractive three-dimensional display technology, as well as on other
optoelectronic applications based on solution-processable organic films. The
project integrates fundamental physics and chemistry with materials design and
device technologies and thus provides interdisciplinary educational resources
and infrastructure for postdoctoral researchers and graduate and undergraduate
students contributing to research. The PI makes active efforts to involve
undergraduates, including female and minority students, in the project. Based on
research results, the research team develops educational materials,
demonstrations, and web tutorials that are introduced into graduate and upper-
level undergraduate physics and engineering courses to deepen students'
understanding of the material as well as incorporated into events for college
freshmen and high-school students.