* 1207583
* Benign E. coli adhesion and biofilm formation on mannoside surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Chengzhi Cai, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2015
* USD 426,516.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1207583 PI: Cai, Chengzhi ORG: University of
Houston&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Benign E. coli adhesion and biofilm
formation on mannoside surfaces&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The
proposed research is relevant to a new strategy to prevent pathogen colonization
and biofilm formation. This new strategy uses benign bacteria to form a live,
protective biofilm on materials surfaces to fence off pathogens. The overall
objective of the proposed research is to investigate systematically the role of
surface presentation of mannoside ligands on the formation of biofilms of a
benign E. coli strain expressing mannoside-binding type 1 fimbriae. The specific
objectives are: (1) To optimize the surface presentation of mannoside ligands. A
series of mannoside ligands will be synthesized, varying the substituents on the
glycosidic linkages. They will be covalently attached to silicone surfaces via
an intermittent layer of poly(amido amine) (PAMAM) dendrimers. This approach
will allow for control of the local ligand density at nanoscale. (2) To address
the role of the affinity and nanoscale presentation of the mannoside ligands on
the adhesion, orientation, mobility, proliferation, extracellular matrix
production, and aggregation of the benign E. coli, as well as the rate of
formation, morphology, coverage, and stability of the benign biofilms. Great
progress has been made in molecular biological study of the regulatory mechanism
in the late stage of biofilm formation. In addition, the knowledge base has been
growing rapidly on how the early stage of biofilm formation is affected by
material surface physical, chemical, and mechanical properties. However, the
understanding of the effect of specific ligand-receptor interactions on biofilm
formation on materials surfaces is limited. The proposed research aims to fill
this critical gap in knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: Bacterial
colonization and biofilm formation has a tremendous impact on human health and
the environment. The proposed research will provide new insights to the process
of biofilm formation, which will be invaluable for the development of strategies
to prevent pathogen colonization and to promote the formation of benign or
functional biofilms. Undergraduate and graduate students involved in the project
will be trained in many fields. The PI will organize a workshop for the Science
Extravaganza at the University of Houston to motivate high school students from
underrepresented groups to choose a STEM (science, technology, engineering,
mathematics) field major in college. An undergraduate student in this project
will be recruited from the teach Houston program at the University of Houston.
Students in the program teach classroom lessons in local high schools from their
first year. The PI will work with the student to develop exciting modules, such
as observation of benign biofilm formation, for use in the science course.