* 1207467
* Droplet-based Microfluidics as a Versatile Platform for the Determination of Reaction Mechanisms in Nanoscale Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Robert Rioux, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 07/31/2016
* USD 390,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY The potential impact of nanoscale materials on emerging
applications is immense, with the possibility of producing disruptive new
technological advances in areas as diverse as alternative energy, computing, and
medicine. "Bottom-up" chemical methods that begin with molecular building blocks
are ideal routes to nanoscale materials because they, in principal, are
extremely versatile and permit the design and synthesis of arbitrary
nanostructures. Despite several decades of research, we have very little
mechanistic understanding of how certain molecular entities react to form
nanostructures. All of the variables contributing to the formation of a
particular nanostructure complicate this problem and make it impossible to
design synthetic strategies apriori. This empiricism is due to the lack of in-
situ information of how nanostructure nucleation and growth (isotropic or
anisotropic) is influenced by the chemical and physical environment. The
proposed research supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program
will address the problem outlined above by developing the most thorough
molecular-level understanding of nanostructure synthesis to date utilizing a
versatile droplet-based microfluidic platform that can mimic bulk synthetic
procedures and produce indistinguishable droplets within which nanostructure-
forming reactions occur. The integrated device will be interfaced with
synchrotron x-ray radiation for in-situ, real-time absorption and scattering
measurements. We will utilize the microfluidic device to answer fundamental
mechanistic unknowns regarding the influence of intrinsic/extrinsic anions on
the rate of reduction and nucleation-growth during the formation of spherical
transition metal nanoparticles (NPs), shape-controlled growth of Pt NPs and Au
nanorods with a particular emphasis on capturing the initial chemical reactions
that induce isotropic-to-anisotropic transformation. NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY The
results of this proposal will provide valuable information to develop continuous
reactors for high-throughput production of nanostructures of any arbitrary size,
shape and composition. The educational outreach of this proposal is to provide
opportunity to graduate students, and undergraduates - especially those from
underrepresented groups - to participate in fundamental research in nanoscience,
microfabrication and synchrotron-based characterization. It is estimated that 1
in 100 children in the United States have an autism spectrum disorder (ASD)
diagnosis. In Centre County, Pennsylvania, a non-profit, human services
organization, NHS runs an after-school program - Stepping Stones - for ASD
individuals between the ages of 8-14. The PI and his group will take the lead on
developing simple and visually stimulating science lessons as part of "Science
Tuesdays". Individuals diagnosed with ASD are sensory learners and our science
lessons will be primarily accomplished through visual demonstrations enabling
student participation which encourages social interaction with their peers, the
PI and his graduate students. Visual experiments that cover concepts relevant to
the proposed work (including solubility, supersaturation, nucleation and
crystallography) include growing rock candy and cloud formation. These lessons
will be recorded and disseminated via YouTube and through live demonstrations at
the National Autism Conference held annually on the campus of the Pennsylvania
State University.