* 1207070
* Viscoelastic Response of Ultrathin Polymer Films:  Bubble Inflation, Liquid Dewetting and Molecular Architecture Effects
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Gregory McKenna, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2016
* USD 375,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is a fundamental investigation
of the viscoelastic response of ultrathin polymer films in two different
conditions. The work will compare, contrast, and seek origins of differences
between the nanobubble inflation method developed by the PI at Texas Tech
University and the liquid dewetting method developed by Bodiguel and Fretigny in
Paris (which are the only methods currently available to measure the
viscoelastic response of unsupported films). The two techniques had shown
substantial differences in glass transition temperatures as functions of film
thickness. The two methods differ in that one measures films with free surfaces
and the other measures films floating on a mobile substrate. The planned
research will examine the effects of changing substrate, molecular weight, and
molecular architecture on the viscoelastic properties of ultrathin polymer
films. It will explore the hypothesis that the relevant differences in
confinement behavior are related to very subtle differences in surface
energy/surface interactions and will provide new data focused on the
understanding of how surfaces and interfaces impact the dynamics of polymers
confined to the nanometer size scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dramatic influence of nanoscale confinement
on material behavior is exemplified by the response of ultrathin polymer films
that show tremendous property changes, for example, in freely suspended films
having nanometer thicknesses. Yet the origins of these changes are not yet
elucidated. The present work probes these changes using two novel nanomechanical
test methods. The work compares and contrasts mechanical properties of a series
of polymers having different molecular characteristics. In addition, because
there is such a strong apparent effect of the environment seen by the film
surface, the work probes the behavior of the ultrathin polymer films exposed to
liquids having different properties. The research provides new data in the
understanding of how surfaces and interfaces impact the mechanics of polymers
confined to the nanometer size scale. The project also has an important
component that trains graduate students and, in addition to their scientific
training, involves them in a STEM outreach program to young girls through the
"Science: It's a Girl Thing" Program at Texas Tech University.