* 1207624
* Dynamical Rigidity Percolation in Microtubule Bundles
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Daniel Cox, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 510,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education at the interface of the mathematical
sciences and biology. The coupled microtubule-tau bundles of the neuronal axon
are a remarkable active material, functionally stable over decades even as the
component proteins are constantly renewed. Using mechanisms proposed for tau
removal in late stages of Alzheimer's Disease, which are initiated by
oligomerization of the a-beta peptide, the PIs will develop a coarse grained
theory of the mechanical failure of this system as the tau proteins are depleted
via: (i) tau fragmentation induced by a-beta oligomer triggered protease
production; (ii) tau charging (phosphorylation) through a-beta triggered kinase
production; (iii) aggregation which robs tau monomers from the bundles. The
kinetics of these processes should produce different time courses for tau
removal and hence allow insight into mechanical failure mechanisms. The taus
will be modeled as springs. The PIs will carry out explicit molecular dynamics
simulations on likely tau oligomer structures to determine the relevant spring
forces. The compressed tau springs hold off mechanical collapse induced by at
least two sources: (i) depletion forces between microtubules induced by
intercalating molecules, which have a higher translational entropy when the
microtubules collapse together; (ii) surface tension from the outer
membrane/actin filament cytoskeleton. The PIs will develop force models for the
taus and microtubule depletion forces, and input them to a 2-dimensional
percolation model for the mechanical rigidity. The sequential "spring removal"
can be mapped to the kinetics of the tau degradation to predict time courses for
cell mechanics experiments conducted under exposure to a-beta oligomers. The PIs
will also explore a fully three-dimensional model, which allows for tilting of
the microtubules, which might be important for allowing the microtubules to
experience the depletion attraction. Finally, the PIs will attempt to develop
algorithms to scale the time behavior at high laboratory concentrations for the
damaging A-beta oligomers of Alzheimer's disease to physiologically relevant
concentrations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of mechanical approaches to the
study of intracellular properties is relatively new, as experimental approaches
are only recently catching up to theoretical potential. The PIs will support
both graduate students and advanced undergraduates to work on these problems;
they will receive interdisciplinary education in the physical and biological
sciences, and will have access to state of the art GPU based computing
facilities augmented by this award. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education at the interface of the mathematical sciences and
biology. The PIs will develop computer-based models for the mechanical
properties of the proteins inside the long shafts, or axons, of nerve cells.
Specifically, they will simulate the long protein filaments, known as
microtubules, which are interlinked by protein springs, tau proteins, to find
how the stiffness of the system is degraded when the tau proteins are removed.
This happens in the time course of Alzheimer's disease, but the precise manner
in which the tau removal occurs is a matter of ongoing investigation. By
developing simulations of the mechanical properties of these protein bundles,
which include the dynamical behavior of the tau proteins and the microtubules,
the PIs can account for the different paths by which tau proteins can be
degraded in Alzheimer's disease. Including forces driving microtubules together
due to other molecules inside the nerve cells and the "balloon skin" of the
nerve cell external membrane, the PIs hope to provide experimentally testable
predictions to identify the key processes of nerve cell degradation and death in
Alzheimer's disease. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tau proteins are interesting systems
in their own right: unlike proteins such as hemoglobin which adopt unique shapes
in the human body, tau proteins are intrinsically unstructured yet clearly
important to nerve cell function. As an input to larger scale mechanical models,
the PIs will simulate the mechanical properties of individual and paired tau
proteins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The insights gained may provide inspiration for
new approaches to active, self-healing composite materials outside of living
systems. Since the microtubule/tau bundles remain mechanically stable and
functional over decades of time in healthy, disease free individuals, they are
remarkable model systems for such smart, active materials.