* 1207817
* Topology and Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Daniel Freed, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2016
* USD 234,999.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-1207817 &lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Daniel S. Freed&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this proposal
fits into the broad interaction between geometry and high energy theoretical
physics, with a focus on algebraic topology. There are both purely mathematical
projects influenced by the physics and projects which apply topology to concrete
current problems in quantum field theory, string theory, and condensed matter
theory. On the mathematics side we seek a categorification of the Atiyah-Singer
index theorem. This requires us to develop generalized differential cohomology
theory further. We will also investigate several problems in topological field
theory, particularly concerning invertible theories, which have implications for
algebra and low-dimensional topology. On the physics side we begin to study
aspects of the maximal superconformal field theory in six dimensions, which is
playing an increasingly central role in applications to mathematics. We also
continue our work on topological questions in Type II superstring theory. The PI
will use his experience in this area to attack topological questions in
condensed matter physics, a new area for his research. There are also graduate
student projects in various directions in geometry and
topology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported by this grant develops
modern ideas in geometry which are closely connected with current work in
theoretical physics. Quantum field theory was developed in the last century to
explain elementary particle physics, and it has had spectacular implications for
mathematics as well. String theory is more speculative from the physics point of
view, even more mysterious in mathematics, yet it too provides profound
geometric insights. Many of the projects to be pursued here lie at the interface
between geometry and these physical theories. They are part of a much broader
community effort to bring new ideas from physics into mathematics. Some projects
investigate mathematical structures and problems suggested by the physics. In
others the PI collaborates with physicists to apply modern techniques in
geometry and topology directly to problems in physics. The longterm value of
such basic research for society, above and beyond its intrinsic intellectual
value, can be only be measured now by understanding how fundamentally our
current technology and economy rely on basic research of past decades and
centuries. This grant also supports a longstanding outreach program in Austin
which engages middle and high school students in mathematics.