* 1207377
* Collaborative Research: Hollow Nanoparticle Synthesis - Templating Electrochemically Evolved Hydrogen Nanobubbles
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Yaowu Hao, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 08/31/2016
* USD 291,350.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research between the University
of Texas at Arlington and Bryn Mawr College will develop a fundamental
understanding of the bubble template synthesis method, a new nanoparticle
synthesis process. In this method, electrochemically evolved hydrogen
nanobubbles are used as reducing agents and templates to form metal hollow
nanoparticles. This new synthesis concept possesses the potential to become a
general route to varieties of nanostructures. In this project funded by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program, in situ synchrotron x-ray
diffraction, atomic force microscopy (AFM) and electron microscopy (SEM and TEM)
will be employed to investigate the formation of nanobubbles and nanoparticles
at different growth stages, and the synthesis of nanoparticles with more
complicated structures and from different materials will be studied. First, the
reaction mechanism and kinetics of metal reduction around hydrogen nanobubbles
will be investigated by in situ monitoring the metal deposition using
synchrotron X-ray diffraction. The hypothesis of "the reaction rate is higher
for smaller bubbles" will be tested through electron microscopy analysis of
nanoparticles formed with different synthesis parameters. Then, the formation
mechanism of electrochemically evolved hydrogen nanobubbles will be studied by
in situ detecting the formation of nanobubbles on non-conductive areas on stripe
pattern electrode surfaces using AFM. With Au nanoparticles as an indicator, the
effects of the surface properties of supports and additives in electrolytes
(such as surfactants and hydrogen evolution enhancers) on nanobubble formation
will be studied using electron microscopy analysis. Finally, the synthesis of
hollow nanoparticles of different electroless-depositable metals such as Pt, Pd
and Ag and nanoparticles with more complicated structures such as multi-shells
and half spheres will be explored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Nanotechnology is considered as one of the most potentially
valuable technologies for U.S. in the global economic competition. As an
important part of nanotechnology, metallic nanoparticles are widely used as
catalysts in energy conversion and chemical industry, as imaging and therapeutic
agents in biomedical applications, as building blocks in electronic and
optoelectronic devices, and in many other areas. Through a systematic study on a
new nanoparticle synthesis process - the bubble template synthesis, this
research project funded by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program will
lead to advances in the understanding of nanoparticle formation mechanisms,
providing essential information for controlling the synthesis process to achieve
the desired properties of nanoparticles. In addition, the new synthesis process
can also be utilized as a convenient tool for studies on very small gas bubbles
(nanobubbles) in liquid. This will have many important impacts on a wide range
of bubble-related applications, from hydrogen generation and water electrolysis
to the design of fluidic microchannels and nanodevices. This research program is
integrated with a multi-layered education and outreach program, including course
development for undergraduate nanotechnology education, interdisciplinary
student training, summer camps for K-12 students, and outreach activities
through annual "Extending Your Horizon" (EYH) conference for Philadelphia local
middle school girls. Special emphasis has been placed on broadening the
participation of both women and underrepresented Hispanic students in science
and engineering by providing opportunities to women undergraduate students in
Bryn Mawr College and Hispanic high school and college students in Texas with
conducting state-of-the-art nanotechnology research in this project.