* 1207520
* Collaborative Research: Designing Glass Structures for Femtosecond Laser Processing
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Richard Brow, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 430,751.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Ultrafast lasers with pulses shorter than a
trillionth of a second can be used to create micron-sized structures inside a
piece of glass. This fabrication method provides a platform for the fabrication
of photonic devices and circuits with applications in optical communications,
bio-imaging and -sensing and nanotechnology. In order to exploit the full
potential of this ultrafast laser 'writing' technique it is important to design
materials that are optimized both in terms of device properties and laser
processing behavior. Towards this goal this project aims to develop such
materials as well as a detailed understanding of how the laser changes the
materials structure on a microscopic scale. The research is a collaboration
between UC Davis and Missouri S&T and provides training for graduate,
undergraduate and pre-college students in state-of-the-art materials science and
optical techniques, research opportunities for undergraduates and outreach
activities at the pre-college level.

TECHNICAL DETAILS: Femtosecond (fs)-laser writing of optical waveguides inside
glass substrates is a promising technique for fabricating integrated photonic
devices. The quality of the device is determined by the response of the glass to
fs laser processing conditions as well as glass composition. Phosphate glasses,
which are of interest as host materials for active devices since they allow
incorporation of high concentrations of rare earth ions, typically produce
negative refractive index changes in the laser-exposed regions, leading to poor
optical performance. However, certain compositions exhibit positive refractive
index changes that are desirable for device fabrication. The overall objective
of the project is to develop a fundamental understanding of the materials
parameters that govern the response of phosphate glass to femtosecond laser
irradiation. Experiments are conducted to determine the relationships between
glass structure and response to fs-laser processing and to characterize fs-laser
induced changes in glass structure using fluorescence, Raman, micro-NMR and ESR
techniques, among others. The experimental results are used to develop a model
that describes the fs-laser response in terms of relevant glass structural
parameters and ultimately design new glass compositions. This project is a
collaboration between groups with expertise in optical materials and laser
physics (UC-Davis) and glass chemistry (Missouri S&T) and provides training for
graduate students in state-of-the-art materials science and optical techniques,
research opportunities for undergraduates and outreach activities at the pre-
college level.