* 1207291
* GOALI: Understanding and Modeling Electromigration Induced Solder Degradation
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Antoinette Maniatty, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 07/31/2016
* USD 317,895.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The goals of this research are (i) to gain a better understanding of the effect
of microstructure on the driving forces and resulting mass diffusion processes
associated with electromigration as well as stress and temperature driven
diffusion processes in tin-based solder, and (ii) to develop validated
predictive simulation tools to predict the lifetime of solder connections for
given microstructural parameters. Electromigration is a mass diffusion process
attributed to momentum transfer from conducting electrons to diffusing metal
atoms, which, over time, may lead to degradation and device failure. With the
conversion to tin-based solders and the continued miniaturization of
microelectonic devices, reliability has become a major concern due to the
complex behavior of tin-based solder subjected to increasing current densities
that drive electromigration. This work involves an integrated effort involving
experimentation, modeling, and simulation. The experimental work focuses on
accelerated electromigration tests on chip scale package test structures and
detailed materials characterization to investigate the effect microstructure has
on degradation. This effort is closely coupled with the modeling and simulation
work focused on developing a model for diffusion at the grain scale, considering
the electrical, mechanical, and thermal driving forces. Both anisotropic lattice
and grain boundary diffusion will be included in the model, as well as crystal
plasticity in the mechanical response. The model will be implemented into a
parallel, finite element simulation tool, which will be validated against
experiments and used to predict time to failure for representative
microstructures. This work is a collaborative effort with researchers at
Fairchild Semiconductor, who will lead the experimental work, be involved in the
development of simulation tools, and will use the tools developed in their
future package design process.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This research addresses reliability issues associated with tin-based solders in
microelectronic devices that are arising as devices become smaller in order to
increase chip speed while reducing cost and power consumption. Due to
environmental concerns, tin-based solders have now replaced lead-based solders
used in microelectronic devices. When an electrical current is carried by a very
small solder bump in a modern device, a process called electromigration occurs
where the solder material actually migrates from one end of the solder bump to
the other, driven by the electrons flowing through the solder. This migration of
material may lead to failure, which is a major source of reliability concern in
tin-based solders. Electromigration may be slowed or completely arrested through
careful design and manufacture of the microelectronic device. In order to do
this, a better understanding of electromigration in tin-based solder, and
modeling and simulation tools based on that understanding must be developed,
which is the focus of this research. Researchers at Fairchild Semiconductor, a
US company and global provider of semiconductor solutions, are collaborators on
this research. This project will impact Fairchild and its customers by
developing the knowledge needed to more accurately predict the life and
reliability of wafer level packaging and will provide a critical product design
tool to shorten time to market and maintain a competitive advantage in the
global market. This project will also train and equip undergraduate and graduate
students involved in the research in new advanced methods for physics based
modeling of materials and processes, computational engineering, and conducting
fundamental interdisciplinary research to address emerging research needs in
material processing and design.