* 1207441
* Collaborative Research: Design of Peptide Crystal Growth Modifiers Using Experiments and Simulations
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jeffrey Rimer, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2016
* USD 305,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
University of Houston focuses on developing fundamental understandings of
peptide interactions with surfaces of calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals, a
predominant component of human kidney stones. This project will use a
synergistic combination of peptide synthesis, materials characterization, and
molecular simulations to develop rational design approaches that tailor calcium
oxalate monohydrate crystallization. This collaborative proposal between the
University of Houston and Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute will utilize the vast
chemical and structural space of peptides to discover effective modifiers of
calcium oxalate monohydrate crystal growth. This project proposes a high-
throughput approach to screen peptide libraries, whereby the most potent
candidates will be investigated by scanning probe microscopy to quantify
peptide-crystal interactions and molecular modeling to investigate peptide
binding to crystal surfaces. The overarching goal of this proposed research is
to establish peptide-mediated crystallization as a versatile platform to achieve
predictable and tunable structures and/or properties. To this end, the project
is expected to advance our understanding of peptide-calcium oxalate monohydrate
interactions, and will be transformative in that the philosophy and approach
could be applied to crystal and shape engineering of other materials.
Developments from this proposed research may lead to the identification of
potent calcium oxalate monohydrate growth inhibitors as viable drug targets for
kidney stone disease. Moreover, this award will be used to strengthen outreach
initiatives at the K-12, undergraduate, and graduate levels to promote science
education and research. This investigator will work with KIPP Houston High
School (a minority institution) to establish a program that uses the research
supported by this award to promote increased interest and participation in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crystal engineering is a challenging area of research
where advancements in rational design can impact the development of biomimetic
systems, therapeutics, and advanced materials. This proposed research project
focuses on designing peptides that interact with surfaces of calcium oxalate
monohydrate crystals, which are one of the most common constituents of human
kidney stones. This is a prototypical example of calcification, which is
ubiquitous in many biological and physiological processes. The key intellectual
contribution of this project will be to bring to bear unique, yet highly
synergistic, expertise to quantify fundamental principles of peptide-crystal
interactions. Through a combination of experiments and modeling, this research
team will identify which peptides most effectively inhibit calcium oxalate
monohydrate crystal growth, and determine which among these candidates exhibit
an affinity for binding to specific surfaces of these crystals to enable the
tailoring of crystal properties (e.g. size and shape). Rational design of
peptide sequences combined with high-throughput screening will allow us to
discover the most effective modifiers of the crystal growth, which can
potentially lead to the identification of drug targets for kidney stones to
address rising worldwide incidence rates of stone disease. General principles of
crystal inhibitor design from this project could lead to developments in
therapeutics for other diseases, and new methods for improving advanced
materials. The integration of crystal engineering with medicine will be used as
a tool to promote STEM education at the K-12 level and encourage students to
become more active in research projects. The team members will work with local
high school students and teachers to offer hands-on research opportunities,
present guest lectures on engineering topics to Advanced Placement Chemistry
students, develop lesson plans that integrate basic concepts of crystallization,
and present seminars to discuss career opportunities in STEM fields.