* 1207041
* Tapered Block Copolymers: Interfacial Manipulation and Nanoscale Network Formation in Bulk and Thin Film Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2012,11/30/2016
* Thomas Epps, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 11/30/2016
* USD 376,426.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As future technological progress
necessitates the design and control of nanoscale membranes, new methods for the
creation of tailored materials with tunable morphology, processability,
transport properties, and mechanical properties must be perfected.
Unfortunately, many designer systems require a tradeoff between incorporating
the desired chemical constituents and obtaining the optimal chemical, transport,
and mechanical properties. To overcome this dilemma, the Epps group is
developing interfacially-modified triblock copolymer systems, with a specific
focus on network-forming materials, through the chemical manipulation of the
internal (block-to-block) junctions using compositional tapers. These
interfacial manipulations (tapered junctions) will allow decoupling of the
influence of chemical constituents and molecular weight from self-assembly and
thermal transitions, providing greater versatility in designing these soft
materials. Such triblock copolymers are capable of self-assembling into co-
continuous network structures, making them ideal candidates for nanoscale
devices. The combination of triblocks and tapered block copolymers can produce
high-molecular-weight network systems with improved mechanical properties (e.g.
entangled polymer chains), where tapering between the blocks allows for the
controlled tuning of effective interaction parameters and nanoscale interfacial
mixing. Further, by developing greater control over interfacial interactions,
the Epps group will generate new nanostructured materials for applications such
as conducting membranes, separation membranes, and nanoscale templates. This
control will facilitate the development of universal protocols for the
generation of stable, processable, and tunable networks for bulk membrane and
thin-film nanoscale applications. Such nanoscale networks utilizing tapered
block copolymers may also be helpful for alternative energy, data storage, and
biological applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As future technological progress necessitates the
design and control of nanoscale membranes, new methods for the creation of
tailored materials with tunable morphology, processability, transport
properties, and mechanical properties must be perfected. Unfortunately, many
designer systems require a tradeoff between incorporating the desired chemical
constituents and obtaining the optimal chemical, transport, and mechanical
properties. To overcome this dilemma, the Epps group is developing chemical
synthesis methods to control the nanometer scale (1/1000th the width of a human
hair) interfaces in membrane materials to permit the independent tuning of those
chemical, transport, and mechanical properties. By using specially modified
complex polymers to enable the design, synthesis, and stabilization of nanoscale
interfaces, novel materials for analytical separation membranes, ion-conduction
membranes, and nanoscale templates may be developed for alternative energy, data
storage, and biological applications. Additionally, this interdisciplinary
project will train students to address key scientific and engineering challenges
in nanotechnology. Students will explore aspects of chemistry, chemical
engineering, and materials science, placing them at the forefront of
nanotechnology research. Outreach activities directly related to the project
include providing multidisciplinary summer research and mentorship opportunities
in Epps' labs for American Chemical Society (ACS) Minority Scholars Program
undergraduates and ACS Project SEED (economically-disadvantaged) high school
students. The PI has been active in activities involving underrepresented groups
in science and will continue to do so throughout this project.