* 1207022
* Collaborative Research: Design of Multifunctional Doubly-Fusogenic Liposomes to Deliver Therapeutics and Diagnostics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Stavroula Sofou, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2016
* USD 390,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1207022 PI: Sofou, Stavroula ORG: Rutgers
University&lt;br/&gt;ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1206943 PI: Hall, Carol ORG: NC
State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The most promising
strategy at present to provide effective control of advanced solid cancer is a
combination of therapies. A potential component of this combination is
antivascular therapy. The goal of this work is to design iv-administered
theranostic liposome nanocarriers that can be programmed to target tumor
vasculature while sparing healthy sites and to release a chemotherapeutic agent,
deliver a radioactive imaging agent or both. This will be accomplished through a
combined experimental and theoretical approach to develop highly selective lipid
vesicles composed of a new class of bi-lipid membranes that rapidly and
extensively release doxorubicin intracellularly or deliver positron emitters.
The high killing efficacy of the liposomes is based on a dual fusion mechanism
that is activated only upon cellular internalization. The project's innovation
lies in the choice of individual base components and the synergistic way that
they work together to optimize delivery of the drug to the proper site. An
additional innovation is the use of molecular level computer simulation to
explore the consequences of various choices of liposome parameters "in silico"
before trying them out in the lab, thus reducing the number of trial-and-error
steps that would normally characterize this type of work . The base components
are the following: PSMA (Prostate Specific Membrane Antigen), which is present
on tumor vasculature but not in normal tissue, is the target. An anti-PSMA
antibody is the ligand. The liposomes are comprised of two functionalized
lipids: PEGylated lipids tethered to anti-PSMA antibodies and lipids
functionalized with a fusion peptide that promotes fusion with the endosomal
membrane. The mechanisms of delivery are the following. During circulation in
the blood, the exposed anti-PSMA antibodies result in selective neovasculature
targeting while uniformly distributed PEGylated lipids on the liposome surface
mask the fusion peptides. Upon endocytosis of liposomes by tumor endothelial
cells, pH-induced lipid phase-separation, and domain formation on liposome
membranes activates two fusion mechanisms: (1) The fusion peptides become
unmasked and bind to the endosome membrane, and (2) The liposomal domain
boundaries serve as sites to nucleate fusion with the endosomal membrane. The
net result is that the liposome releases its cargo directly into the cytoplasm
of tumor endothelial cells, as opposed to the endosome, avoiding entrapment in
the endosomal pathway and subsequent degradation by the lysosome. There are
three aims: (1) Develop an experimentally informed general computational tool to
facilitate the design of liposomes and to test hypotheses about the role of the
different components in the proposed hierarchical assembly. (2) Engineer
liposomes containing anti-PSMA ligands and small fusion peptides, and
investigate the conditions in which the corresponding functionalities exhibit
optimal behavior. (3) Demonstrate that dual-fusion liposomes loaded with
doxorubicin and Y-86 exhibit: (a) selective targeting of tumor endothelium
analogues, (b) effective release of chemotherapeutics and killing of targeted
cells, and (c) delivery of sufficient amounts of Y-86 for diagnostic
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: Since advanced solid cancer
has no cure, many patients could benefit from the proposed research that aims to
develop diagnostic and treatment protocols that significantly extend the life
expectancy and improve patients? quality of life. The research pursued here will
be supplemented by a strong educational component that includes training of two
female graduate students and several undergraduate students assigned to this
project, integration of several topics of this research in a newly launched
open-ended senior design project, general outreach and mentoring activities for
high school students and their teachers, and mentoring activities for women
graduate students and faculty across the nation. In particular, the 6-week
outreach summer program, which will be conducted at Rutgers University, aims to
encourage underrepresented and minority high school students to follow a career
in sciences and engineering. The program includes hands-on research training, a
series of lectures given by speakers from academia and industry on contemporary
issues related to biomaterials, and visits to neighboring pharmaceutical
industries. Educational materials will be developed that highlight this research
including a power point presentation introducing the basics of nanotechnology
and drug delivery via soft materials for dissemination over the web.