* 1207880
* Collaborative Research:   Microbial Ecology of Ocean Basement Aquifers:   ODP Borehole Observatories
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2013
* Jan Amend, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/28/2013
* USD 66,946.00

The ocean crust consists of basement rock formed at the mid-ocean ridges (MOR)
plus the overlying sediments that accumulate over time as the basement rock ages
and moves away from the MORs. There is growing evidence that a substantial
biosphere exists throughout the immense volume of aging, sediment-buried
basement underlying the global system of MOR flanks and ocean basins. The
current project will exploit the unprecedented opportunities provided by long-
term Ocean Drilling Program borehole observatories (CORKs) to collect
uncontaminated samples of basement fluids for geochemical, microbiological and
ecological characterization. Because water-rock reactions and associated
microbial habitats vary with basement temperature and age, the geochemistry and
molecular (genetic) diversity will be examined in basement fluids from multiple
borehole observatories on the flanks of the Juan de Fuca Ridge (JFR), ranging in
basement age (ca.1.24 to 3.5 million years) and in basement temperature (38 to
65degrees centigrade). The synergy between water-rock and aqueous (e.g.,
oxidation-reduction) reactions and the organisms living in proximity to them
demands an interdisciplinary approach to research. In this project, the
microbial community and metabolic diversity will be studied in close conjunction
with geochemical processes. In situ, real-time analyses will simultaneously
measure key dissolved reduction-oxidation (redox) species; such measurements
will help to elucidate the metabolic climate of the basement fluids (e.g., how
the microbes gain energy and fix carbon) and guide culturing portions of this
study. These geochemical and biological studies will provide input data for
thermodynamic calculations of numerous potential metabolic reactions (e.g., a
sort of energy 'road map'), which will provide a 'reality-check' for the
occurrence of certain metabolisms. Geochemical measurements and energetic
calculations will provide a much-needed environmental context for realistic
modeling of microbial community synergy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigators and students from the participating institutions will interact
closely with hydrogeologists, geochemists and technologists from numerous other
institutions, as well as with staff of the International Ocean Drilling Program
(IDOP) to both exploit existing CORK observatories and to influence development
of new borehole observatories that are optimal for ocean basement microbial
community studies. Multiple undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral students
will be intimately involved in all stages of the project, and will benefit from
cross-institutional informal education and training. The project will actively
interact with UH's NASA Astrobiology Institute (NAI), for which subseafloor
biosphere studies is an increasingly significant component. Students and PIs
will participate in educational outreach projects to K-12 schools and the
general public, especially including continuation of the very successful ship-
to-classroom and "Teacher at Sea" outreach programs; the latter will involve
integrating K-12 science teachers directly into all aspects of the project from
initial planning to field and laboratory work. &lt;br/&gt;