* 1207298
* RUI:  Theoretical Study of Quantum Control and Coherence Preserving Strategies in Solid State Spin Qubits
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2013,08/31/2017
* Guy Ramon, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 95,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
and undergraduate education focused on the design and modeling of quantum bits,
qubits, realized by spins localized in semiconductor quantum dots. The study
will elucidate several of the key aspects of spin-based quantum information
processors, focusing on the physical mechanisms that govern the coherence
properties of spins in quantum dots and enable their control and
manipulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing a variety of analytical and
numerical techniques, the PI and his research students will study the
fluctuating charge and nuclear environments, which play a crucial role in
electron spin decoherence in exchange-coupled III-V quantum dots. Coherence
properties of electron-spin qubits will be analyzed under various manipulation
protocols, in the context of ongoing experiments and proposed qubit designs. New
formulations that extend the validity of current theories of electron-spin
dephasing will be explored. In addition, hybrid qubit designs that offer better
decoherence immunity, such as three-spin qubits will be investigated along with
coupling strategies for multi-qubit devices. Going beyond the currently employed
decoupling pulse sequences, the PI will explore time-dependent control fields
that can extend the evolution of the quantum mechanical spin states. Finally the
work supported with this award will develop and model optical and electrical
control methods that utilize the hyperfine interaction to generate entangled
nuclear states, offering new level of control over the nuclear collective
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program supported through this award will be
carried out at Santa Clara University, a Primarily Undergraduate Institution,
and will provide educational opportunities for undergraduate students through
independent research projects throughout its duration. Students will take active
part in cutting-edge physics research that will train them in advanced
theoretical methods and high-end numerical analysis. The research will employ a
variety of methods and work modalities, ranging from many-body problems and spin
physics in semiconductor heterostructures to code writing for parallel computing
computer cluster environment. This diversity ensures that students can pursue
multiple and independent lines of investigation so that self-contained research
projects will be completed within a full-time summer period. Participating
students will be exposed to the leading experimental and theoretical endeavors
in the highly vibrant and interdisciplinary research field of quantum computing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The wide-spread interest in quantum information
processing in recent years has been a critical driving force in the research of
electron spins localized in semiconductor quantum dots. The spins are associated
with electrons; spin is an intrinsic quantum mechanical property that can be
exploited to make a two-state quantum mechanical system, or qubit, in the
engineered mound of a semiconductor surface or quantum dot. This award supports
a theoretical research and undergraduate education program aimed at elucidating
several of the key aspects of spin-based quantum information processors,
focusing on the physical mechanisms that govern the coherence properties of
spins in quantum dots and enable their control and
manipulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two main ingredients of a successful
design of qubits - the building blocks of a quantum computer - are preserving
the coherence of their fragile states and finding mechanisms that will allow
high fidelity qubit control and manipulation at the single- and two-qubit level.
Addressing the first, the PI and his research students will model and analyze
the fluctuating charge and nuclear environments, which form the main decoherence
channels for electron spin qubits. A better understanding of the adverse effects
of the environment on spin qubits at current experimental setups will allow the
team to test and propose strategies to extend coherence, including time-
dependent control fields, novel qubit designs, and encoding of the logical
states in physical states of three electron spins. The research supported by
this award will further explore coupling strategies for multi-qubit devices and
develop optical and electrical methods to control the nuclear spins in the
quantum dot substrate, by utilizing their hyperfine interaction with the
localized electron spins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program supported through
this award will be carried out at Santa Clara University, a Primarily
Undergraduate Institution, and will provide educational opportunities for
undergraduate students through independent research projects throughout its
duration. Students will participate in cutting-edge physics research that will
train them in advanced theoretical methods and high-end numerical analysis. A
variety of theoretical methods and work modalities will ensure that students
will pursue multiple and independent lines of investigation so that self-
contained research projects can be completed within a full-time summer period.
Participating students will be exposed to the leading experimental and
theoretical endeavors in the highly vibrant and interdisciplinary research field
of quantum computing.