* 1207622
* Electron Pairing in Doped Insulators
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Warren Pickett, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Alexios Klironomos
* 02/29/2016
* USD 339,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award support computational research aimed at understanding the
superconducting mechanisms of a class of doped high temperature superconductors,
namely the two dimensional compound LiHfNCl and the three dimensional insulator
BaKBiO3 that superconduct in the 25-30 K temperature range. Unlike low-
temperature heavy fermion superconductors or the high temperature
superconducting cuprates and iron pnictides, in which there is strong magnetic
behavior near and within the superconducting state and a majority of researchers
expect the pairing mechanism to involve magnetism, this class of doped-insulator
high temperature superconductors do not contain any magnetic ions, and the
electron-phonon coupling is too weak to account for their high critical
temperatures. This project addresses the situation that arises in such materials
where a relatively low density of doped carriers interact dynamically within a
background of highly charged moving ions. The effective electron-electron
interaction is screened both by other electrons and by the moving ions. The
conventional means of handling screening, via the random phase approximation, is
insufficient, as it misses important short-range correlations resulting from
weak short-range screening of strong interactions, and gives an overall weak
coupling. The theoretical approach will be to extend the treatment of the
dielectric screening matrix beyond the mean field, thereby coupling the
screening process of the ions and the carriers. The potential payoff for these
investigations is a detailed understanding of a new pairing mechanism that
produces superconductivity at 30 K and might be a good candidate to produce
substantially higher critical temperatures.

An important outcome of this research that could have a societal impact through
sustainable green-energy is the potential discovery and design of new
superconductors. This award also supports the education of a graduate student
and a postdoctoral research associate at the frontiers of computational
condensed matter physics, and will contribute to the training of young
scientists who will form tomorrow's scientific and technological workforce.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award support computational research aimed at understanding how a class of
materials with composition LiHfNCl and BaKBiO3, which do not normally conduct
electricity, enter a phase at low temperatures wherein electricity flows through
them without any resistance, making them superconductors. Unlike some of the
more commonly known superconductors in which the strong interaction of the
electrons with the vibrations of the positively charged nuclei are ultimately
responsible for their superconducting properties, the electron-nuclei
interaction in these materials is not strong enough to account for the observed
temperatures at which they become superconducting.

Understanding the newest and most exotic superconductors remains at the
intellectual frontier of condensed matter theory. In this project, the PI and
his group will develop the theory and perform the necessary large-scale
computations to treat dynamical behavior of electrons as they interact with each
other and with highly charged moving ions with the ultimate goal of capturing
the essential mechanism through which these materials become superconducting.

An important outcome of this research that could have a societal impact through
sustainable green-energy is the potential discovery and design of new
superconductors. This award also supports the education of a graduate student
and a postdoctoral research associate at the frontiers of computational
condensed matter physics, and will contribute to the training of young
scientists who will form tomorrow's scientific and technological workforce.