* 1207145
* Molecular Semulation: A New Paradigm in Materials Modeling
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Donald Brenner, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 456,331.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY The Division of Materials Research, the Division of
Mathematical Sciences, and the Office of Cyberinfrastructure contribute funds to
this award. This award supports computational and statistical research, and
education with the aim of developing a new materials modeling technique in which
large-scale molecular dynamics simulations of crystal plasticity are emulated
with statistically-derived relations that map output spatial defect densities to
input atomic configurations. A series of carefully chosen simulations of the
plastic response of materials to high strain rate deformation is used to create
data from which the statistical models are developed. These models are in turn
used to predict resulting defect densities for input configurations that are not
part of the data base. To succinctly describe this new concept, the word
"semulation" is borrowed from computer science where it has been used to define
a process or tool that combines the best of simulation and emulation. Mappings
that enable statistical analysis are created by assigning to each atom a set of
values that provide a unique measure of bonding environment. This information,
which implicitly includes defect and lattice type, is then coarse grained to
create a spatial distribution of defect densities. To statistically correlate
the results, the coarse grain data is pooled across counts of different atom
environments in the same and nearby subregions. Tools in the form of LAMMPS
subroutines will be distributed so that researchers can develop their own data
bases, and a web interface will be created that will allow access to existing
data bases.

NON TECHNICAL SUMMARY The Division of Materials Research, the Division of
Mathematical Sciences, and the Office of Cyberinfrastructure contribute funds to
this award. This award supports computational and statistical research, and
education with the aim of developing a new materials modeling technique. Data
base searching and statistical analysis is playing an increasingly important
role in a wide range of applications. For example, rather than trying to apply
grammar and syntax rules, current language translation software relies on
searches of data bases that contain already translated documents. The PI aims to
develop a similar concept for modeling damage in metals by creating databases of
damage profiles generated from large-scale atomic simulations, and then using
these databases to efficiently predict damage for new conditions that are not
included in the original simulations. This requires developing new statistical
analysis methods that can map defect distributions after a metal is deformed
back to the metal's initial structure. These tools and associated web-based
interfaces will be distributed to the computational materials science community
so that researchers can both develop their own data bases, and use existing data
bases to predict damage in metals without having to carry out a full simulation.