* 1207704
* Collaborative Research: Building an Event Horizon Telescope:  (Sub)millimeter VLBI from the South Pole Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Sheperd Doeleman, Northeast Radio Observatory Corp
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Gaume
* 07/31/2015
* USD 191,204.00

A research topic of great current interest is the supermassive black hole of
about 4 million solar masses that is now known to exist at the center of our
Milky Way galaxy. Similar objects are common in other galaxies. Most of what is
known about the Milky Way's exotic object comes from studies of the kinematics
of stars influenced by its strong gravitational field. No possibility has
heretofore existed for directly imaging the black hole, or more technically its
event horizon, the gravitational "point of no return" from within which no
particle or photon can escape the black hole. The galactic center region is
distant, about 8 kpc, making it extraordinarily difficult to obtain high-
spatial-resolution images of the supermassive black hole by any direct
technique. If such images could be obtained, they would be the very first of
their kind, and could reveal information not yet imagined about black holes and
the dynamics in the cores of galaxies.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To attack this
challenging scientific problem, Drs. D. Marrone of the University of Arizona, S.
Doeleman of the Northeast Radio Observatory Corporation, and J. Carlstrom of the
University of Chicago intend to enhance an existing array of radio telescopes
operating at the very highest radio frequencies (the submillimeter, with
wavelengths somewhat shorter than a millimeter) and in a mode where telescopes
separated by continental baselines coherently combine their data to achieve
unprecedented spatial resolution. The general technique is termed Very Long
Baseline Interferometry, or VLBI, and the particular array of radio telescopes
to be used is referred to as the Event Horizon Telescope (EHT), developed in
part through a previous award from NSF. Through a new NSF proposal the
researchers plan to add the South Pole Telescope (SPT) as a new station to the
EHT. Adding stations (telescopes) in this manner enhances sensitivity to radio
signals and also improves the spatial response of the instrument as an imaging
device, so that better-quality maps may be made of fainter objects. In addition
to the addition of a key observing station, the technology will feature a new,
sensitive dual-band millimeter-wave VLBI receiver, optimized for the needs of
this project, that will employ superconducting mixer technology developed for
the Atacama Large Millimeter Array (ALMA) project by the National Radio
Astronomy Observatory (NRAO). Finally, the proven 230 GHz design will be adapted
for use at 345 GHz.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this work is being provided
by NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences through its Advanced Technologies and
Instrumentation program.