* 1207211
* Particle Astrophysics at TeV Energies with VERITAS
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Reshmi Mukherjee, Barnard College
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 780,440.00

Gamma-ray astrophysics is a rapidly evolving field that has experienced a huge
development during the last five years with the successes of a new generation of
ground-based Cherenkov telescopes, such as VERITAS (Very Energetic Radiation
Imaging Telescope Array System), located in southern Arizona, and the launch of
the Fermi Gamma Ray Space Telescope. Very high energy (VHE, with energies above
100 GeV) gamma-ray observations sample the sky at the highest photon energies,
pointing towards the most extreme cosmic accelerators. The mechanisms by which
particles are accelerated and produce VHE gamma-rays are of great interest
because of the extreme environments where such acceleration takes place: strong
radiation fields (pulsars), shock acceleration (SNRs) or accretion powered
relativistic jets (blazars).The exponentially increasing numbers of detected
sources, together with the improved quality of observations, are dramatically
improving our knowledge of the most extreme processes in the
universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides operational funding for
scientists at Barnard College to carry out high energy astrophysics studies with
VERITAS, an array of four large imaging atmospheric Cherenkov telescopes that
has been fully operational since spring 2007. VERITAS represents a dramatic step
forward in the study of extreme astrophysical processes in the universe, and is
providing high-quality gamma-ray observations and an increasing number of source
detections. The PI will contribute by participating in observing campaigns,
carrying out scientific data analysis, and working on code development for
improvements to VERITAS analysis techniques. In particular, the PI will focus on
the study of extragalactic sources such as active galactic nuclei (AGN) of the
blazar class, as well as Galactic sources, and unidentified GeV-TeV sources,
including both archival and new multi-wavelength studies, in order to study the
nature of particle acceleration in these objects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: The Barnard Group expects to play a strong role in outreach efforts to
K-12 students. As a Barnard College faculty member, the PI is able to reach a
broad audience of high school girls interested in science by participating in
college-sponsored science lectures such as the Saturday Science Seminars. The
PI's research at Barnard College, a 4-year liberal arts school for women, has
significant impact in influencing women in the physical sciences, and the PI
will continue to be a mentor to undergraduate women in astrophysics research.