* 1207895
* Aspects of Global String Compactifications
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Per Berglund, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2016
* USD 180,318.00

String theory, as a leading candidate for a quantum theory of gravity,
encompasses both quantum mechanics and Einstein's theory of general relativity.
A remaining challenge is the identification of the appropriate set of background
conditions relevant to the formation of our universe. Compactifying the eleven-
dimensional M-theory/supergravity can lead to a very large number of four
dimensional vacua. It is therefore necessary to understand the extra, compact
dimensions and discover the links between the properties of these spaces and the
physics we observe in our universe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
addresses two important aspects of string compactifications. A primary focus is
the determination of how, in the context of global flux compactifications,
string vacua exhibiting Standard Model like spectra exist. This study will also
apply constraints from cosmology, such as the cosmic microwave background, to
put restrictions on the inflationary type potentials obtained from string
theory. In addition, questions regarding the details of the geometry, such as
mirror symmetry, will be addressed. A second approach will be made in studying
various features of AdS4/CFT3 aimed at improving our understanding of the four
dimensional string landscape, as well as three dimensional condensed matter
systems. The projects , taken together, are very timely since, during the course
of the next few years, data from the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN will be
improving our understanding of physics beyond the Standard Model. Furthermore,
more accurate observations of the cosmic microwave background using the European
Space Agency PLANCK satellite will provide even tighter constraints on the
possible inflationary scenarios arising in string theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Results from the proposed work will be of
interest to several sectors of the mathematics and physics communities.
Furthermore the proposed activities will foster collaborations and intellectual
exchange within the UNH physics and mathematics community and amongst regional,
national and international collaborating scientists. In addition the research
program will be coupled with a strong outreach program taking the frontiers of
particle physics into local high schools. This will capitalize on the existing
infrastructure within the Theorynet, an NSF sponsored program in the greater
Boston area, as well as at UNH, for interactions with high school teachers and
students. Such interactions will include seminars and informal question-answer
sessions with both teachers and students during presentations by the PI at local
high schools, as well as visits by high schools to UNH to learn about research
in theoretical particle physics.