* 1207080
* Synthesis-Microstructure-Performance Relations in Oxide Ceramic Scintillators
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2012,03/31/2017
* Timothy DeVol, Clemson University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 03/31/2017
* USD 518,372.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Scintillators are unique materials that transform
high energy ionizing radiation into detectable visible light. They are used for
the detection and measurement of radiation in fields like security, energy,
medical diagnosis, and science. Presently, there is a knowledge gap relating the
fabrication and processing conditions of transparent ceramic scintillators with
their scintillation output, a situation that undermines their performance and
negatively impacts the widespread use of these materials. The innovative aspect
of this project is to go beyond the fabrication of transparent ceramics to
establish relations between fabrication conditions, microstructure, and defect
characteristics with afterglow and scintillation performance. The broader
impacts include the engagement of students in research activities, scientific
events, and teaching; concomitant to broadening the participation of faculty
from underrepresented Latino minority in institutions from the EPSCoR states SC
and OK; and the dissemination of results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: It is hypothesized that the intensities of scintillation and afterglow
are related to the concentration of structural imperfections that generate
electronic traps, and that it is possible to mitigate afterglow by identifying
suitable rare earth dopants to drain charge carriers off traps. The project aims
at investigating the effect of grain boundary density and oxygen non-
stoichiometry on the scintillation efficiency and afterglow intensity and
duration, and at developing a predictive capability to identify suitable rare
earth dopants to decrease afterglow intensity and duration. It focuses on rare
earth doped Lu2O3, Y2O3, and Y3Al5O12 transparent ceramics, ultimately
generating an understanding about how to fabricate ceramic scintillators with
enhanced performance that can benefit the strategic areas and society in
general.