* 1207026
* Topics in Classical and Quantal Soft Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Paul Goldbart, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 330,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education on a suite of inter-
related topics in the statistical physics of classical and quantal soft matter.
Its two major portions focus on (i) the structure and elasticity of soft random
solid media formed via vulcanization, especially in settings in which the
constituents are prone to liquid crystallinity; and (ii) non-equilibrium atom-
light co-crystallization and its consequences for laser-driven ultracold atoms
confined to multimode optical cavities - a topic the PI terms "soft quantum
matter." Related elements of the project address (iii) systems of fibrous,
strongly interacting polymers and their fluctuations, made tractable via the use
of concepts and techniques from quantum many-body physics; (iv) the physics of
the pericellular coat, a polymer-rich zone that covers many biological cells
and, under the control of the cell, seems to play central roles in important
cell functions, including motility and division; and (v) the liquid, crystal,
and glassy behavior of deformable colloidal particle systems, which appears to
be governed by an interplay between the external configurations of the particles
and their internal deformability. In large measure these topics are inspired by
experiments, either ongoing or anticipated.

Random solids, the focus of topic (i), are materials made via the permanent
chemical bonding of randomly selected constituents, as exemplified by vulcanized
rubber. This bonding creates a new state of matter, which has shear elasticity
and spatial localization of its constituents - but with no long-range
crystallinity. The PI aims to develop an understanding of the qualitatively new
features that arise when the parent liquids exhibit long- or short-range liquid
crystallinity in one of its many forms. This order influences and is influenced
by the random solid structure. To accomplish these goals, statistical-mechanical
tools will be applied to properly account for the many levels of randomness that
such materials present.

Topic (ii) concerns laser-driven atomic gases, trapped in high-finesse optical
cavities. These systems are expected to undergo fascinating non-equilibrium
phase transitions to states of spontaneous organization among the atoms, which
self-consistently populate either the even or the odd anti-nodes of certain
modes of the cavity radiation. For suitably designed cavities, these transitions
are expected to be accompanied by strong fluctuations in the atomic
organization, which will imprint themselves on the spatial and temporal
correlations of the light leaking from the cavity. The PI aims to develop a
thorough picture of the ordering, its steady-state fluctuations, and the rich
kinetics through which this non-equilibrium steady state is achieved.

Their multiple levels of randomness, thermal, quenched, and emergent, make
understanding vulcanized media deeply challenging. Progress in understanding
them, especially when they also feature liquid crystallinity, continues to
demand the creation of refined concepts and powerful techniques. Ultracold
atom/laser systems have enabled stimulating new realizations of the dynamics of
quantum particles normally associated with hard condensed matter. The multimode
cavity-based setting is opening up new vistas - of quantal soft matter and
quantum non-equilibrium phase transitions - in which the optical lattice is now
an emergent entity, capable, for example, of crystallization/melting, and
supporting excitations and defects.

This research on random solids and soft quantal matter may have impact on other
areas of science beyond its intended domain and immediate goals.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education in the area of soft
materials and matter. The PI aims to identify and understand emergent behavior
in soft materials and soft matter. Emergent behavior arises from the collective
organization or action of the constituent atoms or molecules. Examples include
the elasticity of crystals, magnetism, and liquid crystallinity. Liquid crystals
are a fascinating class of soft materials that have a rich variety of internal
structures with molecules in spatial arrangements less organized than solid
crystals but with directional patterns formed by the orientation of the
constituent molecules. So, they can exhibit a range of phases intermediate
between liquid and crystalline.

Central to this project are two specific themes involving emergent behavior. The
first addresses soft random solids, such as those formed via Goodyear's
vulcanization process, in which long, flexible macromolecules are bonded
together, at random, to form a disordered, quivering, giant structure. The PI
asks: What properties do such media have? How can they be understood and
modeled, despite their evident complexity? Are they truly solid and, if so, how
can this be so, since their internal organization is so different from that of
familiar solids, say copper or quartz? Media created via vulcanization, such as
rubber, have been manufactured for more than 170 years. However, only relatively
recently has it been appreciated that the mingling of vulcanization with liquid
crystallinity can produce remarkable, qualitatively new materials - liquid
crystalline elastomers - which the PI aims to understand and which have
surprising, rich, and valuable properties.

The second theme also involves qualitatively new collective behavior, triggered
by changes in organization and motion resulting from strong interactions. The
constituents are atoms, held at astonishingly low temperatures between highly
polished mirrors, and irradiated with laser light. It has recently been realized
that such systems can undergo a new kind of crystallization process, in which
the atoms partner with the light, assisting one another to organize in space.
The PI aims to answer: What kinds of atom-light crystals are thus created, how
are they related to conventional crystalline media, and what can they teach us
about other phenomena - familiar ones such as crystallinity and glassiness?