* 1207604
* Underrepresented Students in Topology and Algebra Research Symposium
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2014
* Syvillia Averett, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 01/31/2014
* USD 25,000.00

The second annual meeting of the Underrepresented Students in Topology and
Algebra Research Symposium (USTARS) is to be held at the University of Iowa on
April 13-15, 2012. The project was proposed by a group of underrepresented
students in the University of Iowa Mathematics Department and is largely run and
organized by graduate students. Speakers will give 30-minute research talks in
various subfields of topology and algebra; these subfields include algebraic
combinatorics, enumerative geometry, knot theory, and representation theory. One
distinguished graduate student will give an hour long presentation and one
invited faculty member, Dr. Federico Ardila of San Francisco State University
and Universidad de Los Andes, will give a one hour keynote address.
Undergraduate participants from the VIGRE/ALLIANCE Summer REU will also present
in a poster session.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;USTARS promotes diversity within the
mathematical community by providing a platform for collaboration and
professional development. Participants are exposed to a variety of current
research, ideas, and results, and meet underrepresented professors and students
who will become future collaborators or colleagues. The conference also promotes
diversity by encouraging women and minorities to attend and give talks. Indeed,
the conference organizing committee is diverse in gender, ethnicity, and
educational background, and hence is well-positioned to encourage participation
from a diverse group of students. The participants of the conference will
continue to influence the next generation of students by serving as much needed
mentors and encouraging students in the mathematical sciences to advance
themselves and participate in research and conference
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;http://www.mathalliance.org/ustars.asp