* 1207585
* Liquid crystalline materials containing boron clusters for electrooptical and cation transport application
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* David Wright, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 06/30/2016
* USD 445,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is a continuation
of the current NSF award supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
Program and involves design, synthesis, and study of liquid crystalline
materials that are uniquely suited to address fundamental questions and applied
problems in the field of liquid crystals. The proposed materials are liquid
crystals containing boron clusters, a class of compounds that display unusual
steric and electronic properties. Because these materials have a potential to
meet technological needs in modern society, the project has two related goals:
i) the development of new nematic materials for applications in flat panel
displays and ii) new smectic liquid crystalline electrolytes for rechargeable
Li+ ion batteries. The project involves the molecular design of new materials
aided by quantum-mechanical calculations, inorganic/organic synthetic methods,
structure-property relationship studies, electrooptical characterization and ion
mobility investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary program supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program is directed towards the development
of new advanced molecular materials for addressing fundamental questions in the
field of liquid crystals and for applications in flat panel displays and
rechargeable batteries. The design involves unique organic-inorganic hybrid
molecules, which will be synthesized and investigated using a broad array of
modern research tools. The proposed work will affect a number of areas of
science and engineering, and is expected to impact display and energy storage
technologies. It will provide excellent opportunities for involved personnel
(undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral workers) to obtain broad
training in modern materials chemistry through research and also domestic and
international collaborations, which include LCD industry. The aesthetic appeal
of liquid crystals and their significance in modern technologies make them an
attractive topic for outreach programs and public presentations, which will be
continued during the current funding period.