* 1207641
* Sixth Africa Materials Research Society Conference December 2011
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2012
* Eric Garfunkel, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 11/30/2012
* USD 25,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The National Science Foundation, Division of
Materials Research will provided funds to support the participation of US
students and Faculty at the 2011 Africa Materials Research Society Conference.
This meeting is comprised of a series of symposia, workshops and short courses.
Each symposium will last 1-3 days, with 5-6 parallel sessions running at all
times. Most sessions will be quite technical, with international and African
leaders in their respective field making extended presentations and students
making shorter presentation or presenting posters. The workshops and short
courses will be more pedagogical in structure and content than the regular
symposia. The topical areas of the conference include:&lt;br/&gt;Energy:
Photovoltaics, electrochemistry, fuel cells, catalysis, CO2 abatement
&lt;br/&gt;Materials for Life, Health and the Environment: Biomaterials,
sustainable materials, polymers, drug delivery, nanomedicine, imaging, sensors
&lt;br/&gt;Basic NanoScience: Nanoparticle synthesis and characterization,
graphene and carbon nanotubes, condensed matter physics, magnetic,
nanoelectronics, optics &lt;br/&gt;Materials Technology: extraction, foundry,
processing, metallurgy, alloys, hard materials&lt;br/&gt;Infrastructure
Materials: Cement, concrete, clays, transportation materials
&lt;br/&gt;Materials Education and Networking: curriculum development, web-based
and distance learning, international research and teaching collaborations,
schools, networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The
project will provide funds that will enable the participation of US students and
faculty at the 2011 Africa Materials Research Society Conference. The conference
will:&lt;br/&gt;- Promote excellence in materials research in Africa and between
Africa and the US.&lt;br/&gt;- Build a network of US-based materials researchers
who are capable of working in multi-national and multi-disciplinary
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;- Promote information and resource sharing, exchanges,
and development goals in academic, industrial, and national laboratory
settings.&lt;br/&gt;- Demonstrate how materials research contributes
significantly to strategies for social equity and poverty alleviation in a
constructive and sustainable manner.&lt;br/&gt;- Encourage downstream materials
manufacturing and value-adding activities, with a focus on applications in
energy, health, construction, transportation, biology, and
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;- Strengthen facilities and other resources for materials
science education, focusing on the higher education sector.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US participants will include a significant percentage
of women and underrepresented minorities. The support of the NSF Division of
Materials Research Office of Special Programs is gratefully acknowledged.