* 1207549
* Collaborative Research: Charge Transport Pathways in Semiconducting Polymer Films
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Michael Chabinyc, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 03/31/2016
* USD 192,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The connection between charge transport
and molecular order on intermediate length scales in films of semiconducting
polymers will be examined. In most electrical devices, semiconducting polymer
chains do not span the distance between the electrodes and the resulting
electrical properties are the result of charge transport both along the chains
and from chain-to-chain. Through a collaborative effort between scientists at
UCSB and NCSU the charge transport pathways in semiconducting polymers will be
studied by: 1) measuring the in-plane bulk and interface correlation length of
the backbone of semiconducting polymers using a combination of physical and
electrical characterization methods and 2) investigating transport in model
block co-polymer systems with varying energetic structure to uncover how both
positive and negative carriers are transported in complex systems. This work
will use a novel polarized soft X-ray scattering method to probe the backbone
correlation length that will enable a greater understanding of the connection
between morphology and electrical transport. The scattering techniques developed
in this work will have impact on characterization of both semiconducting and
conventional polymers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conjugated polymers have tremendous potential for use in
cheap, flexible, light-weight devices as transistors in simple circuits, light
emitting diodes, and solar cells. Improvement of our control of the properties
of electrically conducting polymers will enable new types of electronic devices
for use in energy conversion and biomedical diagnostics. This work will focus on
the determination of the pathways of charge transport in conjugated polymers.
Research in polymer electronics is highly multidisciplinary and will provide
training for graduate students in materials science, chemistry, and
microelectronics. The PIs and graduate students will also provide lab space and
training for promising undergraduate students from underrepresented groups to
advance their future careers in science and engineering. Outreach to children to
promote science education in the local school districts will be done through
demonstrations of flexible electronics devices by graduate student researchers
at local science nights.