* 1207409
* Structural Plasticity in Intermetallics:  Shaping the Crystal Structures of Metals and Alloys with Chemical Pressure
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2015
* Daniel Fredrickson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 04/30/2015
* USD 400,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Intermetallic phases combine a diverse structural chemistry with a range of
valuable physical and chemical properties, including superconductivity,
thermoelectric, hydrogen storage, catalysis, and a variety of magnetic
phenomena. A limiting factor in the development of materials from these
compounds is the difficulty encountered when attempting to synthetically guide
or control their crystal structures. The focus of this project supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry (SSMC) program is the development of a new
conceptual framework for understanding and harnessing the chemical driving
forces underlying intermetallic crystal structures: Structural Plasticity. The
structures of many complex intermetallic phases can be viewed as being built
from fragments of simpler structure types, which are separated by interfaces.
Such atomic arrangements recall the dislocations that are induced by mechanical
stress in a malleable metal and mediate a metal's response to such stress. The
structural plasticity model hypothesizes that the connection between
intermetallics and malleable metals goes beyond geometry: interfaces inserted
into a simple structure to create a more complex one alleviate internal stresses
that would be present if that original structure were to be adopted in an
unmodified form. This project uses a combination of theoretical calculations and
experimental work to explore this hypothesis. This includes the development and
application of the Density Functional Theory-Chemical Pressure (DFT-CP)
analysis, which extracts information about the local pressures, or chemical
pressures, acting on individual atoms within a crystal structure from DFT
results. The results of chemical pressure analysis and empirical reasoning are
used in the synthesis and structure determination of new intermetallic
structures that emerge from chemical pressure-induced Structural Plasticity.
Three mechanisms by which structures cope with chemical pressure will be
explored through this joint theoretical and experimental approach: (1) the
insertion of defect planes into a simple structure type, (2) the hosting of one
structure type by another, and (3) the formation of quasicrystalline order.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Metals and alloys exhibit a host of useful properties that are expected to play
key roles in energy applications, such as storage of hydrogen as a fuel source,
the catalysis of chemical reactions at fuel cell electrodes, and the extraction
of electrical energy from temperature gradients. Optimizing these properties for
applications is severely complicated by the difficulty of controlling the
packing geometries of atoms in these materials. The central goal of this
research project supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry (SSMC)
program is to develop an understanding how the chemical bonding determines these
atomic arrangements, and strategies based on these insights for tailoring atomic
packing to enhance the desired materials properties. This objective will be
attained through combining theoretical and computational modeling with the
synthesis and characterization of new materials. The project also includes the
creation and expansion of online resources for facilitating the incorporation of
materials chemistry into high school and undergraduate courses. Included among
these resources are the Solid State Chemistry Resource Library and the online
textbook Interactive Solid State Chemistry. Together, these will help
systematize the wealth of on-line content available as teaching aides for solid
state and materials chemistry, and will fill gaps in the coverage of these
subjects left by the existing content. Both are to be incorporated in the
Chemical Education Digital Library, a pathway in the National Science Digital
Library.