* 1207117
* Dynamics, Transport, and Ordering of Inclusions in Liquid Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Daniel Reich, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 06/30/2016
* USD 405,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** The study of inclusions suspended in liquid crystals
can lead to important new insight about the viscoelastic and interfacial
properties of these materials and can further create novel platforms for the
manipulation and self-assembly of particles through unique anisotropic
interactions engendered by the fluids. In addition, particle-dispersed liquid
crystals hold technological promise as composite materials with enhanced
properties deriving from the coupling of the particles to the liquid crystalline
order. This work aims to advance substantially our fundamental understanding of
and control over the behavior of inclusions in liquid crystals by investigating
several promising new classes of systems and particle interactions. Among the
specific topics on which the research will focus include nanoparticle
dispersions in smectic liquid crystals, particle- and defect-laden nematics
flowing in microfluidic arrays, and anisotropic transport of particles and ions
in liquid crystals. The broader impacts of the project will include research
training and education for graduate and undergraduate students in physics that
will prepare them for careers in academia and industry. The project will also
enable continuation and expansion of a partnership with a local science magnet
high school to provide talented Baltimore City students with opportunities for
research internships.

****Non-Technical Abstract**** Liquid crystals are fluids composed of rod-shaped
molecules in which the molecules arrange themselves to be more ordered than in
an ordinary liquid but less so than in a crystalline solid. Examples include
nematic liquid crystals where the molecules orient along a common direction and
smectic liquid crystals where the molecules form layers. When an impurity like a
small particle is suspended in such a fluid, it can disrupt this order leading
to novel effects, such as the spontaneous assembly of the particles into
patterns or the deflection of particles away from a force causing them to move.
The impurities can also endow the fluids with enhanced material characteristics,
such as unique optical and magnetic properties. This project will investigate
experimentally several classes of inclusions in liquid crystals, including
nanometer-scale particles and molecules that carry electrical current, which
promise potentially significant impact on research and technology but which have
been the subject of little previous study. The broader impacts of the project
will include research training and education for graduate and undergraduate
students in physics that will prepare them for careers in academia and industry.
The project will also enable continuation and expansion of a partnership with a
local science magnet high school to provide talented Baltimore City students
with opportunities for research internships.