* 1207507
* Scalable Thin-Film Fabrication for THz Optical Switching Devices in Vanadium Dioxide
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Richard Haglund, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 12/31/2016
* USD 452,127.00

Technical Description: Vanadium dioxide exhibits a reversible insulator-to-metal
transition that can be initiated optically with femtosecond lasers, and is thus
potentially ideal for high-speed electronic, photonic and memory devices. This
research project addresses two challenges to the realization of this potential:
First, the insulator-to-metal transition is fast (sub-picosecond), but the
metal-to-insulator transition is slow (sub-nanosecond) because it requires a
rearrangement of crystal structure. Second, scalable low-temperature thin-film
fabrication has not been demonstrated for epitaxial vanadium-dioxide films on
technologically useful substrates. The activity addresses these issues by
correlating materials properties (film morphology, substrate interactions,
dopant concentration, lattice match, strain and crystalline phases) to the
static and dynamic optical constants of the thin-film structures and to the
time-dependent electronic response and lattice vibrations that govern the speed
of the transition. The relative merits of sputter, electron-beam and atomic-
layer film-deposition techniques are assessed and the equilibrium optical and
physical properties of the films are characterized by ellipsometry, X-ray
diffraction and by high-resolution transmission-electron, Raman and X-ray
photoelectron microscopy. Dynamical optical properties are measured with
femtosecond time resolution by visible, infrared and THz pump-probe
spectroscopy, time-dependent ellipsometry, interferometric autocorrelation and
photoelectron electron microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
Description. Vanadium dioxide is a remarkable material that changes from an
insulator to a metal in about a trillionth of a second when illuminated by a
short burst of laser light, making it ideal for applications in
telecommunications, electronics and optical computing. The goal of this project
is to optimize vanadium dioxide properties to make the fastest possible optical
switch while developing fabrication tools to make vanadium dioxide thin-film
devices on a size scale suitable for real-world applications. The project
promotes the development of the future science and engineering work force by
training graduate students to think and work at the interdisciplinary boundary
between science and engineering. The research fosters work-force diversity by
recruiting a graduate student from, and collaborating with researchers at, two
universities that serve underrepresented populations. Undergraduate students
involved in the research present the concept of optical switching to local high
school students through Vanderbilt Students Volunteering for Science. Statewide
impact on future science and engineering undergraduates is fostered by a long-
standing interaction between the graduate students and the annual Tennessee
Governor's School for Emerging Technologies. The research project also motivates
ongoing dialogue with industrial partners who are developing technologies based
on vanadium dioxide.