* 1207281
* Photoelectron Emission at Diamond-Liquid Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Robert Hamers, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 05/31/2015
* USD 470,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Diamond has an unusual property known as negative electron affinity (NEA) that
allows it to act as a solid-state source of electrons when illuminated with
ultraviolet light. The combination of diamond's NEA with its outstanding
chemical stability allows it to be used as a solid-state source of electrons
operating under non-vacuum conditions, even able to directly inject electrons
into liquids. The proposed research supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry Program, will investigate the factors controlling the efficiency of
electron emission into liquids such as water and tetrahydrofuran. Research
efforts will focus on understanding the materials factors that control the
electron emission process and identifying conditions that will increase electron
emission with a broader spectrum of excitation wavelengths and on enhancing the
stability of NEA. Methods to be explored include doping with phosphorus or
nitrogen, and manipulation of the electrochemical double-layer at the diamond-
electrolyte interface. These measurements will provide fundamental new insights
into factors that control the efficiency and stability of photoelectron emission
under non-vacuum conditions. This research could enable new technological
applications in several fields of science and technology such as improved field-
emitter displays and enable new types of chemical transformations in liquids.
The project will support training and mentoring of students, including
undergraduates and high school students, and efforts to engage with state
legislators and other decision-makers to inform about the societal impact of
scientific research.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The emission of electrons from solid materials underlies many existing
technologies such as computer displays. Most materials require high temperature
and high vacuum conditions in order to emit electrons and therefore cannot be
used in water and other liquids. However, diamond, even when used as inexpensive
thin films and/or commercial-grade diamond powder, has the unusual ability to
emit electrons into liquids at room temperature when illuminated with
ultraviolet light, although with relatively low efficiency. This project will
explore several different approaches to improving the ability of diamond to emit
electrons into liquids. If this work is successful it could lead to improved
computer display technologies and to new, energy-efficienct ways to initiate
important chemical reactions, including transformation of inexpensive starting
materials into more useful products, such as liquid fuels. The project will
support training and mentoring of students, including undergraduates and high
school students, and efforts to engage with state legislators and other
decision-makers to inform about the societal impact of scientific research.