* 1207122
* Super Responses of Decomposed Two-Phase Nanodispersions to External Stimuli: Theory and Modeling
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Armen Khachaturyan, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 129,998.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
investigations of new functionalities in materials with a focus on giant low
hysteretic recoverable strain response to applied stress, magnetic and electric
fields. This effect is expected in traditional precipitation hardened alloys
when they are two-phase nanodispersions consisting of precipitates of a low-
symmetry phase embedded in a cubic matrix. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
precipitates of a low-symmetry phase formed at the early stages of decomposition
are single domain particles that have one of several symmetry-related
orientation variants. The strain response is caused by coherent switching
between different orientation variants of the precipitates. This is a new
effect. The switching- generated macroscopic strain is giant in comparison with
the intrinsic responses to the applied fields. If the applied field is stress,
the material becomes superelastic; if it is a magnetic field, the material
becomes an extrinsic super-magnetostrictor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will investigate conditions that could lead to a giant low hysteretic strain
response of precipitation hardened alloys to the applied fields. The scientific
goal of the project is to develop a blueprint for the search of alloy systems
and the processing conditions that would provide exceptional functional
properties of these systems. The goal of this project is to provide access to a
new class of functional materials with unique combinations of mechanical and
functional properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific goals of this project
include: &lt;br/&gt;1. Developing theories and computer models that can
explicitly take into considerations all physically significant energy
contributions affecting the recoverable stress and/or magnetic field-induced
switching of single-domain orientation variants and thus macroscopic strain
response. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Clarifying mechanisms that control the
formation of coherent two-phase material systems with flexible orientation
variants of nanoprecipitates. In particular, the development of the
understanding of the effects of elastic moduli, lattice mismatch, and magneto-
structural coupling of the constituent phases, as well as the optimization of
the effects of thermo-mechanical/ thermo-magnetic treatments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Establishing correlations between the microstructure
and dynamic strain responses to differently directed applied stress and/or
magnetic fields.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award also provides support that
will enable: (1) further collaboration with experimentalists in order to
validate our findings and search for advanced functional materials of this kind,
(ii) the education and training of the next generation of materials
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON- TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports an exploration of the practically uncharted territory of the functional
behavior of decomposed nanostructured materials. Nanodispersive decomposed
systems are technologically important structural materials that have been a
subject of intensive research for decades. However, there are very important
aspects of these materials that have been previously overlooked: under certain
conditions, the precipitation hardened nanodispersions can acquire unique
functional properties. The materials can have giant recoverable strain responses
to the external stimuli, which can be interpreted as superelasticity, super
magnetostriction, shape memory and ferromagnetic memory effects. The goal of
this theoretical and computational research is to: (i) investigate the formation
of these kinds of materials during decomposition and ways to optimize their
properties, (ii) study the mechanisms and dynamics of their switching-induced
strain responses, and (iii) develop a blueprint for engineering a new class of
spontaneously formed inexpensive functional materials with desired super
responses to applied stress, electric, and magnetic fields. The project has the
potential to open a practically untapped source of super-responsive functional
materials. In particular, its success would open a way to develop materials with
dramatically enhanced magneto-mechanical properties, and to engineer inexpensive
magnetostrictive alloys that are free from critical rare-earth elements that are
difficult to obtain, but still have desired properties comparable or even
exceeding those of rare-earth based compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
also supports educational activities to educate and train a postdoctoral
research associate and graduate students, preparing them for the challenges of
materials research in the 21st century which will require an interdisciplinary
approach and synergy between different branches of physics and engineering.