* 1207440
* Workshop: Towards a Local Proof of the Local Langlands Correspondence
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Liang Xiao, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* tara smith
* 03/31/2013
* USD 25,700.00

The organizers intend to hold a weekend workshop at the University of Illinois
at Chicago, aimed at graduate students and young researchers, on the subject of
the Local Langlands Correspondence. Recent work on the special fiber of the
stable reduction of the Lubin-Tate tower by J. Weinstein using p-adic Hodge
theory and p-divisible groups appears finally to make possible a purely local
proof of the correspondence. Five experts will be invited to give talks on
different pertinent subjects, which in total present the complete story behind
the local correspondence: introductory material; C. Bushnell and P. Kutzko's
type theory; M. Strauch's Jacquet-Langlands correspondence via the Lefschetz
trace formula; Weinstein's aforementioned results on the stable reduction of the
Lubin-Tate tower, and his joint work with M. Boyarchenko on the geometry of the
special fiber. The workshop will be held on May 12-13, 2012. More information
can be found at the conference website:
http://math.uchicago.edu/~lxiao/workshop_site/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Number
theory is the branch of pure mathematics devoted to the study of whole numbers
and their relations; a particular goal is often to understand whether a given
algebraic equation has a whole number solution. The apparent simplicity of such
problems belies their complexity, and a box of intricate tools has been
collected over the past 400 years to attack them. Chief among them is a
'correspondence' proposed by R. Langlands in the 1960s which, once established,
would allow number theorists to exploit methods from a wide range of other,
seemingly unrelated mathematical fields. For example, the 300 year old problem
'Fermat's Last Theorem' was successfully tackled by A. Wiles in the 1990s by
establishing part of Langlands' correspondence. Now, although the correspondence
remains mysterious in general, it can be split into pieces which can be studied
'one prime at a time', called 'local correspondences': since prime numbers are
the atoms of the whole numbers, a common approach in number theory is to attack
a problem one prime at a time. These local correspondences can be investigated
using geometry and are much better understood; the main intent of the organizers
is to host a weekend workshop where graduate students and young researchers can
learn about the latest developments in the field.