* 1207328
* Glass Surface Chemistry - Understanding Effects of Alkali Ions on Water Activity on Glass
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Carlo Pantano, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 04/30/2016
* USD 364,270.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Although multicomponent silicate glasses are involved
in a variety of advanced technical applications, little is known about its
surface chemistry in humid ambience. Thus, researchers, engineers and
manufacturers must rely on literature and analytical methods relevant to
amorphous silica to understand complex glasses even though it is clear that the
surface chemistry of multicomponent silicate is quite different than silica. It
is the thesis of this study that the structure and reaction of water films on
silicate glasses are a function of the glass surface composition as well as the
process through which the surface is created and the presence of applied or
residual surface stress. This study consists of a series of carefully-designed
experiments to test this hypothesis. The outcome of this research will benefit
not only the glass science field, but also other engineering technologies,
manufacturing, and life science research. Considering the broad range of
engineering and science technologies that work with glass, it is an ideal medium
through which to educate the broader community about materials, in general. This
research is being integrated with education by participating in a summer
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program, delivering short courses
at a historically black university, mentoring undergraduate students as well as
underrepresented minority students on research projects, and introducing young
women from high school into research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION: The over-arching hypotheses of this study are: (1) the presence of
local stress, whether intrinsic, applied, residual or due to local
atomic/molecular structure, is a factor in determining the water layer
structure, its adhesion and its reactivity, and (2) water molecules on
multicomponent silicate glasses form a highly-structured interfacial layer,
including hydration of metal ions, which acts as an integral part of the glass
surface. Non-linear laser spectroscopy and advanced thermodynamic measurements
are being used to directly measure the thickness, structure and energy of the
chemisorbed as well as physisorbed water layer on multicomponent glass surfaces
with varying concentrations of alkali ions. This information about the adsorbed
water layer is being related to the adhesion and friction-induced dissolution of
multicomponent glass surfaces in humid ambience.