* 1207293
* FRG: Unit Defect and Microstructural Processes at Metal/Dielectric Interfaces: An Integrated Experimental and Simulation Approach
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Susan Sinnott, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Alexios Klironomos
* 05/31/2016
* USD 1,083,863.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Lead-based dielectric materials continue to be the
used in many electronic devices for communication, sonar, non-volatile memory,
and echography, despite the fact that lead is environmentally and biologically
incompatible. One common metal used in these devices is platinum because it
conducts electrical current well and is resistant to oxidation and high
temperatures. At high temperatures it is common for mixing to occur at the
interface between the lead-based materials and the platinum, which ultimately
limits the properties and performance of the devices. This project is focused on
understanding these effects in platinum-lead-based dielectric interfaces and
using this information to produce structures with improved electrical
performance. The project concurrently trains the next generation of scientists,
including graduate students, undergraduate students, and high school students,
in state-of-the-art experimental and computational materials science and
engineering. The training of underrepresented undergraduate students and
outreach to high school students through summer research projects are also a
focus of this activity.

TECHNICAL DETAILS: Lead-based perovskites, most prominently lead titanate and
its derivatives, continue to be the dominant dielectric material for many
applications despite the fact that lead is environmentally and biologically
incompatible. One common metal electrode used in these devices is platinum
because it is an excellent conductor and exhibits high oxidation and heat
resistance. During high-temperature processing, the constitutive elements in
these materials interdiffuse across the interface, controlling the development
of crystallographic texture and composition and thereby defining the subsequent
properties and performance characteristics. This project is focused on
understanding the fundamental mechanisms at play at the metal-dielectric
interface and using this mechanistic information to synthesize materials and
heterostructures with controlled interfaces with improved electrical properties.
A combination of experimental and computational methods is used to determine the
mechanisms by which (i) lead diffuses into and out of lead titanate, and (ii)
temperature-driven grain-boundary migration and texture evolution occurs at the
platinum/lead titanate interface. The computational approaches include
electronic structure calculations using density functional theory and atomic-
scale molecular dynamics simulations. As part of the latter effort, new charge-
optimized, many-body reactive potentials are being developed and disseminated to
the computational community as part of the open-source LAMMPS software
(http://lammps.sandia.gov/). Experimentally, phase and texture evolution during
high-temperature processing are characterized using in situ diffraction
techniques and diffusion across the interface is examined via quantitative
electron microscopy. In addition, broadband impedance and electrical
measurements are being used to determine the influence of structure on
dielectric and ferroelectric behavior. The project is training the next
generation of scientists in state-of-the-art experimental and computational
materials science and engineering. Summer research projects will engage
underrepresented undergraduate and high school students.