* 1207437
* Cooperative Mesoscopic Transitions in Finite Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Michael Bachmann, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 330,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports research and education to develop computational and
analytical tools to advance theoretical understanding of structural transitions
in folding, aggregation, and adsorption processes of polymers and proteins in a
thermal environment. These studies are prerequisites for the design of novel
materials and biomimetic technological applications such as biosensors. The PI
aims to develop a systematic identification of structural transitions and the
classification of their properties by means of computer simulations of
simplified, coarse-grained models and subsequent thermodynamic statistical
analyses. The challenge for a thorough investigation lies in the precise
description of the cooperative behavior of interacting monomers, lining up in
linear polymer chains, under the influence of dominant finite-size effects.
Hence, the transition behavior has to be studied on mesoscopic length scales,
which, because of system complexity, neither allow for a quantum nor for a
classical mechanics approach. The development of efficient simulation methods is
an essential prerequisite for this project. Primarily, sophisticated
generalized-ensemble Monte Carlo methods such as parallel tempering,
multicanonical sampling, and the Wang-Landau method will be used. For time-
resolved information molecular dynamics simulations will be performed.

The major research fields in this project are:

1. Polymer crystallization and protein folding. By means of computer simulations
of simple models for homopolymers, nucleation effects and conformational phases
are studied and classified for flexible and semiflexible polymers. Changes in
freezing behavior due to disorder effects caused by different types of monomers
are investigated in simulations of generic heteropolymer models, resembling
structural properties of proteins.

2. Aggregation. The formation of polymer and protein clusters is simulated and
thermodynamically analyzed for simplified coarse-grained and also for atomistic
models. Of particular interest is the understanding of first-order-like
transitions by means of microcanonical statistical analyses.

3. Adsorption at substrates. The influence of competing energetic and entropic
effects on structure formation in adsorption processes of polymers at attractive
soft and solid substrates is investigated on different levels of model
abstraction.

This award supports graduate and postdoctoral training in the interdisciplinary
fields of polymer science and biophysics. This includes the development of
skills in computational and statistical physics and the ability to present and
communicate research results. The junior scientists become familiar with high-
performance computing on compute clusters of various scales, including most
modern architectures such as graphics processing units.



NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports research and education in the interdisciplinary field of
soft condensed matter and aims at a better understanding of the significant
structural changes polymers, which are long chain-like molecules, and proteins
experience in structure formation processes such as folding, aggregation, and
adsorption at surfaces of materials. Folding and aggregation of biomolecules are
essential processes in biological systems that enable cell functionality.
However, misfolding and nonfunctional aggregation are known to be serious
factors in epidemic diseases such as Alzheimer's. On the technological side, the
understanding of adsorption properties of polymers on the surfaces of materials
is potentially interesting for the design of novel materials with specific
mechanical and electronic properties, which is particularly interesting for
future technological applications.

In this project, properties of these structural transformations are investigated
by means of computer simulations of appropriate models and by performing a
systematic analysis of the statistical mechanics that triggers these processes.
Structural phase diagrams give insight into the competition between intrinsic
effects in the molecular system and the influence of the external environment.
The understanding of the origin of qualitative structural changes in molecular
systems and their dependence on environmental parameters, such as the
temperature, pressure, and electromagnetic fields is the key to their control
and eventual future biomimetic applications.

Graduate students and postdoctoral researchers who are involved in this project
learn how to develop and specialize models, algorithms, and data analysis tools.
They use most modern resources needed for highly parallel computing, which
besides conventional computer systems also includes graphics processing units.