* 1207394
* Nanoelectronic Material Characterization using Single Electron Transistors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Patrick Fay, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 05/31/2016
* USD 465,000.00

Technical Description: With the shrinking of electronics towards the nanometer
scale, just a few misplaced dopants can cause significant variability in the
performance of electronic devices. Therefore, the development of an ability to
accurately map vacancies, defects, dopant atoms, and interface structures
becomes urgent to enable future generations of electronic devices. To achieve
these goals, this project develops methods for detailed investigation of charged
defects in electronics-relevant materials. The approach is to integrate novel
electronic materials with single-electron transistor structures so that the
native imperfections in the materials and fabrication-induced defects are
directly detectable through evaluation of the single-electron transistor's
characteristics. Both low-frequency testing methods (e.g., conductance mapping)
and high- frequency techniques (e.g., microwave reflectometry) are used to
provide detailed characterization of charged defects in the barrier materials
over a broad frequency range. The project aims to contribute to the detailed
understanding of the interfaces and dielectric materials used in charge-based
electronic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: This project
investigates new methods to characterize materials used in mainstream silicon
electronics and emerging nanoelectronic devices by using single electron
transistors, which are charge-sensing devices that can detect the motion of
extremely small amounts of electrical charge in their vicinity. The research
project is expected to contribute to the further development of novel electronic
materials and to enhance understanding of electronically active interfaces
between materials at the nanometer scale. The educational activities associated
with this project include the development of educational and training
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students in an interdisciplinary
environment as well as for diversity and minority recruiting. An outreach
program with a local high school, established previously by PIs, continues to
introduce high-school teachers and students to engineering and for them to
conduct research at the University of Notre Dame in an atmosphere of maximum
inclusivity.