* 1207123
* A Route Towards Efficient Energy Relaxation from Nanocrystals to Oxide-free Semiconductor Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Yuri Gartstein, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 06/30/2016
* USD 389,925.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;Technical: Energy-transfer-based hybrid nanostructures
judiciously engineered from components with separate functionalities offer a
versatile platform for optoelectronic device applications. Light absorption in
the strongly absorbing component of the hybrid is followed by non-contact
electromagnetic energy transfer from the resulting excitons in nanostructures to
electron-hole pairs in the conductive semiconductor thin film. This
electromagnetic manipulation of excitations in nanoscale materials with well-
controlled interfaces is an important step towards the next generation of
functional nanodevices, which does not rely on charge transfer between the
components. This project focuses on the fundamental principles of radiative and
non-radiative energy transfer phenomena between highly absorbing nanocrystal
quantum dots (NQDs) and high-mobility Si semiconductor components combined in
layered hybrid nanostructures. The first effort aims to study non-radiative
energy transfer from monolayers of NQDs covalently grafted on Si surfaces. To
facilitate complete light absorption, multilayer NQD structures are to be
fabricated and energy 'funneling' diffusion via non-radiative interactions
between nanocrystal layers into Si substrate is explored and optimized. The
second task focuses on radiative coupling of nanocrystal emission to waveguiding
modes in Si nanomembranes. Placed in the vicinity of a high dielectric constant
material such as Si, the nanocrystal emission is converted to waveguide modes in
the Si layer where it is eventually absorbed, contributing to overall energy
transfer. The third direction explores the applicability of new multishell NQDs
that possess long-lived multiexitonic states for energy transfer. The overall
energy transfer efficiency of planar NQD/Si structures is assessed by employing
time-resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy combined with photocurrent
measurements. The results of this research will lead to the understanding of
energy transfer pathways in hybrid excitonic structures that overcome charge
trapping related to interfacial states. Together with modeling tools and
guidelines for achieving desired functionalities, these results could be applied
to engineer practical architectures for efficient photovoltaic
structures.&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: Nanostructures composed on nanoparticles
attached to thin silicon films offer a versatile platform for modern photonics
with applications in advanced sensing, photovoltaics and novel light emitting
sources. The fundamental research results of this project are expected to
significantly impact our understanding of energy transfer phenomena and
manipulation in these nanostructures leading to more efficient optoelectronic
devices of great benefit to society. Students participating in this research are
able to acquire expertise in the field of excitonics and hybrid nanomaterials.
The research is inherently interdisciplinary in nature, allowing students to
gain proficiency in physics, photonics and materials science and to develop both
experimental and modeling skills. A strong effort is devoted to involve
undergraduate and pre-college students and facilitate their interest in science.
The PI of this project is committed to knowledge transfer via enhancing the
curriculum by developing a course on Photonics Applications for Sustainable
Energy and the interaction with the local industry.