* 1207102
* Enhanced Diffusivity Along Dislocations--From Quantum Tunneling to Classical Transport in the Pd-H System
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Dallas Trinkle, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 07/31/2016
* USD 450,133.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The project will study quantification of enhanced diffusivity
of hydrogen along dislocations (hydrogen pipe diffusion) in deformed Pd via
quasi-elastic neutron scattering measurements and first-principles computations.
The work scope takes advantage of protocols developed recently under NSF
sponsorship to study hydrogen at very low concentration and as a function of
temperature in deformed Pd. The experimental methodologies use advanced state-
of-the-art quasi-elastic neutron spectrometers at the Spallation Neutron Source
and the NIST Center for Neutron Research and employ computational protocols to
simulate hydrogen within the local strain environment of a dislocation (relaxed
into two partial dislocations) supercell. The combined experimental and
computational efforts will provide the first direct quantification of hydrogen
transport along dislocations over a temperature regime from classic transport
(translational diffusion via site hopping) to quantum tunneling. Key objectives
of the work are the direct measurement of pipe diffusion activation energy, the
diffusion constant, extension to the quantum tunneling temperature regime, and
the physical basis for enhanced diffusivity at dislocations from first-
principles computations. A secondary objective is the study of grain boundary
diffusion using the same experimental and computational methodologies. The work
scope represents an extension of current advanced quasi-elastic neutron
scattering capabilities in the U.S. to a regime of low hydrogen inventory and
low temperature, thereby establishing new sensitivities for these instruments in
the quantification of hydrogen.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Impurities in metals influence many important properties
related to performance and applications. Metals are crystalline in that the
atoms form an ordered arrangement. Disruptions of this ordered arrangement are
common and are called lattice defects. This work involves the study of hydrogen,
an impurity, and one type of lattice defect, a dislocation. In particular, the
interaction of hydrogen and dislocations in the metal palladium will be studied
to better understand how the solute impurity moves or diffuses along the
dislocation lattice defects. The project will employ advance computational tools
and advanced neutron scattering instrumentation to achieve the stated goals. The
work scope represents a significant extension of experimental and computational
methodologies to new regimes of hydrogen diffusion behavior. It is anticipated
that the research will promote an improved understanding of the influence of
lattice defects on hydrogen transport in metals containing dislocations. The
work will have an impact beyond a detailed study of hydrogen in palladium,
potentially affecting areas of materials science ranging from embrittlement to
energy storage in metal hydrides. Two graduate students will be educated and
trained in two research methodologies, advanced neutron scattering techniques
and first-principles computations, that are at the forefront of scientific
inquiry. The breadth of first-principles computations in materials research is
extensive, as are the recent investments in neutron scattering infrastructure at
NIST, ORNL, and LANL. Graduate students trained in the use of these protocols
will be well positioned for productive scientific careers.