* 1207351
* Electrochemical Synthesis of Structurally Ordered, Magnetic Pt-Based Alloys for Magnetic Microdevices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Giovanni Zangari, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 330,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integration of hard magnetic
materials within microfabrication processes may lead to novel devices with
improved functionalities, such as novel storage media concepts or more effective
magnetic microactuators. Electroplating methods would facilitate the fabrication
of these structures by using purely additive processes, while allowing accurate
reproduction of lithographic patterns. This research seeks to achieve a
fundamental understanding of the growth and annealing process of electroplated,
equiatomic Fe-Pt alloys, in order to produce materials useful in magnetic
microsystems applications. Specifically, structurally ordered Fe-Pt films,
micro- and nanostructures with a predetermined crystal orientation and large
magnetocrystalline anisotropy will be developed. In particular, the kinetics of
formation of the ordered tetragonal structure in films will be studied as a
function of thickness, microstructure and internal stresses, and will be
controlled and optimized by introducing compositional gradients in the films and
by using suitable underlayers. Ternary Fe-Mn-Pt alloys will be developed to
further enhance anisotropy and thus extend the range of achievable properties.
The materials' magnetic response will be tailored for the targeted application
via control of the microstructure and crystallographic orientation of the
ordered structure. Nucleation and growth modes of the alloys within patterned
structures of nanometer size or with high aspect ratios will be investigated in
order to model prospective device components. Phase transformation and magnetic
hardening in such confined structures will be analyzed as a function of
geometry, structure size, growth conditions and underlayers in order to
understand such processes and to develop feasible synthesis and post-processing
conditions capable to achieve the properties of interest.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Permanent
magnets are magnetic materials that once magnetized maintain a magnetic moment
and become themselves useful sources of magnetic fields. They are ubiquitous in
modern machinery and appliances, such as electrical motors, communication
devices and information storage in computers and data banks. Advances in
permanent magnet materials may allow for an extension of their functionalities
to micro- and nanoscale devices, potentially leading to outstanding
technological innovations; however, suitable materials and production methods
are not yet available. This project seeks to integrate permanent magnet
materials with available methods for microchip fabrication to ultimately enable
the production of magnetic microscale devices. In order to do so, the formation
and post-processing of Fe-Pt alloys will be investigated, with the aim to
achieve materials exhibiting high performance even at extremely low size. Target
applications will include novel information storage technologies and motion at
the microscale for sensors and biomedical chips. Besides these technological
aspects, this project will offer undergraduate research internships that will
provide students with training and motivation to pursue graduate studies, as
well as an opportunity of research management experience for graduate students.
In turn, internships of graduate students within companies will enhance their
scientific and professional development.