* 1207765
* Heegaard Splittings, Knots and 3-Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Abigail Thompson, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2016
* USD 218,624.00

An overarching goal in the study of 3-manifolds, post-Perelman, is to put them
in some satisfactory order. One model for an order can be found in 2-dimensions;
surfaces, orientable or not, with or without boundary, come in a neat package,
which is well-understood. Thanks to Thurston and Perelman one now knows
inexpressibly more than before about the geometry of all 3-manifolds, yet one
still seeks an elegant framework in which to place them all. This quest leads to
some long-standing problems, as well as introducing some new ones. This proposal
describes problems in this general area which can be considered long-standing,
although from a new point of view. For example, the PI will build on the
fundamental work on the stabilization problem for Heegaard splittings which was
completed during the previous grant, working with J. Hass and W. Thurston, and
proposes to complete the second half of this conjecture. The PI introduces a new
knot invariant, related to earlier joint research with Scharlemann, and suggests
methods to answer some very basic questions regarding it. In addition the PI
includes a problem closely related to the long-standing slice-ribbon conjecture.
The PI also discuss her extensive outreach activities, which are intimately
entwined with her research.

A 3-dimensional manifold is an object that looks, to a local observer, like
3-dimensional Euclidean space. That is, it looks like the room in which you are
likely to be sitting. But just as several thousand years ago mankind knew only
the local, not the global, shape of the earth, at present we know only about the
local, not the global, shape of the 3-dimensional universe in which we live. So
3-dimensional spaces are in many respects important objects of study. Tremendous
progress in this field has been made in recent years, and there is now a hope of
understanding the full sweep of 3-dimensional spaces. The problems in this
proposal address some of the longstanding structural questions in the field,
with the aim of uncovering at least part of what is sure to be, when it is
ultimately discovered, the elegant framework which underlies it.