* 1207783
* Controlling the Dynamics of a Model Filamentous Biopolymer
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Jennifer Ross, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2017
* USD 469,600.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research is
cofunded by the Cellular Processes program (BIO/MCB). The goal of this research
project is to understand how stabilizing and destabilizing factors can tune the
dynamics of a model biopolymer. Regulation of the microtubule network is
essential to the process of intracellular organization. Microtubule-associated
proteins and enzymes control the length and dynamics of single microtubule
activity, and thus the network. This project will examine destabilizing enzymes
from the microtubule severing enzyme family that is an important group of
regulators that can cut microtubules anywhere along the length and cause
depolymerization. Additionally, the ability of microtubule stabilizers, such as
MAP4 and tau, and their ability to stabilize microtubules alone and to
antagonize the activity of severing enzymes also will be studied. Using multi-
color total internal reflection fluorescence imaging system, microtubules
performing dynamic instability in the presence of fluorescently-labeled
accessory proteins will be studied. With this project, both graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained at the interface of life sciences and
physical sciences. This interdisciplinary training would be very important to
prepare them for future industrial and academic careers. The PI has established
a strong track record in successfully recruiting and educating students from
diverse backgrounds. Recruiting and training of under-represented minority
students will be the focus of the planned outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of these fundamental scientific
studies is to understand how the cell controls the length, growth, and shrinkage
of microtubules. Microtubules are filaments found in almost all cells. They
support the structure of the cell, and their arrangement into a cell-wide
network that is important to organize the inside of cells. In order to
understand how microtubules organize the inside of the cell, one must understand
how the length, growth, and shrinkage of microtubules themselves are controlled.
Experiments will be performed where individual microtubules one-at-a-time will
be observed in the presence of other proteins using a specialized microscope.
These other proteins could either cut microtubules or protect them. This project
is to understand the exact mechanism of tuning on the destructive and
constructive proteins that regulate the length, growth, and shrinkage of
microtubule. This research will use multi-color single-microtubule imaging by
fluorescence microscopy to examine the dynamics of microtubule activity. As part
of teaching and training, graduate and undergraduates students will be trained
in biological physics at the interface between the physical sciences and life
sciences. Biological physics is an important interdisciplinary field that is
needed in many industrial and academic careers. As part of this project,
underrepresented students will be recruited and trained in the research
activities of the investigator.