* 1207761
* EDGES-2:  Detecting First Light and Reionization through the Global 21 cm Signature
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2012,11/30/2016
* Judd Bowman, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Kurczynski
* 11/30/2016
* USD 842,117.00

The formation of the first stars, galaxies, and black holes during what is known
as the Cosmic Dawn is the next frontier in observational cosmology. During this
epoch, the intergalactic medium (IGM) was primarily in the form of neutral
hydrogen gas, accessible to observations through its redshifted 21 cm line. Once
the first stars formed at a redshift z ~ 30, they produced a background of
Lyman-alpha photons that coupled the neutral hydrogen spin temperature to the
physical gas temperature in the IGM. This is thought to have caused the 21 cm
line to become visible in absorption against the cosmic microwave background
(CMB). Later, X-rays traveling long distances deposited their energy as heat and
raised the IGM temperature. This heating drove the average 21 cm signal to rise
into emission above the CMB, until the neutral gas was eventually ionized during
the epoch of reionization, and no detectable signal remained. The evolution of
these absorption and emission features in the early IGM should be evident in
cosmic radio spectrum, since redshift maps to frequency for the 21 cm line.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant observational challenges must be addressed to
separate the expected 10-100 mK high-redshift 21 cm signal from the dominant
Galactic foreground emission, but Dr. Judd Bowman of the Arizona State
University and his collaborators at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
propose to overcome these challenges with a spectrometer featuring 10 times
improved performance and frequency coverage from 40 to 200 MHz to span the
redshift range 6 &lt; z &lt; 30. The new instrument, called EDGES-2, will make
use of a new precision calibration method based on a generalization of the
classic noise wave propagation model. Broader impacts of the project include
demonstration of this new, high-precision calibration method for wideband
systems, which has applications outside of radio astronomy, including to
ionospheric study. The project also has a strong focus on providing
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate student training and mentoring in
an interdisciplinary environment to learn basic principles of digital signal
processing, software design, statistical analysis, model fitting, and
astrophysics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for the development of the EDGES-2
project is being provided by NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences through its
Advanced Technologies and Instrumentation program.