* 1207245
* Collaborative Research: Urbach-Tail Dynamics and Implications for Photonic Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Jacob Khurgin, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 06/30/2015
* USD 152,135.00

Technical Description: Scientists in the University of New Mexico (UNM) and the
Johns Hopkins University (JHU) are engaged in a multi-investigator research
project to study the physics of energy states located at and below the optical
band-gap energy of semiconductors. While the presence of these states has been
known since the earliest days of semiconductors, there has been an ongoing
disconnect between experimental and theoretical research. This project aims to
close that gap. The band-tail states, also called Urbach tail, are studied by
measuring and modeling the dynamics of absorption, luminescence, and heat
transfer to the lattice using established and new methods of time-resolved
optical and terahertz spectroscopy. The temporal response of the band-tail
states holds a wealth of interesting and important physics. The project sheds
new light on energy band-tail states in semiconductors by studying their
temporal response to optical perturbation. New and improved methods of time-
resolved spectroscopy leading to extremely high sensitivity are being developed
at UNM. JHU is producing a new theory of band-tail state dynamics that is
crucial to the interpretation of the experiments. This theory is sufficiently
general to accommodate states that are extended, local, or a
mixture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: The research project
aims at gaining a fundamental understanding of light absorption by
semiconductors at the long-wavelength absorption tail and the subsequent
photoluminescence (emission) from these materials. A success of the project can
have implications for future development of optoelectronic devices and
semiconductor laser refrigeration. The project also serves as a vehicle to
educate and train graduate students who are in the early stages of their
careers. It is particularly valuable because of its multidisciplinary nature in
the broad fields of physics, materials science, and optics. An important
educational component is an exchange program between UNM and the Southwestern
Indian Polytechnic Institute, co-located in Albuquerque. Supported UNM students
are responsible for setting up optics labs and mentoring at both facilities.