* 1207446
* New Perspectives on Wave Propagation in Random Media
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Azriel Genack, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 05/31/2016
* USD 380,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** Measurements of the spectrum of the microwave field
pattern at the output surface and on a line along the length of disordered
samples generated by a source moved to points on a grid over the sample's input
surface will provide a comprehensive picture of waves transport. Related
measurements will be carried out using laser light and a spatial light modulator
and CCD camera. The analyses of these measurements will be supplemented with
finite difference time domain numerical simulations. This research will advance
four distinct perspectives on wave transport and the relationships between them:
the spatial structure of (1) modes and (2) transmission eigenchannels, as well
as the variation with position of (3) the local diffusion coefficient, and (4)
the field speckle pattern for both diffusive and localized waves. Wave
statistics determined in single samples will guide applications to focusing,
imaging, and enhanced transmission in random systems. The joint experimental,
theoretical and numerical study of fundamental and applied aspects of
propagation using microwave radiation and light will provide and ideal learning
experience for the undergraduate, graduate, and high school students and the
postdoctoral fellow involved in this research. The work will strengthen the
photonics initiative at CUNY and foster photonic technological in the New York
City area.

****Non-Technical Abstract**** The manner in which waves propagate in random
media affects our ability to communicate and image and to create electronic and
photonics devices. The study of waves in multiply-scattering systems is all the
more challenging because of the twin difficulties of probing the interior of
scattering samples and measuring the full scattered field. In this project, we
will measure the wave pattern generated by sources of microwave radiation and
light at various positions on the output of disordered samples as well as
microwave radiation in the interior of such samples. This full set of
measurements will allow us to determine the natural modes of oscillation as well
as the specific transmission channels for waves in each random sample as well as
the position dependent flux and intensity of the wave and the nature of
fluctuations of intensity throughout the sample. The work will enable optimal
focusing through and within random systems and will yield nearly complete
transmission even in ordinarily opaque systems. The use of both microwave and
laser measurements for challenging fundamental and applied problems will advance
the education and careers of graduate students, undergraduates, high school
students and a postdoctoral fellow involved in the research. The success of this
work will strengthen the CUNY Photonic Center established to enhance the
technological base of the New York City metropolitan area.