* 1207672
* Exploring Fundamental Properties of Matter with  Electromagnetic Probes
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Michael Kohl, Hampton University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Hicks
* 07/31/2015
* USD 435,000.00

With the award, Dr. Michael Kohl, assistant professor in the experimental
nuclear physics group of Hampton University, will be able to continue to pursue
the OLYMPUS experiment at DESY in Hamburg, Germany, and to maintain and expand
his leadership role as the elected OLYMPUS spokesperson. The OLYMPUS experiment
at DESY, Germany, will precisely measure the ratio of elastic positron-proton
and electron-proton scattering cross sections. With this measurement, OLYMPUS
will definitively determine the effect of two-photon exchange in lepton-proton
scattering and hence verify if it is indeed responsible for the discrepancy in
measurements of the proton electric to magnetic form factor ratio between the
polarization transfer and cross section methods as observed at Jefferson Lab.
Without such a definitive test, not only the electromagnetic form factors but
the interpretations of all electron scattering data, usually done in the
framework of single-photon exchange, are under considerable doubt. The OLYMPUS
experiment has been prepared since official approval by DESY and of the US
funding by NSF and DOE in 2010 and has taken first data in Februry 2012. It is
scheduled for further running in fall 2012. The OLYMPUS apparatus is to a large
extent based on the previous BLAST detector from MIT, which has been relocated
to DESY and reassembled. Several components were upgraded or newly added, such
as the new Gas Electron Multiplier (GEM) based forward elastic tracking
telescopes for luminosity monitoring, which have been built by Dr. Kohl's new
group at Hampton University with help of NSF funding. The operation and
maintenance of the GEM detectors and future analysis of this essential component
of OLYMPUS has been and continues to be the main institutional responsibility of
the Hampton group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Kohl's research program has many
facets and offers a great opportunity for first class education and research
purpose domestically and abroad. This project will continue to combine
utilization of a new lab on the campus of Hampton University with forefront
research at the sites of large research facilities such as DESY and Jefferson
Lab, and provide new research and educational opportunities for students from
minority populations, predominantly African-Americans. Dr. Kohl has been
successfully working with Hampton University undergraduate and graduate students
and has been a dedicated mentor for the postdoctoral researchers of the Hampton
group. Dr. Kohl has been maintaining a strong partnership with MIT, which has a
goal of providing a pipeline of talented undergraduate students toward graduate
education in top schools and to ultimately increase the number of African-
American PhDs.