* 1207562
* Topological Insulators by Band-Gap Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Rui-Rui Du, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 354,000.00

****Technical Abstract**** This project will pursue experiments on the novel
properties of newly discovered topological insulators made of compound
semiconductors indium arsenide and gallium antimonide. This two-dimensional
quantum spin Hall insulator, which supports quantized helical edge modes, is
created by band-gap engineering using molecular beam epitaxy and electrostatic
gates. The project will continue to explore interesting physics at the
messoscopic length scale, with the focus on the helical edge modes and their
interface with superconductors, where proximity effect and Andreev reflection
will be systematically studied. The project will support the education of two
Ph. D students, where a combination of advanced trainings in semiconductor
materials, nanotechnology, and ultralow temperature measurements will be
received. Understanding of materials science of this class of material and their
topological properties is directly relevant to spintronics and quantum
information technology.

****Non-Technical Abstract**** Electrical insulators commonly refer to the
materials that prevent the flow of electricity. However, recent research
demonstrates a type of topological insulators which has novel properties.
Although electricity cannot flow through them, it can flow around their narrow
outer edges. The material, called a "quantum spin Hall topological insulator",
acts as an electron superhighway. It is one of the building blocks needed to
create future electronics and computers. This project will pursue experiments on
the newly discovered topological insulators made of semiconductors indium
arsenide and gallium antimonide, addressing important issues relate to materials
science and quantum physics. This will be accomplished using the most advanced
tools of nanotechnology and ultralow temperature measurements. The project will
support the education of two Ph. D students in semiconductor materials and
technology, as well as fundamental physics.