* 1207141
* Excited-State Properties of Electrostatically Doped Low-Dimensional Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Li Yang, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 275,310.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports computational and theoretical research and
education to study doping effects on excited-state properties of low-dimensional
structures of broad interest, including silicon nanowires, graphene and
electrically gated bilayer graphene. Because of the geometry of these structures
and the associated divergence of the electronic density of states close to the
band edge, electrostatically doped free carriers can dramatically change the
electronic screening of many-electron interactions. As a result, an even small
amount of doping may substantially change the excited-state properties, such as
the quasiparticle band gap and optical properties, making doping an efficient
tool to tune the intrinsic electronic structure of low-dimensional materials in
addition to its usual role of providing free carriers. The variation of many-
electron effects may also modify the spin singlet-triplet splitting which would
change the luminescence properties with possible application to quantum
information technology. The research involves using density functional theory
based methods along with GW and the solution of the Bethe-Salpeter equation.

This award also supports educational activities, including a new course, 'First-
Principles Calculations and Their Applications to Nanostructures,' in Washington
University. Additional activities include a series of seminars for interested
researchers from institutes nearby to introduce cutting-edge first-principles
approaches and their applications to the nanotechnology.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports computational and theoretical research
and education to investigate the properties of very tiny wires that are little
more than a few atoms wide and single-atom thick carbon sheets known as
graphene. The PI will use advanced computational methods that aim to predict
properties of structures of atoms and materials starting from knowledge of their
constituent atoms. Of particular interest are properties that involve how well
materials and structures of atoms absorb or emit light. An aim of the work is to
determine how the addition and removal electrons from the quantum wires or
graphene can be used to design the quantum mechanical states of quantum wires
and graphene.

This project contributes to the knowledge base including methods and software
upon which future device technologies will be based. Specific aspects of the
work contribute to the design of photovoltaic devices for the efficient
conversion of light to electricity. This award also supports educational
activities, including a new course, 'First-Principles Calculations and Their
Applications to Nanostructures,' in Washington University. Additional activities
include a series of seminars for interested researchers from institutes nearby
to introduce cutting-edge first-principles approaches and their applications to
the nanotechnology.