* 1207431
* Structures and Dynamics in Disordered Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Stefan Boettcher, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexios Klironomos
* 08/31/2016
* USD 330,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical and computational research and
aging on hierarchically structured systems and aging in glasses. Hierarchical
structures are pervasive in many environments, such as biological networks, and
social and economical organizations. Custom-made materials that exhibit
hierarchical properties may lead to complex yet well-controlled functionalities
not found in ordinary matter. Their recursive design lends itself to rigorous
analysis as well as to efficient engineering. Applying venerable tools from
condensed matter physics, such as the renormalization group, deep new insight
can be gained for transport and critical phenomena on such structures,
benefiting applications such as the design of tunable phase transitions or of
quantum computing devices.

In the spirit of the powerful concept of universality arising from
renormalization group, as applied to systems on conventional lattices, the PI is
formulating a renormalization group-classification scheme for critical phenomena
on hierarchical networks. Hierarchical networks exhibit a number of uncommon
critical phenomena that are rare to find in real materials, such as inverted
Kosterlitz-Thouless transitions, infinite-order or discontinuous transitions,
and non-universal transitions with tunable critical exponents. Understanding and
controlling such transitions ultimately provides the possibility to engineer
materials and nanostructures with custom properties not available in ordinary
materials. These notions will be developed for a broad range of condensed matter
systems. In the process, the PI will investigate and advance the application of
RG methods to handle global constraint, and novel RG schemes will be devised for
non-equilibrium and quantum transport phenomena on networks. For example, the PI
will investigate problems in quantum computing in recursive lattices to analyze
with rigorous methods how quantum interference affects Grover's algorithm for
quantum search in higher-dimensional structures to suggest efficient
realizations of memory in a quantum computer.

The central hypothesis of the second project on glassy relaxation is that aging
generally is connected with record fluctuations, implying that intermittent
events or "quakes" drive the dynamics in many glassy materials, with quenched or
structural disorder, irrespective of specific microscopic details. Specifically,
this project aims to study a new real-space model that provides the relevant
phenomenology for record dynamics. Extensive simulations of this model will be
conducted to reveal its consistency with known aging phenomena, including the
reproduction of various thermodynamic measures. New measures will be explored
and tested for their experimental efficacy. Theoretical descriptions in terms of
record dynamics will be devised and matched to recent experimental results.

While there are theories that capture various features of aging behavior in
glassy materials, there are few unifying concepts among them. Mode-coupling
theory does not apply below the glass transition, kinetically constrained models
rarely have a transition, and effective temperature concepts from mean field
theories lack fluctuations to capture the full non-equilibrium nature of the
aging phenomenon. In general, thermodynamic descriptions provide useful
indicators, yet, blur the true sub-extensive character of activated dynamics.
The PI will examine the significance of the importance of intermittent, extremal
fluctuations as a controlling impetus for the relaxation process by devising and
analyzing a model based on record dynamics and by providing quantitative
insights into a broad spectrum of aging phenomena. In the long run, a more
unified description of complex relaxation may emerge, enhancing control in the
use and design of disordered materials. Implications for the understanding of
complex energy-landscapes, useful in materials design as well as for biological
evolution and combinatorial optimization, will be explored.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical and computational research
and aging on hierarchically structured systems and aging in glassy materials.
The study of complex networks has revolutionized our understanding of many man-
made and natural structures in the last decade. Hierarchical structures, in
particular, have become a central issue in the design of complex materials as
well as in the study of biological networks, social and economical
organizations. The PI's research on the dynamics of transport processes within
hierarchical networks and modeling the flow of granular materials or electrons,
reveals entirely new patterns, very distinct from the typical behaviors observed
in ordinary materials. One goal of this project is to understand and classify
these novel properties using the tools of traditional condensed matter physics,
appropriately adapted to these structures. Such insight can be exploited to
engineer meta-materials with custom-made and controllable features.

Another system exhibiting complex dynamics is provided by colloidal and
similarly disordered materials. At high density and/or low temperature these
amorphous materials attain a glassy state characterized by extremely slow
relaxation dynamics, which itself depends on the history of the process. Slow
relaxation in disordered systems arises at many levels, for better or for worse:
We desire to "unpack" traffic jams faster, to transport grains through hoppers
more quickly, or to pack objects more densely, but we also hope that actual
glass - in principle a fluid material - retains it shape for long times. A
unifying phenomenology referred to as "aging" has been used to describe
manifestations of this relaxation dynamics over a wide class of otherwise
unrelated materials. Yet, a generic mechanism needed to justify such a sweeping
generalization has been elusive. In this second project, the PI will investigate
in depth a promising mechanism theoretically and numerically, and in close
connection with the experimental evidence.