* 1207053
* Investigation of Growth and Dopant Incorporation in Silicon Carbide Nanowires
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Roya Maboudian, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2016
* USD 291,417.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Semiconducting nanowires, high aspect ratio rods with
diameters of order tens of nanometers, have received much attention in recent
years, due to their anticipated (and in some cases observed) novel optical,
thermal, electrical, and mechanical behavior. To date, silicon (Si) nanowires
have been the most extensively studied owing both to the technological relevance
of the material and to the relative simplicity of the synthesis. However, a
number of critical applications, such as high-efficiency electrochemical storage
devices and high brightness miniature neutron sources, highlight the limitations
of Si nanowires and the need for more robust materials systems. Silicon carbide
(SiC) nanowires were chosen for these studies because of the exceptional
physicochemical stability of this material. This research project aims to gain a
fundamental understanding of the growth mechanism of silicon carbide nanowires
and the parameters that control their morphological and electrical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The specific SiC nanowire
synthetic approach chosen is Ni-catalyzed chemical vapor deposition from single
precursor methyltrichlorosilane and with ammonia as a dopant. The primary
analytical techniques include high-resolution transmission electron microscopy
(for detailed structural studies), Raman spectroscopy (for structural,
vibrational, and optical properties), atom probe tomography (for chemical
composition mapping with sub-nm resolution) and field-effect transistor
measurements (for electrical characterization, including the Fermi level
position and carrier concentration and mobility). From a fundamental point of
view, this research is enabling a better understanding of the interplay between
the growth parameters (e.g., catalyst, growth temperature, dopant precursor) and
the structural, morphological and electrical properties of SiC nanowires. From
the applied point of view, the research is highlighting the key factors for
synthesizing SiC nanowires with tailored doping for such applications as
emitters for vacuum electronics, corrosion resistant charge storage devices, and
other energy, sensing, and harsh environment applications. The project is
providing core training for graduate and undergraduate students. A variety of
outreach activities, including the participation of underrepresented students in
research, are underway. The results of this work are being incorporated into
talks given to the general public by the researchers and are also being widely
disseminated through a variety of means such as refereed journals, conferences,
lectures, and demonstration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by
the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM) and Ceramics (CER) Programs in the
Division of Materials Research (DMR).