* 1207045
* Tailorable Glycosaminoglycans for Enhanced Stem Cell Chondrogenesis
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Johnna Temenoff, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
the Georgia Institute of Technology is to develop a glycosaminoglycan
(GAG)-based biomaterial platform with high degree of control of sulfation levels
in order to better tune these materials as controlled biomolecule delivery
vehicles for applications in tissue engineering and drug delivery system.
Furthermore, using a mesenchymal stem cell micromass culture as a testbed, this
work will define tangible criteria for building biomaterials that can promote
stem cell differentiation in response to exogenous soluble cues while providing
early information about the role of GAGs (and their sulfation level) in
cartilage development. Additionally, because GAGs are implicated in such a wide
range of biological processes, the materials developed here can be used to
elucidate the role of GAGs in development, cancer, and immunity (to name a few
examples), therefore contributing significantly to advancing basic biological
knowledge in these fields as well. Further broader impacts include the creation
of a highly interdisciplinary environment in which to train graduate and
undergraduate biologists, engineers and chemists to address critical questions
in creating the next generation of tailorable biomaterials by integrating
knowledge from materials science, chemistry, biology and medicine.

Biomaterials derived from tissues, such as those examined in this project, are
advantageous because they often possess specific capabilities to interact with
their environment and direct healing. However, the complex structure and myriad
of possible native chemical modifications of these materials have, to date, made
it difficult to understand how to precisely control their biological activity
and, therefore, impeded their development as a class of therapeutic
biomaterials. This project addresses this issue by taking a systematic approach
to understanding how chemical modifications to this particular class of
biomaterials affects their resulting bioactivity and ability to control release
of specific drugs. While the project first will examine the release of specific
factors from these materials for cartilage tissue regeneration, in the future,
it is expected that the insights derived from these studies will be used to
further develop these naturally-derived materials to deliver a wide range of
therapeutics for tissue healing throughout the body. This project will also
result in the advanced training of graduate researchers with unique analytical
skills based on a multi-disciplinary and integrative perspective. Moreover, the
planned integrated education and research plan in coordination with outreach
programs on campus will result in additional training opportunities for
undergraduate and high school students from under-represented minority
populations.