* 1207533
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: "Family, "Foreigners," and Fictive Kinship: A Bioarchaeolgoical Approach to Ancient Maya Social Organization"
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2014
* Katherine Miller, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2014
* USD 20,000.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Jane Buikstra, Katherine Miller will conduct an
analysis of biological and chemical data from human skeletal remains from the
ancient city of Copan. The research site is located at the southeastern
periphery of the ancient Maya world in western Honduras. Copan was a major
social, political, and economic center that was occupied for nearly 3,000 years
reaching its apogee during the Late Classic period (AD 600-820) when the
population surpassed 20,000 inhabitants. Copan is ideal for this project because
of its continuous occupation, its role as a major Maya urban center, and
extensive excavations that have produced the largest skeletal collection in
Mesoamerica. Ms. Miller's research explores kinship and residential patterns
through an empirical and theoretically inclined methodology applicable to past
societies by directly engaging individuals who were buried at
Copan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The factors that influence how people choose to
associate and organize into social, political, and economic groups both in the
past and present are long-standing research issues in anthropology as they are
central to (re)constructions of the past. This project takes a novel approach to
the problem of social organization by using new methods and a largely neglected
source of data, the human body. The chemical and biological signatures found in
the skeleton highlight the interplay of genealogy and culture and are well-
suited to accurately document relationships and affiliations since these
signatures cannot be seen, distorted, or misrepresented by the individual or
society in life or death. This project will address the role that kinship and
shared residence played in the formation and maintenance of social groups by
employing (1) biodistance analysis to infer biological kinship relationships
through the physical expressions of underlying genetic traits found in teeth,
and (2) radiogenic strontium isotope analysis to extract samples of strontium
from human teeth to infer ancient migration and residence patterns. This study
will provide a necessary and timely addition to the body of knowledge on ancient
Maya social organization by including data drawn from those who created and
maintained society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will have impacts that
extend beyond the research topic. As part of an international collaboration with
the Honduran Institute of Anthropology and History and institutions from the
United States, a major component of this research includes the conservation of
the largest collection of archaeologically recovered ancient Maya human skeletal
remains from a UNESCO World Heritage site. The intellectual merit of this
project centers on the interdisciplinary nature of the research design that
combines archaeology, biological and cultural anthropology, biogeochemistry, and
statistics to address the long-standing problem of social organization. Results
will be disseminated through a publicly available online database and in peer-
reviewed publications. Public outreach will occur both in the United States and
Honduras through public lectures, academic presentations, and workshops to
improve the understanding of science and protection of archaeological
collections. Finally, this project provides the foundation for long-term
international scientific collaboration by training students and professionals
from the United States and Honduras in bioarchaeological methodology, research
design, conservation, and field analysis.