* 1207112
* Development of Critical Data for Predicting Growth of Secondary Organic Aerosols in Air
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2012,11/30/2016
* Barbara Finlayson-Pitts, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 11/30/2016
* USD 734,977.00

This project is comprised of a series of studies to measure the uptake
coefficients for semi-volatile organic compounds (SVOC) on secondary organic
aerosols (SOA) formed from the oxidation of a variety of gas phase precursors.
The rationale for these investigations is that SOA growth is better described by
a kinetically limited mechanism than one based on equilibrium phase
partitioning, and that uptake coefficients for various SVOC on typical
atmospheric SOA are needed in order to model SOA growth more accurately.
However, uptake coefficients data on SOA are limited. The activities therefore
include studies of the generation and composition of SOA formed from oxidation
of SOA precursors by nitrate radical or/and ozone inside a large-volume, slow-
flow aerosol flow tube; studies of the uptake of organic nitrates and SVOC on
SOA as well as studies of possible evaporation of SOA components using
attenuated total reflectance Fourier transform infrared spectrometry (ATR-FTIR);
measurements of absolute uptake coefficients of organic nitrates and SVOC on SOA
using a Knudson cell and a coated wall fast flow reactor; characterization of
the uptake of organic nitrates and SVOC on self-assembled monolayers; and
analysis of SOA using nano-secondary ion mass spectrometry (nano-SIMS). The
research will yield information important in assessing the relative importance
of kinetically limited mechanisms versus equilibrium partitioning in SOA
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include providing kinetic data and
molecular insights on the uptake of semi-volatile organic compounds onto
secondary organic aerosol, disseminating results broadly through publications,
summer teacher workshops, hosted lab tours for students and the general public,
visits of researchers to local schools, training of undergraduate and graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows, continued involvement of underrepresented
groups in the principal investigator's research activities, and development of
new experiments for the undergraduate curriculum at UC-Irvine.