* 1207592
* US-German Collaboration: Unravel CNS regeneration - From Fact Extraction to Experiment Design
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2017
* Lawrence Hunter, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 11/30/2017
* USD 487,862.00

This research is motivated by the problem of spinal cord injuries, with the goal
of producing data that can lead to pharmacological or other interventions to
make recovery possible. It is hypothesized that major changes after a spinal
cord injury occur on the protein level, and that a model of protein changes and
interactions between proteins will make it possible to elucidate previously
unnoticed relationships between the participating proteins and protein pathways.
To do this, a computational neuroscience approach is a necessary addition to
laboratory experiments. This analysis requires a considerable amount of
background knowledge; to acquire this knowledge, natural language processing
(text mining) is necessary; specifically, new techniques for natural language
processing need to be developed in the neuroscience domain.

The research plan involves a series of proteomics experiments to be carried out
on rats with induced spinal cord injuries and the interpretation of these
results using a computational systems biology approach. The quality of
knowledge-based computational analysis depends critically on the breadth of
formally represented knowledge in the program. A major challenge is that much of
the requisite knowledge is "buried" in scientific publications, rather than
being available in computable form in databases. Therefore, novel text mining
techniques will be developed, tailored for the neuroscience domain, to extract
such knowledge from scientific publications and convert it into a computable
form. A generic computational analytical tool, known as Hanalyzer, is already
available but needs to be adapted to the specific problem; the challenge is to
develop the natural language processing technology. A neuroscience-specific
aspect of this challenge is that there is a high diversity in the surface forms
of words that are used to refer to spinal cord regeneration, making machine-
learning-based approaches susceptible to data sparsity and rule-based approaches
vulnerable to an intractable number of keywords that must be accounted for. A
distributional approach will be used to approach this challenge, with novel
techniques that make use of semantic role labeling, recognition of ontological
concepts, and dependency parsing to learn the surface forms that correspond to
abstract or implicit concepts like spinal cord regeneration.

This project is a collaboration involving investigators in Denver, Colorado and
in Duesseldorf, Germany. A companion project is being funded by the German
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF).