* 1207323
* GOALI: Fabrication and Characterization of Controlled Microstructure Glass Composites for Electromagnetic Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2019
* Rosario Gerhardt, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2019
* USD 1,160,072.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project is a collaborative effort between
Advanced Composite Materials LLC (ACM) and the Georgia Institute of Technology.
The main goal of this project is to develop a fabrication method - material
combination necessary to make high temperature resistant conductive coatings
that could be used for a variety of electronic applications. While the
industrial partner is focused on using silicon carbide (SiC)-based materials as
microwave oven cooking inserts, the methodology being developed in this project
will be useful for all types of glass composites. The final composite properties
will depend on the properties of the additives used, which could make them
useful for many industrial applications in fields such as electronics,
communications, military and defense, industrial heating, and other novel
household heating and cooking appliances. In addition to supporting several
graduate and undergraduate researchers, the project includes support of high
school teachers and/or faculty members from non-research or minority-serving
institutions during the summer months, with the purpose of increasing their
understanding in this exciting area of research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: The main aim of this project is to fabricate conductive glass
composites with different filler content and varying thicknesses with optimal
properties. One of the goals is to determine the ideal thickness and the lowest
filler content possible that will permit the fabrication of transparent
conductive glassy coatings that could be deposited onto a variety of substrate
types. The wide availability of many different filler materials in nanosized
form, combined with recent developments in the fast sintering of ceramic
materials, and a more detailed understanding of how to control percolation,
makes this a propitious time to carry out this project. Bulk consolidation
methods that are being used include hot-pressing, pressureless sintering and
electric field assisted sintering. Thin film formation methods being used
include spin coating and screen printing. The thin and thick glass composite
specimens are being characterized using scanning electron microscopy (SEM),
atomic force microscopy (AFM), scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM)
and X-ray microtomography. The dc and ac resistivity as well as the broadband
dielectric, optical and magnetic properties are being measured. Modeling of the
processing-structure-property relationships as a function of thickness, glass
type, filler type and consolidation method is expected to reveal a better
understanding of how to control the electromagnetic properties of these types of
materials. Two doctoral students and several masters and/or undergraduate
research students are working on this project; this training contributes to the
future workforce in this cutting-edge field.