* 1207243
* Electrical Spin Injection at Chemically Modified Organic/Inorganic Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Arthur Epstein, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 05/31/2016
* USD 389,710.00

Technical Description: The central aim of this project is to determine the role
of interface structure, chemistry and band alignment in spin transport and
scattering in hybrid organic/inorganic heterostructures. The project consists of
two components. The first is focused on using previously demonstrated spin-
transport techniques to explore the impact of chemical modification and
passivation of the inorganic surface on spin transport in hybrid
organic/inorganic systems. The second focuses on the development of novel
measurement geometries to directly probe the exchange interaction across the
organic/inorganic interface for both bare and modified inorganic surfaces using
the ultrafast pump-probe technique of ferromagnetic proximity polarization. The
success of the project can help laying the foundation for the development of
both hybrid and all-organic spintronic devices that exploit the relative ease of
fabrication and inherent chemical functionality available in organic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: This research project
is on the integration of organic-based magnetic materials into the developing
field of spintronics, which relies on exploiting the magnetic properties of
materials for low-power and instant-on electronics. The use of organic-based
materials can potentially lead to room-temperature operation, inexpensive
fabrication and intrinsic chemical sensitivity for on-chip integration of
chemical sensing. The expansion of organic electronics to include organic-based
magnetic materials and devices allows the development of capabilities
complementary to traditional solid-state spintronics in much the same fashion
that organic light-emitting diodes and organic thin-film transistors have
provided low-cost, easier-to-manufacture alternatives for more conventional
inorganic electronic devices. In addition, the PI works with physics PhD
students in collaborative teams that use "live" intellectual property to develop
viable business plans for commercialization, in collaboration with the
Technology Entrepreneurship and Commercialization Academy based in the Fischer
College of Business at The Ohio State University. This training goes well beyond
what is currently available to a typical PhD in physics and fills a critical gap
in the development of our nation's STEM workforce.