* 1207945
* RUI: Discovery Research K-12: Developing Algebra-Ready Students for Middle School: Exploring the Impact of Early Algebra
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Maria Blanton, TERC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Karen King
* 08/31/2013
* USD 750,613.00

The project Developing Algebra-Ready Students for Middle School: Exploring the
Impact of Early Algebra, led by faculty at the University of Massachusetts-
Dartmouth and the University of Wisconsin is developing and testing a curricular
learning progression of early algebra objectives and activities for students in
grades 3 - 5. The goal of the work is to provide teachers with curricular
guidance and instructional resources that are useful in preparing students for
success in study of algebra at the middle grade level. The project is also
developing and validating assessment tools for evaluating student progress
toward essential pre-algebra mathematical understandings.

The basic hypothesis of the project is that findings from prior research on
early algebra learning need to be consolidated into a coherent longitudinal
curriculum strand in elementary school mathematics and that effective use of
such curricular resources also requires teacher access to high quality
assessments of student learning progress. The project is using content analysis,
synthesis of the research literature on early algebra, and classroom teaching
experiments to produce and test the curricular learning progression and teaching
resources. The assessment instruments are being developed and validated using
standard psychometric techniques.

Since the ultimate utility of any early algebra materials depends on designing
them in such a way that typical elementary teachers can use them effectively,
the project is also conducting exploratory work on professional development of
teachers. This work lays the groundwork for what the proposers envision to be a
subsequent large scale comparative study to test the hypothesis that appropriate
early algebra experiences in elementary grades will enhance learning of formal
algebra in later grades.