* 1207595
* Gamma Ray Astronomy and Particle Astrophysics (Univ of Utah Group)
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* David Kieda, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 05/31/2016
* USD 1,188,000.00

Very High Energy (VHE) gamma-rays probe the most energetic non-thermal processes
known in astrophysics, and provide a wealth of information regarding magnetic
fields, shocks, radiation fields, and energetics in the source environment. VHE
gamma-rays also enable research in fundamental particle astrophysics, including
the study of candidate locations of high concentrations of Dark Matter and
direct, sensitive searches for Lorentz Invariance Violation in the lepton
sector. This umbrella award will continue support for the VHE gamma-ray
astronomy research groups at the University of Utah (UU). The UU VERITAS group
will carry out continuing observations and data analysis from the VERITAS
Imagining Atmospheric Cerenkov Telescope array, the world's most sensitive VHE
gamma-ray observatory. An upgrade of the VERITAS cameras, led by the UU VERITAS
group, will be installed and commissioned in mid-2012. This upgrade will result
in substantial increases in sensitivity, and allow exploration of the energy
regime below 100 GeV. The UU HAWC group will participate in the construction,
commissioning, and operations of the HAWC Observatory, which is currently under
construction near Sierra Negra, Mexico. The HAWC observatory will employ an
array of 300 large Water Cherenkov Detectors deployed at high altitude that
record the charged particles generated by VHE gamma-rays in the Earth's
atmosphere. The group will perform synergistic, coordinated observations between
VERITAS and HAWC, once the HAWC observatory is fully operational.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This award will strengthen the
UU VERITAS and HAWC groups' existing EPO initiatives on the local, state, and
national level. During the past three years, the groups have developed and are
now operating the Willard Eccles Observatory (WEO), at Frisco Peak, Utah. This
robotic telescope performs multi-wavelength science observations and also
provides public observing time to universities, colleges, and high schools
throughout Utah. The groups have developed STEM outreach through mentorship of
two high school FIRST robotics teams, and developed a statewide FIRST robotics
program.