* 1207439
* Understanding Intrinsic Ductility in Metallic Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2012,09/30/2016
* Yunfeng Shi, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2016
* USD 263,817.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and
theoretical research and education to advance understanding of the intrinsic
ductility of metallic glasses. The conditions and manner in which materials fail
are of fundamental concerns to both engineers and scientists. Recently an
empirical relation has been found between the Poisson's ratio and the fracture
energy in amorphous solids, including metallic glasses and oxide glasses.
However, there is little theoretical understanding for such a convenient and
intriguing correlation between near-equilibrium elasticity and far-from-
equilibrium failure. The PI will use molecular dynamics simulation coupled with
potential-tuning scheme to investigate the intrinsic ductility of metallic
glasses, as a prototypical amorphous solid. Such strategy will enable the
exploration of amorphous solids unavailable in experiments by prescribing atomic
interactions. Both the Poisson's ratio and the fracture energy will be studied
in terms of the atomic bonding and packing. The knowledge of how structure
determines intrinsic ductility is crucial to toughening metallic glasses and
even oxide glasses. The computational platform developed in this project can be
used to conduct dynamic fracture and fatigue testings, and to study fracture
toughness of thin films, porous materials and composite materials. Insights
gained here will also provide important clues on other empirical relations
linking the Poisson's ratio to densification, fragility and glass-
transition.&lt;br/&gt;The PI will reach out to high school students interested
in science and engineering through the New Visions: Math, Engineering,
Technology &amp; Science program in collaboration with Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute. Planned activities include half-day mini-lectures on computational
materials science, complemented with interactive demonstrations. The PI will
also reach out to the computational research community by continuing developing
open-source visualization software SimRePlay.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and theoretical
research and education to understand how amorphous solid materials fail. The
touch screens of smart phones, made of oxide glasses, are brittle as they
shatter upon impact, while glasses constituted with metal atoms, termed metallic
glasses, can be as tough as steels. The PI will use advanced computer simulation
techniques to model the fracture of various amorphous solids. The insights
gained from computational work at the atomic level will help understand and
predict the failure mode of amorphous solids, and provide important clues of how
to make tough glasses.&lt;br/&gt;The PI will reach out to high school students
interested in science and engineering through the New Visions: Math,
Engineering, Technology &amp; Science program in collaboration with Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute. Planned activities include half-day mini-lectures on
computational materials science, complemented with interactive demonstrations.
The PI will also reach out to the computational research community by continuing
developing open-source visualization software SimRePlay.