* 1207036
* Numerical Simulations of Quantum Computers and Disordered Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Allan Peter Young, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 330,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education to study two fields where
computer simulations can give important information: quantum computers and spin
glasses.

It is well known that there are certain specialized problems which can be solved
much more efficiently on a quantum computer than on a classical computer. The
question addressed in this project is whether an eventual quantum computer
could, in addition, solve a broad range of optimization problems more
efficiently than a classical computer using the Quantum Adiabatic Algorithm.
Results already obtained by the PI for several optimization problems indicate
that the simplest application of this algorithm does not give an improvement
over classical algorithms for large problem sizes. The PI will therefore use the
inherent flexibility of the quantum adiabatic algorithm to see if modifications
to it give a significant improvement, and also apply the algorithm to other
types of problem. In particular, the PI will investigate if quantum algorithms
will be helpful in the field of machine learning.

The PI will also investigate several questions in the field of spin glasses,
which are systems with disorder and frustration. The study of spin glasses is
important far beyond the rather narrow field of dilute magnetic alloys where
they were first studied, because ideas developed for them have applicability to
a wide range of complex systems, such as combinatorial optimization problems in
computer science, protein folding in biology, and structural glasses (e.g.
window glass). Spin glasses are a convenient system in which to study this class
of problems since they can be probed in fine detail in experiments by applying a
magnetic field, and can be represented theoretically by simplified models which
are amenable to computer simulation. Understanding spin glasses will help our
understanding of these other problems as well. In particular, the PI will apply
optimization methods developed using spin glass ideas to solve other
optimization problems.

This award will support the education of students in developing state-of-the-art
algorithms for large-scale numerical simulations. The research will enable them
to pursue scientific careers in many related fields and become part of a
scientifically sophisticated workforce. Recent students of the PI have gone on
to apply the ideas learned under his supervision in both academia and industry.
The PI will also continue to teach techniques used in his research as part of
courses on computational physics, which are offered to both undergraduates and
graduate students.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education to study two fields where
computer simulations can give important information: quantum computers and spin
glasses

Information in a computer is stored as "bits" which take values 1 or 0. It has
been proposed that certain problems could be solved more efficiently on a
quantum computer in which the bits are replaced by "qubits" which follow the
laws of quantum mechanics and can be simultaneously in states 1 and 0, which is
called a superposition. So far, it has proved very difficult to build a useful
quantum computer because a small amount of external noise destroys
superposition. However, it is still of interest to study what problems could be
solved efficiently on a quantum computer if and when a quantum computer can be
built. The PI will study whether a particular broad class of problems, known as
optimization problems, can be solved more efficiently on a quantum computer than
on a classical computer. Since we do not have a quantum computer, the PI will
emulate the behavior of a quantum computer by doing numerical simulations on a
classical computer.

The PI will also study a class of systems called "spin glasses" which exhibit
glassy behavior at low temperatures, that is, they do not come to equilibrium
but are always evolving with time. Ideas developed for spin glasses have
applicability to a wide range of complex systems, such as some optimization
problems in computer science, protein folding in biology, and structural glasses
(e.g. window glass). Spin glasses are a convenient system in which to study this
class of problems since they can be probed in fine detail in experiments, and
can be represented theoretically by simplified models which are amenable to
computer simulations. Understanding spin glasses will help our understanding of
these other problems as well.

This award will support the education of students in developing state-of-the-art
algorithms for large-scale numerical simulations. The research will enable them
to pursue scientific careers in many related fields and become part of a
scientifically sophisticated workforce. Recent students of the PI have gone on
to apply the ideas learned under his supervision in both academia and industry.
The PI will also continue to teach techniques used in his research as part of
courses on computational physics, which are offered to both undergraduates and
graduate students.