* 1207194
* Vortices, Quilts, and Quasimaps
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Christopher Woodward, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2017
* USD 436,667.00

The PI will use gauged Floer theory to study non-displaceability
of&lt;br/&gt;Lagrangian tori in possibly open symplectic manifolds
via&lt;br/&gt;compactifications such as symplectic toric orbifolds, and compare
with&lt;br/&gt;results of McDuff on displaceability. With F. Ziltener, his
former&lt;br/&gt;postdoctoral advisee E. Gonzalez, and his current student
Sushmita&lt;br/&gt;Venugopalan the PI will study the quantum cohomology of
quotients and&lt;br/&gt;relationships with gauged Gromov-Witten theory. In
particular he will&lt;br/&gt;(a) prove a quantum version of Kalkman's wall-
crossing formula which&lt;br/&gt;governs the behavior of Gromov-Witten
invariants under variation of&lt;br/&gt;symplectic quotient and proves
birational equivalence under crepant&lt;br/&gt;flops in many cases, as
conjectured by Ruan (b) find presentations of&lt;br/&gt;quantum cohomology rings
of symplectic quotients such as toric&lt;br/&gt;orbifolds and quiver varieties.
With K. Wehrheim and his former&lt;br/&gt;student S. Ma'u the PI will continue
to study holomorphic quilts,&lt;br/&gt;functoriality of Lagrangian
correspondences in Floer-Fukaya theory,&lt;br/&gt;and relationship with low-
dimensional topology. In particular, the PI&lt;br/&gt;will prove the A-infinity
version and the exact triangle for fibered&lt;br/&gt;Dehn
twists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These research projects will improve our
understanding of symplectic&lt;br/&gt;geometry, which is a mathematical
framework for understanding&lt;br/&gt;classical mechanics, particularly for
time-dependent energy functions.&lt;br/&gt;Many of these projects are related to
the behavior of&lt;br/&gt;symplectic invariants under the operation of
symplectic reduction in&lt;br/&gt;which the number of degrees of freedom of a
system is reduced by using&lt;br/&gt;symmetry. These invariants also appear in
the study of&lt;br/&gt;quantum-mechanical ``sigma models'' by physicists,
who&lt;br/&gt;have made a number or predictions about their behavior
under&lt;br/&gt;symplectic reduction, some of which will be verified and
generalized&lt;br/&gt;as part of the project. The project on holomorphic quilts
will have&lt;br/&gt;applications to our understanding of three- and four-
dimensional&lt;br/&gt;spaces, especially invariants constructed using gauge
theories which&lt;br/&gt;are conjectured (and in some cases known) to have
symplectic&lt;br/&gt;interpretations. The PI will also continue his involvement
with middle&lt;br/&gt;school mathematics teachers.