* 1207597
* Differential Equations on Singular Spaces and Asymptotic Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Thalia Jeffres, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2018
* USD 178,010.00

This project involves several geometric problems giving rise to linear and
nonlinear differential equations on noncompact manifolds. The PI has worked in
recent years on constant scalar curvature, constant Ricci curvature, Gauss
curvature flow, and equations of mean curvature type. She is above all
interested in such questions in the presence of singularities - sharp corners,
cones, and edges. Promising new directions generated by this work will be
carried out during the grant period. Curvature conditions produce nonlinear
equations, which are typically very challenging in noncompact and singular
settings. Questions to be pursued include extensions of recent work carried out
with R. Mazzeo and Y. Rubinstein regarding the existence and the nature of
Kaehler-Einstein metrics with conical singularities on a compact, complex
manifold. The PI intends likewise to pursue further work in the area of constant
scalar curvature metrics with conical singularities. Earlier joint work with J.
Rowlett focused on the case of negative curvature; the PI now intends to
continue these investigations into the cases of zero and positive curvature. In
addition to these nonlinear problems, a second class of problems involves
spectral functions of the Laplacian. A unifying theme is the use of asymptotic
methods. The project involves a graduate student.

The PI proposes to work on various problems in the area of partial differential
equations with the unifying theme of using asymptotic methods. The development
of techniques and the exploration of their applicability to problems on
noncompact and singular spaces is expected to enhance the range of settings in
which such problems of physical and geometric origin may be studied. These
topics have been the subject of intense research activity. The PI has been very
active in speaking in conferences and research programs, and funding will
support such travel. Funding will also allow the PI to visit collaborators and
to support the travel of collaborators to her home institution. Very
importantly, it will also allow her to support a graduate student. The PI is
involved in education at all levels.