* 1207204
* Mechanical Properties of Freestanding Nanoparticle Sheets
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Heinrich Jaeger, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 06/30/2015
* USD 405,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates a new class of ultrathin
sheets that are self-assembled from metal nanoparticles, each particle being
surrounded by a thin shell of short organic molecules that act as inter-particle
spacers. As close-packed monolayers these sheets are the thinnest structures
that can be fabricated from nanoparticle building blocks. The sheets exhibit
remarkable mechanical strength and robustness, including Young's moduli of
several GigaPascal, and can be draped over openings hundreds to thousands of
particles wide. The resulting freestanding membranes provide special
opportunities for investigating nanomechanical properties, making it possible to
investigate large assemblies of nanoscale building blocks without interference
from a substrate, while at the same time allowing for direct experimental
access, via a range of probes such as electron or scanning probe microscopies,
to the individual building blocks themselves. Combining systematic experiments
with simulations of the elastic response, the project addresses questions that
are of fundamental relevance also for systems with atoms as building blocks,
such as how the overall mechanical response is affected by defects in the
particle arrangement. Additional directions to be pursued include assessing the
feasibility of using the sheets as mechanical resonators and sensors in the MHz
range, and the possibility of folding the nanoparticle sheets into three-
dimensional structures. The project will train one postdoc and one graduate
student in vital nanoscience know-how. A set of outreach activities includes the
development and prototyping of hands-on activities with a major science
museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticle self-assembly offers special opportunities for
the design of next-generation materials. This project investigates a new class
of ultrathin sheets, assembled from metal nanoparticles. As one-particle-thin
layers, these sheets are the thinnest structures that can be fabricated with
nanoparticles. A special feature is that they combine extreme flexibility with
unusual mechanical strength. This combination makes it possible to design novel
coatings as well as new types of self-assembled, nanomechanical resonators and
sensors. The project provides a natural platform for integrating research with
education and outreach. It will train one postdoc and one graduate student in
vital nanoscience know-how, and introduce undergraduates to forefront science. A
special component is a set of outreach activities that include the development
and prototyping of hands-on activities with a nearby major science museum.