* 1207651
* Extending the use of machine learning algorithms to Sufficient Dimension Reduction
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Andreas Artemiou, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2013
* USD 19,385.00

The investigator develops new methodologies for sufficient dimension reduction
both for linear and nonlinear dimension reduction problems. A method developed
recently by the investigator and his collaborators utilizes classic two-class
Support Vector Machine algorithms to develop a new class of algorithms for
linear and nonlinear sufficient dimension reduction under a unified framework.
In this work the investigator extends this methodology in several directions.
First, different extensions of the classic Support Vector Machine algorithms are
used to improve the performance and the asymptotic properties of the original
method. Second, the method is extended to algorithms that allow for multi-class
classification. Third, the investigator develops new method-specific and method-
free variable selection methodologies for sufficient dimension techniques based
on ideas in the machine learning literature. Finally, new algorithms for the
order determination of the dimension reduction space based on the new
methodology are developed.

Recent advancements in computer science have increased computer power and,
subsequently, the capability of storing large datasets efficiently. Thus, to
analyze large datasets effectively in many sciences, like Biology, Meteorology,
Genetics and Economics, new techniques are needed to reduce the dimensionality
of the datasets. This work creates new algorithms to reduce the dimensionality
of large datasets effectively, for both linear or nonlinear relationships
between variables. These techniques transform a high-dimensional regression or
classification problem to a lower-dimensional one, which helps to identify
hidden relationships among variables. The methodology being developed will be an
efficient tool for scientists working with large datasets, and it will open new
research frontiers to statisticians to develop new ideas in the area of
dimension reduction.