* 1207825
* Scalable 100 GHz focal plane arrays: a 16-pixel wideband array for the Green Bank Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2017
* Sarah Church, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Kurczynski
* 06/30/2017
* USD 1,455,000.00

The development of large format detector arrays for millimeter-wavelength
spectroscopy offers great opportunity for new discovery, potentially enabling
molecular line surveys that efficiently map the dynamics and distribution of
star-forming gas with high angular and spectral resolution over large areas of
sky. The challenge to building large spectroscopic arrays is technical rather
than fundamental: each pixel in the array must be a complete and independent
heterodyne spectrometer. In the astronomically important frequency range of
5-170 GHz (wavelength 1.8-60 mm), amplifiers based on High Electron Mobility
Transistors (HEMTs) offer low noise, low power dissipation, high reliability,
inherently wide bandwidths, and the ability to build instruments with high
spectral resolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under a previous NSF award, Dr. S.
Church of Stanford Univ. and her collaborators developed the necessary complex
fabrication techniques and constructed prototype components for such an
instrument using single-pixel feed horns, low-noise Monolithic Millimeter-wave
Integrated Circuit (MMIC) amplifiers, and Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs)
as the signal-processing components. The current proposal aims to extend this
technology toward mass-production and machine-assembly with the 16-channel Argus
spectrometer targeted for W-band (85-116 GHz) observations at the 100m Green
Bank Telescope (GBT) of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory. While a
16-pixel detector will not fully exploit the potential of this approach, it is
well-matched to the field of view offered by the GBT and its scalable design
will provide a proof of both concept and fabrication technique for future arrays
with perhaps hundreds of pixels on other telescopes. Though not intended as a
GBT facility instrument, Argus will be opened to collaborative research use by
the general astronomical community. The project will also foster the training of
students and young researchers through direct hands-on involvement in the
instrument development as well as ongoing outreach efforts in area community
colleges and high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for the development of
MMIC-based multi-channel mm-wave spectrometers is being provided by NSF's
Division of Astronomical Sciences through its Advanced Technologies and
Instrumentation program.