* 1207252
* Ultrafast Dynamics in Solids and Semiconductor Nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Jianming Cao, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 04/30/2016
* USD 365,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This research project seeks to understand
the structure-property/function correlation in colossal magnetoresistive (CMR)
materials and semiconductor quantum dots by directly examining their structural
dynamics in real time. The structural dynamics will be probed at the atomic
spatiotemporal resolution using a novel technique of femtosecond electron
diffraction (FED) developed in PI's laboratory. In conjunction with FED,
femtosecond time-resolved optical spectroscopy measurements in the relevant
degrees of freedom will also be conducted to thoroughly characterize the
dynamical behavior in these materials. Issues and questions to be addressed
include: (1) Dynamics of photoinduced phase transition in CMR materials: What
are the steps involved and what are the associated timescales? What is the role
of Jahn-Teller distortion in these photoinduced phase transition? (2) Dynamics
of electron-phonon coupling in semiconductor quantum dots: How fast is the
photo-deposited energy transferred from charge carrier to lattice? How does this
time scale depend on the size, the type and structure of quantum dots, and the
surface conditions? What is the role of phonon bottleneck? These research will
provide a real-time and atomic-level view of these dynamics and hold the
potential to fully reveal the related physical mechanisms and the structure-
function correlations that would otherwise be impossible to extract. This
project integrates research and education to train students in cutting-edge
techniques and modern methods in the forefront areas of condensed matter physics
and ultrafast science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The property of matter is largely determined by its
microscopic structure, that is, how the constituent atoms are arranged at the
atomic level. A well-known example is the carbon and its allotropes, such as
graphite, diamond and buckyball C60. Likewise, structural changes and
transformations involving the rearrangement of constituent atoms and/or
molecules dictate many important processes in nature, ranging from seemingly
simple processes such as melting to complex biological reactions. Probing
structural dynamics at the atomic spatiotemporal scales has attracted
considerable interest. In our previous research funded by NSF, we developed a
unique tool of femtosecond electron diffraction and demonstrated its capability
of probing structural dynamics at the time and length scales of atomic motions.
Here, we will use this new technique to study several condensed matter physics
problems of both fundamental physical importance and interesting technological
implications. They include the dynamics of photo-induced structural
transformation in colossal magnetoresistive materials and the relaxation of
photo-generated carrier in semiconductor nano-crystals. The former study will
reveal the elementary steps involved, thus gaining new insight to the transition
pathways. The latter research will contribute to the understanding of the energy
redistribution in nano-crystals and help improving the energy conversion
efficiency in nano-crystal based solar cells. Participating undergraduate and
graduate students will acquire training and knowledge in the forefronts of
contemporary condensed matter physics and ultrafast science, and will be
prepared for careers in academia, industry, and national laboratories.