* 1207667
* Analysis, Algorithm Design, and  Computation for Stochastic Systems and Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Gang George Yin, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2018
* USD 430,752.00

Motivated by emerging applications, this proposal encompasses several research
topics in systems theory and stochastic optimization methods. (1) It aims to
develop new stochastic approximation algorithms (with delays, distributed
processors, and a switching process representing the random environment).
Asymptotic properties of these algorithms and related limit results will be
established. The results can be applied to consensus control problems among
others. (2) Stability of systems with random delays (possibly due to
communication latency) will be investigated. Sufficient conditions for stability
of nonlinear systems and criteria for functional differential systems with
random delays will be obtained. The expected results will shed more lights on
treating stability of systems that are delay dependent. (3) Error estimates in
the form of large deviations for system identification using regular and
quantized observations will be obtained. By considering both space complexity in
terms of quantization and time complexity with respect to data window sizes,
this study focuses on providing a better understanding to the fundamental
relationship between probabilistic errors and resources that represent data
sizes in algorithms, sample sizes in analysis, and channel bandwidths in
communications. (4) To approximate the first exit time for diffusions, Markov
chain approximation methods will be developed and their rates of convergence
will be obtained. To treat numerical solutions to stochastic differential
equations with continuous-state-dependent switching, pathwise rates of
convergence will be ascertained using a sequence of re-embedded numerical
solutions having the same distribution as the original systems in an enlarged
probability space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to bridge systems
theory, stochastic optimization methods, and applications. The research topics
proposed include developing iterative algorithms using parallel processors and
taking random environment into consideration, investigating stability of systems
involving random delays, obtaining lower and upper estimation error bounds for
system identification under different observation patterns, and designing and
analyzing numerical solutions of problem involving certain differential
equations with random uncertainty. The problems to be studied have been
extracted from or motivated by real applications. It is anticipated that the
results of this research will be useful for applications in networked systems,
wireless communication, financial engineering, system identification with
regular and quantized observations, and numerical solutions of certain problems
involving random differential equations. The models to be constructed, the
intrinsic properties of the systems, and the numerical methods and algorithms to
be developed will lead to potential transfer of advances in stochastic systems
theory and optimization methods to the aforementioned applications. Theproposed
research will involve participation of graduate students; it will also include
undergraduate student research projects. By integrating the proposed research
with teaching and student training, the planned work will contribute to the
further development of mathematical systems theory and the improvement of
mathematics education.