* 1207995
* Integrable Structure of Interacting Particles Systems and Quantum Spin Chains
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2019
* Craig Tracy, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2019
* USD 961,728.00

he asymmetric simple exclusion process (ASEP) is a model of interacting
particles on a lattice. ASEP is one of the simplest, nontrivial stochastic
models in which to study transport phenomena as it models processes far from
equilibrium. As such the model has attracted much attention from both
mathematicians and physicists. This award will support (1) the exploration of
the underlying integrable structure of ASEP using spectral methods, (2) the
generalization of ASEP to multi-species where there are now second-class, third-
class, etc. particles, and (3) ASEP on the half-line. The integrable structure
referred to commonly goes under the name ``Bethe Ansatz''; and in (3) this
project will support the analysis of the new structures required in restricting
to a half-line. (Here the familiar sum over permutations in Bethe Ansatz is
replaced by a sum over signed permutations.) A closely related model is the
quantum spin model called the Heisenberg-Ising model. This project will support
the analysis of the domain wall problem in the Heisenberg-Ising chain. A long-
term goal of this project is the study of limit laws and their universality in
these various models.

The Gaussian distribution (the familiar bell-shaped curve) is important because
of its universality; that is, it applies to a wide variety of seemingly
unrelated problems. The underlying common theme for all these problems is the
fact that the objects under study have some degree of ``independence''; or
stated in more physical terms, are non-interacting (or weakly interacting).
These types of problems are well-understood both physically and mathematically.
Current research involves processes which are strongly interacting; and as such,
there is no satisfactory general theory as there exists for the non-interacting
cases. In the search for new universal laws, the ideas, methods and results of
random matrix theory, interacting particle systems and their associated limit
theorems; in particular, the Tracy-Widom (TW) distributions, have found an ever
widening impact in science and engineering. Since their initial discovery in
random matrix theory, the TW distributions have been shown to describe the
properties of a number of random systems including the fluctuations of a large
class of growing interfaces and directed polymer systems. These same TW
distributions are now regularly used in multivariate statistical analysis where
they have become a standard statistical tool for inferring population structure
from genetic data. Their use in engineering involving signal analysis and
wireless communications is just beginning. This project extends the scope of
these theoretical investigations; and as such, will make available to a wider
audience the resulting mathematical results.