* 1207746
* RUI: Interactions between Homotopy Theory and Algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* James Turner, Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2017
* USD 137,481.00

To every category of classical algebras (associative, commutative, Lie) there is
an associated category of simplicial algebras. The objects of such categories
consist of a sequence of algebras together with face and degeneracy maps between
adjacent levels, satisfying certain relations. The associated homotopy theory of
simplicial algebras provides a setting for modeling the homological algebra
associated to the original algebra type (and, thus, providing a basis for the
study of derived algebras). Thus this category provides a natural place to study
such algebras utilizing standard homological devices such as higher torsion,
higher extensions, and the tangent complex. The PI continues his research on
simplicial algebras in relation to the problem of realizing algebras as the
homotopy or cohomology of spaces and in relation to the conjectural rigidity
properties of the tangent complex. To that end, the PI will aim to further
elaborate the general internal structure of Andre-Quillen cohomology of
algebras. In a continuing collaboration with D. Blanc and M. Johnson, the PI
will use this structure to determine and study the algebraic properties of
higher homotopy operations as they are represented in the Andre-Quillen
cohomology of (a variation of) Lie algebras. This in turn will be used to
elucidate the obstruction theory for topologically realizing a given Lie algebra
via homotopy groups and seek to make these obstructions computable. The PI will
also continue studying the divide between locally complete intersection algebras
and locally Gorenstein algebras through the possible rigidity properties
possessed by Andre-Quillen cohomology. This will involve elaborating further the
structure of derived commutative algebras as modeled by simplicial commutative
rings. Again the internal structure of Andre-Quillen cohomology will serve to
help elucidate the properties of those derived algebras that possibly fall
within this divide and use these properties to characterize and classify their
types. Finally, the PI will begin carrying further this particular investigation
within the context of derived algebraic
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Derived algebras appear in various
contexts in algebraic topology, algebraic geometry, and commutative algebra.
Recent concepts flowing into algebraic topology and algebraic geometry from
theoretical physics (such as topological modular forms, elliptic objects and
chiral algebras) can be studied from within the context of algebraic geometry
based on certain types of derived algebras. This project will enhance our
understanding of how the theory of derived algebra and derived algebraic
geometry can provide a setting for studying such complex geometric structures
through sophisticated homological devices. The PI works with undergraduates and
opportunities are provided for them to engage in research during the summers.
The PI invites mathematicians from around the country to speak at a colloquium
held on campus. Talks at the colloquium give students a chance to be introduced
to researchers from various universities and be exposed to the type of
mathematics being pursued at the graduate level.