* 1207808
* Complexity Penalization in High Dimensional Matrix Estimation Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Vladimir Koltchinskii, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

The investigator will study a variety of problems of estimation of large
matrices based on noisy measurements of linear functionals of these matrices.
The main focus is on the problems where the target matrix is either low rank, or
it can be well approximated by low rank matrices. The proposed estimation
methods are based on empirical risk minimization with complexity penalties that
favor low rank solutions and the objective is to obtain sharp bounds on the
estimation error (in particular, low rank oracle inequalities) that show how it
depends on the important parameters of the problem such as the level of the
noise, the sample size, the size and the rank of the target matrix. The problems
to be studied include: (a) new low rank oracle inequalities for trace regression
providing a bridge between known results in the noiseless case and in the noisy
case for more complex models of design distribution; (b) estimation of density
matrix in quantum state tomography with a goal of studying both the least
squares method in matrix regression setting and the maximum likelihood method
for more general measurement models with proper complexity penalization; (c)
estimation (learning) of low rank kernels on graphs and manifolds with a goal of
developing new methods of predicting similarities between vertices of a graph or
points in an unknown manifold embedded in a Euclidean space.

This project is in a very active interdisciplinary area of high-dimensional
matrix estimation that is borderline between statistics, mathematics and
computer science, and it will facilitate research collaborations between these
areas. It will provide a better understanding of subtle aspects of high-
dimensional problems of matrix estimation and of complexity regularization in
these problems. The problem of estimation of large matrices is very basic in
high-dimensional statistics and in a variety of its applications in such areas
as signal and image processing, compressed sensing, bioinformatics, quantum
information and quantum statistics, high-dimensional data visualization and
visual analytics. In these problems, it is of importance to find low-dimensional
structures in high-dimensional data that reflect basic relationships between the
variables describing complex high-dimensional systems. In the case of matrix
problems, finding such structures can be reduced to estimation of low rank
matrices and the proposed project will result in a better understanding of the
existing methods as well as in the development of new methods of low rank matrix
recovery.