* 1207692
* Community Workshop: Real-Time GPS Position Data Products and Formats; Boulder, Colorado
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2013
* David Mencin, UNAVCO, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 02/28/2013
* USD 49,918.00

This grant supports a workshop to determine community-defined strategic
direction for Real Time GPS (RTGPS) position data products and formats. High-
rate real time positions based on RTGPS data improve temporal resolution of
observations of natural processes and are likely to improve the understanding of
earthquakes, seismic wave propagation, volcanic eruptions, magmatic intrusions,
movement of ice, landslides, and structure and dynamics of the atmosphere.
RTGPS-based positions may also have substantial impacts on the ability to assess
natural hazards in near real time, including source characterization of large
earthquake, tsunamis and volcanic eruptions, directly influencing how science
and society prepare and react to these hazards. Well-defined data products and
formats will allow the integration of these data with data streams from other
areas of geodesy, seismology, and cryospheric and atmospheric science, helping
to realize the true potential of this valuable resource. A three-day workshop is
planned for late March 2012 in Boulder, Colorado and will bring together
approximately 50 geoscientists and students with experience and interests in
defining data products and formats based on RTGPS data. The organizing committee
will produce a final workshop report that will make community-based
recommendations RTGPS data products and formats that serve the broad scientific
community.