* 1207213
* Monolayer Nucleation and Passivation of Advanced Electronic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Andrew Kummel, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2017
* USD 452,867.00

Technical Description: Atomic layer deposition is a cyclic chemical process that
provides sub-nanometer control of layer thickness. The bonding of the first
layer is the critical step in providing a low defect interface, which enables
nucleation of atomic layer deposition within each unit cell. The project is
developing an atomic layer understanding of oxide monolayers deposited on two
very different semiconducting materials, gallium nitride and graphene, by
combining scanning tunneling microscopy and scanning tunneling spectroscopy.
These materials have surfaces with very low chemical reactivity, enabling the
fabrication of unique electronics devices; however, these materials lack
reactive atoms that can strongly bond to atomic layer deposition precursors. For
graphene, the non-reactive surface is functionalized via adsorption of an
ordered monolayer of organic coordination complexes while for gallium nitride
and order layer of inorganic function groups are deposited. Two techniques are
developed with broad applicability: (a) ultra high vacuum cross-sectional Kelvin
Probe Force Microscopy to image the electrostatic potentials inside working
capacitors and field effect transistors on the nanoscale and (b) contactless
ultra high vacuum variable frequency capacitance-voltage for in-situ measurement
of gate oxide defects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: At
present, computer chip speed and performance are limited by the dissipation of
heat. Further increases in performance require decreasing in the supply voltage
to stabilize heat dissipation per unit area. This research project seeks to
develop the monolayer chemistry required for nucleating layer by layer growth of
the nanoscale insulators, which will enable lower-power computing or more
efficient high power communication. The project includes activities designed to
recruit and support under-represented minority PhD students and undergraduate
students who are interested in materials science and engineering or materials
chemistry.