* 1207221
* GOALI: Self-Assembled Multivalent Lithium Salts for Solid Polymer Electrolytes
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Stephanie Wunder, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2016
* USD 404,010.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This GOALI project is a collaboration between Temple University, Hybrid
Plastics, and MaxPower, Inc., and addresses the fundamental question of whether
it is possible, using an understanding of the self-assembly of nanomaterials and
lithium ion diffusion in polymers, to design solid polymer electrolytes (SPEs)
that have both high room-temperature conductivity (> 1 x 10-3 S/cm) and lithium
ion transference numbers, tLi+, that approach 1. The SPEs so formed will have
the advantages of liquid electrolytes without the accompanying safety problems
of volatility, flammability and dendrite formation. Multi-ionic lithium salts
will be synthesized from polyoctahedral silsesquioxane (POSS) nanoparticles and
combined with polyethylene oxide (PEO), since preliminary data indicate that
these SPEs exhibit improved lithium ion transport properties. The polyoctahedral
silsesquioxanes are Janus-like nanoparticles, with hydrophobic phenyl groups at
one end and ionic groups based on -Si-O-BF3- Li+ at the other end. In the
morphology that forms, the phenyl groups cluster and the -Si-O-BF3- groups
orient towards the PEO phase. The electron withdrawing POSS cage and BF3 groups
delocalize the negative charge on the anion so that the dissociated Li+ can be
solvated by the surrounding PEO matrix. The PEO is completely amorphous, so that
the resulting solid structure is not the result of PEO crystallinity but instead
it is proposed to be the result of phenyl crystallites and crosslinks formed
from -Si-O-BF3 anion--- Li+---O-H2CH2 bridges that connect the phenyl clusters
and PEO chains. Enhanced conductivity may be the result of this morphology, in
which Li+ ions are loosely coordinated to several -Si-O-BF3 anions, and may
migrate along the interfacial regions with a lower activation energy.
Preliminary data show ionic conductivities of 3 x 10-4 S/cm, close to the target
value of 1 x 10-3 S/cm, with tli+ = 0.6. Better designed multi-ionic lithium
salts in which the Li+/phenyl group ratio is increased will be investigated. The
purpose is to minimize the amount of non-conductive phase needed to maintain a
solid without PEO crystallinity and to maximize the amount of low Tg conductive
phase with solvated Li+ ions. Morphology, mechanical and electrochemical
properties will be correlated to elucidate the factors that contribute to
enhanced conductivity. This project is supported by the NSF Solid State and
Materials Chemistry Program.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The potential impact of the proposed research is improved solid polymer
electrolytes that would enhance the performance of lithium/lithium ion batteries
used in large electrical energy storage applications such as electric
vehicles/hybrid electric vehicles or matching the output of fluctuating power
sources including wind and solar with fluctuating demand. Solid polymer
electrolytes are intrinsically safer than the volatile liquid electrolytes
currently used in small lithium ion batteries for portable devices. The research
will focus on the development of new materials which have ionic conductivities
comparable to those of current liquid electrolytes, but are safer and have
better performance overall. Material synthesis will be performed in
collaboration with Hybrid Plastics, Inc., a company with the expertise and
scale-up facilities necessary for the project. Long-term battery testing for
complete evaluation of the new solid polymer electrolyte materials that are
developed will be accomplished through collaboration with MaxPower, Inc, a
lithium battery manufacturer. Undergraduate/graduate students will participate
in interdisciplinary research in polymer-, organic- and electro-chemistry both
in academic and industrial environments.