* 1207738
* Conference Travel:  Automorphisms of Free Groups: Algorithms, Geometry and Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Mladen Bestvina, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2013
* USD 33,600.00

During Fall 2012 there will be a semester-long special program entitled "Free
Groups: Algorithms, Geometry and Dynamics" held at the Centre de Recerca
Matem√†tica (CRM) in Barcelona, Spain. There will be two focused events, (1) a
series of advanced courses primarily aimed at graduate students and postdocs
tentatively set for the week of September 17-21 and (2) an international
conference tentatively set for the week of November 26-30. There has been lately
a flurry of activity surrounding the group of outer automorphisms of a free
group. During this exciting time in its development, the advanced courses will
be aimed to attract future researchers, and to prepare them to attend the
subsequent international conference. Postdocs and more advanced graduate
students will also be invited to give presentations on their own work. The
international conference will bring together many of the top experts, primarily
from North America and Europe, to give talks on their research, to share ideas,
and to initiate new projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans are naturally
attracted to symmetry, be it a regular hexagonal pattern in a honeycomb, a
clever rhyme scheme of a poem or the beautiful tilings in the Alhambra. The
symmetries of an object are often the first properties we look for when we
encounter something for the first time and try to understand it. A group is a
mathematician?s way of defining and thinking about symmetry. Just as a thorough
investigation of the integers is important to understand the rational numbers
because every rational number is the quotient of two integers, a thorough
investigation of free groups is important to understand groups because every
group is the quotient of two free groups. Symmetries of free groups are the
focus of this international conference and the of advanced courses. Leading
mathematicians will be at the conference to discuss current progress in this
area and to train younger researchers. Instructors for the advanced courses will
prepare notes that will be bounded and subsequently published. More information
can be found at the website for the CRM http://www.crm.es and at the conference
webiste
http://www.crm.es/Activitats/Activitats/2012-2013/Automorphisms/default.htm