* 1207941
* CRCNS: Collaborative Research: Responses of the Rodent-Vibrissal-Trigeminal System to Air Currents
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Venkatesh Gopal, Elmhurst University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2017
* USD 123,349.00

The rodent vibrissal-trigeminal system is one of the most important models in
neuroscience for the study of sensorimotor integration. To date, however,
research has focused exclusively on direct tactile sensation. Recent results
from the Hartmann and Gopal laboratories have demonstrated that rat vibrissae
have a robust and repeatable mechanical response to airflow. In addition,
neurons in the vibrissal-trigeminal system are known to respond to air puffs.
These results suggest that the rat may use its vibrissae to detect air currents
and determine wind direction. The Northwestern-Elmhurst team will perform
mechanical, behavioral, and computational studies to characterize the role of
vibrissae in wind-following behaviors, and the vibrissal-related neural response
to air currents. These will constitute some of the first investigations of the
underlying mechanisms that permit terrestrial mammals to sense and follow the
wind. The team will specifically identify the morphological features of
vibrissae and their orientation on the mystacial pad that enable flow sensing
behaviors. They will investigate the broad hypothesis that differential
mechanical deformations of the vibrissae across the mystacial pad can encode a
variety of flow parameters. Finally, behavioral experiments will be performed to
determine the extent to which the rat uses its vibrissae to sense airflow, and
to quantify the movement strategies used during anemotaxis in the behaving
animal. The partnership between Northwestern and Elmhurst will provide
significant research opportunities for undergraduates; in addition, videos will
be developed to teach the fundamental principles of fluid dynamics and
biological sensing that underlie this research. The proposed work has
potentially large implications for olfactory localization and the structure of
the olfactory system, and is likely to lead to the development of novel flow-
sensing technologies.