* 1207494
* GOALI: Micromechanical Experiments and Modeling of Shape Memory Response in Ni-Ti Based Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Peter Anderson, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 06/30/2016
* USD 447,161.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shape memory alloys (SMAs) are materials
with remarkable properties that stem from a martensitic transformation. The
crystallographic aspects of the martensitic transformation have been calculated
and verified in a number of systems; however, there are fundamental aspects of
shape memory and pseudoelastic behavior that are not understood. Principal among
these is how the matrix accommodates the large strain associated with the
transformation. Theoretically, accommodation may be achieved either by matrix
plasticity or by inducing additional transformation variants. With plentiful
evidence for plasticity in the literature, understanding the mechanism of defect
generation has become a critical component for mitigating functional fatigue in
thermomechanical cycling applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By combining
micromechanical testing, in situ and post mortem scanning transmission electron
microscopy (STEM), and multi-scale computational modeling efforts, the current
study aims to develop a more detailed picture of the microstructural evolution
as a function of cycling. The fundamental study of defect generation and
multiplication is being facilitated by the observation of plastic deformation
associated with individual martensite transformation modes in small volumes of
material (micropillars). By characterizing the defects generated during these
isolated transformation events, the nature of the coupling between plasticity
and the transformation is being illuminated. The results from micromechanical
testing are also compared to the substructure development observed in pure
thermal and combined thermomechanical cycling via in situ STEM experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This experimental work is being supplemented by
microstructure-sensitive modeling at various length scales, including an
Eshelby-type, variant-level prediction of the local stresses developed by
specific martensite modes. In previously published work, this model's output has
shown remarkable agreement with the active slip systems observed experimentally.
This combination of a variety of novel experimental and computation techniques
allows for an unprecedented insight into the fundamental mechanisms driving
functional fatigue in NiTi-based SMAs and will eventually lead to more fatigue-
resistant alloy design for future applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shape memory alloys (SMAs), such as NiTi,
are unique materials that are able to retain a "memory" of their original shape
after cyclic heating or loading. This makes these materials extremely attractive
for applications in the medical industry such as stents and surgical devices, in
the automotive industry as solid-state actuators, and in the technological world
for use in micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS). Unfortunately, these
remarkable properties rapidly degrade with repeated cycling, making them
unsuitable for many potential applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current
work is focused on studying the mechanisms of functional fatigue in NiTi-based
shape memory alloys through the use of a variety of novel experimental
techniques. By employing micromechanical testing, in situ and post mortem
scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), and computational modeling,
the study aims to develop a more detailed understanding of how the
microstructure evolves with both mechanical and thermal cycling. Specifically,
this includes observation and analysis of the material?s behavior and resultant
defect accumulation for pure mechanical cycling, pure thermal cycling, and
combined thermomechanical conditions at different length scales. In addition,
this program facilitates industrial and international collaborations with
General Motors Research and Development, the Ruhr University in Bochum, Germany,
and others. The results of this work will eventually aid in the development of
fatigue-resistant alloys that can out-perform current state-of-the-art materials
in demanding applications.