* 1207480
* Biomimetic Ligand Display in Proteolipobead Hybrid Matrices to Direct Stem Cell Chondrogenesis
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Raymond Tu, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2015
* USD 440,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1207480 PI: Gilchrist, Lane ORG: CUNY City
College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Biomimetic Ligand Display in Proteolipobead
Hybrid Matrices to Direct Stem Cell
Chondrogenesis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Mimicking elements of
stem cell microenvironments to elicit regenerative control is one of the major
challenges in biomaterials research. Of the major environmental cues, the
presentation of membrane associated ligands involved in cell-cell interactions
(e.g. cadherin, notch) and the sequestering of soluble factors (e.g.
transforming growth factor-beta) at the cell surface have not yet been well
established in 3D culture systems. As the 3D context is more appropriate for
biomimicry of the stem cell niche, our long-term goal is to integrate
microsphere-supported biomembrane systems into 3D matrices. This will be
accomplished using a composite 3D hydrogel scaffold architecture that integrates
laterally mobile ligands/bound factors positioned in microsphere-supported
biomembrane systems known as proteolipobeads. For the first time, this will
allow for the laterally mobile presentation of various ligands/membrane-bound
factors to stem cells within a 3D format via novel, molecularly engineered
interfaces with controlled surface densities. Thus, the specific focus of this
proposal is to build a platform that incorporates laterally mobile N-Cadherin
fragments and the TGF-beta3 receptor, TGF-beta-R3 (i.e., beta-glycan), in
proteolipobeads suspended in a 3D matrix for presentation to human mesenchymal
stem cells (hMSCs). The proposed mode of N-cadherin and TGF-beta-R3 display will
be used to investigate the effects of N-cadherin-mediated cell-cell
communication events and TGF-beta3 sequestering on MSC chondrogenesis in vitro
and serve as the proof-of-concept for this transformative technology. The
specific hypothesis behind the proposed research is that the introduction of
proteolipobead assemblies into 3D scaffolds is a viable biomimetic means to
present ligands/bound factors to stem cells and mimic cellular communication in
the stem cell niche. The objectives are designed to examine if this mode of
ligand presentation can be achieved and to assess the effects on stem cell
viability and differentiation. Objective 1 is to embed N-cadherin/TGF-beta-R3
proteolipobeads in carboxymethylcellulose 3D constructs and probe N-Cadherin
display and TGF-beta3 growth factor sequestration. Objective 2 is to investigate
the interaction between N-cadherin/TGF-beta-R3 biomembrane-microspheres and
hMSCs by monitoring MSC viability and chondrogenic
differentiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The benefits to society
of the proposed activity are that contributions from the research could help
cross major technological barriers in stem cell bioengineering, so that humanity
can ultimately guide stem cell regeneration processes. Essentially a whole
dimension in stem cell ligand/bound factor presentation has not yet been
achieved, and the proposed scaffold design may lead to new molecular methods for
control of stem cells in 3D culture. In addition, this work may lead to
innovative therapies for cartilage repair, which is a significant clinical
problem. To go beyond the impact of the research outcomes, we will implement a
new mechanism for advancing discovery while promoting training and learning.
This program will be specifically tailored to inner-city middle and high school
students and aimed at stimulating a fascination with the molecular basis for
color. This educational outreach integrates UV-VIS pigment identification field
studies of sanctioned and renegade street graffiti art in the CCNY (Harlem)
neighborhood. A concurrently running online dye and pigment database will be
created, that will be further augmented with molecular structure and absorption-
relevant molecular orbital visualizations using computational chemistry
packages. The very same pigments, dyes, and fluorophores have dual uses in
paints and as molecular reporter groups in the proposed studies. Thus, the
participating labs are well positioned to provide the initial research setting
along this learning pathway for local students who take an interest in the
molecular basis of color. The results of this research in stem cell biomaterial
engineering will be broadly disseminated via oral presentations at conferences,
and in regular student research poster symposia at CCNY.