* 1207063
* Preparation and characterization of microscopic photomechanical molecular crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Leonard Mueller, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 06/30/2016
* USD 600,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Photochemical reactions within molecular crystals
provide a way to transform light energy into nanoscale mechanical motion.
Progress in nanoscale photomechanical materials requires an interdisciplinary
approach that combines materials chemistry and physical characterization. In
this joint proposal, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program, the Bardeen research group's expertise in molecular crystalline
materials, optical spectroscopy and microscopy will be complemented by the
Mueller group's strengths in solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and
computational chemistry, in order to pursue a research program with two main
thrusts:&lt;br/&gt;1) New photomechanical materials. We will concentrate on
thermally reversible photomechanical systems that can operate with a single
light source. To make photomechanical elements that can function on the
nanoscale, we will look for systems where changes in the crystal shape can be
induced intrinsically without relying on specialized irradiation conditions. Two
new types of photochemical "engines" will also be investigated: the unimolecular
Dewar isomerization of anthracene, and thermally induced polymorphic phase
changes. We will also develop the capability to make uniform arrays of molecular
crystal plates as a step toward making devices based on photomechanical
molecular crystals.&lt;br/&gt;2) Physical characterization of the solid-state
reaction dynamics and their connection to crystal deformation. This part of the
project will involve using optical, x-ray, NMR and computational methods to
understand how molecular-level reactions drive large-scale crystal shape changes
in model systems. After the photochemical reaction has been initiated, the
structure of the photoproduct and how the reaction affects the crystal packing
will be determined using solid-state NMR, x-ray diffraction, and computational
methods. We will also use optical and scanning probe microscopy to map out how
the crystal geometry changes as a function of these parameters. Information from
these experiments will be combined to provide a holistic picture of the
photomechanical process on multiple length scales and
timescales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Machines that
function on length scales smaller than biological cells could lead to
revolutionary advances in fields like medicine and defense. But there are many
questions that must be answered before this goal can be achieved, including how
to produce such structures, how to provide them with power, and how to control
their motion. Our approach involves self-assembling photochemically reactive
molecules within a crystal, whose shape and size is controlled by the
preparation conditions. Because the molecules are organized within a crystal,
they move in concert to expand or bend the overall nanostructure. The research
in this proposal will assess whether these nanoscale photochemical "engines" can
be used to manipulate objects on nanometer to micron length scales. We also want
to gain a predictive understanding of how molecular-level chemical changes can
combine together to create much larger shape changes in the crystals. In
addition, outreach programs based on this research will be used to increase the
participation of underrepresented minorities in science. U.C. Riverside is a
Hispanic Serving Institution, with strong connections to the surrounding public
schools. We are currently designing and implementing outreach modules for 1st,
2nd and 4th grade classes that are consistent with the California State
Standards for science education. With undergraduate volunteers, we are bringing
these modules to local elementary schools, like Taft Elementary, a local Title I
school whose student body is more than 50% Hispanic.