* 1207785
* MOHSIS: The Maryland OH Suppression IFU System for the Discovery Channel Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Rajarshi Roy, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Peter Kurczynski
* 05/31/2018
* USD 845,949.00

A long-standing and profound problem in astronomy is the difficulty in obtaining
deep&lt;br/&gt;near-infrared observations from the ground due to the extreme
brightness and variability of the night sky at these wavelengths. The
atmospheric emission at 1.0 - 1.7 um arises almost entirely from a forest of
extremely bright, very narrow OH emission lines that vary on timescales of
minutes. Using an approach known as a fiber Bragg grating (FBG), these emission
lines can now be selectively removed, while retaining high throughput between
the lines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. S. Veilleux of the University of Maryland
College Park and his international team have carefully refined the application
of this technique by incorporating an Integral Field Unit (IFU) FBG input, and
have thoroughly demonstrated the efficacy of the approach through in situ tests
with existing telescopes and instrumentation. The requested NSF funds are highly
leveraged through FBG development at the University of Sydney and spectrograph
construction being provided by the NASA Goddard Space Flight Center as well as
the University of Maryland. Science applications will initially focus on low-
resolution spectroscopy of very faint, transient gamma-ray burst (GRB) sources,
which are now known to originate in supernovae located in very distant galaxies,
as well as on studies of the galaxies that host these cataclysms. Teaming with
Discovery Communications provides an unusual outreach component to the project
that will involve students at a variety of levels as well as the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding this component of the near-infrared OH
emission-line suppression spectrograph is being provided by NSF's Division of
Astronomical Sciences through its Advanced Technologies and Instrumentation
program.