* 1207338
* RUI: Organic Vapor-Liquid-Solid Deposition
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Janelle Leger, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 07/31/2016
* USD 305,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Thin films of organic molecular crystals (OMCs) have drawn widespread attention
for their scientifically interesting and potentially useful properties, with
applications ranging from mechanically flexible circuitry, to inexpensive
photovoltaics, light emitting diodes, and chemical sensors. However because the
properties of OMCs are extremely sensitive to structural imperfections, domain
size, and crystallographic orientation, preparation of high quality thin films
with controlled microstructural organization under technologically favorable
conditions has long been a bottleneck toward practical applications and better
controlled fundamental studies. The proposed research will investigate a new
approach for fabricating OMC films called organic vapor-liquid-solid (OVLS)
deposition. OVLS combines aspects of vapor-phase deposition with solution-phase
growth using a liquid or liquid crystalline matrix, offering several advantages
compared to conventional physical vapor deposition techniques. These include the
ability to perform deposition at ambient pressure and temperature, compatibility
with a wide range of molecular building blocks and solvent chemistries, and the
ability to exert greater control over growth habit, film morphology, and
crystallographic orientation. In short, OVLS deposition has the potential for
improved control over several of the most important film growth variables while
at the same time operating under conditions favorable for technological
exploitation and basic understanding of nucleation and growth. This research,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program at NSF, will study
OVLS deposition to develop a more detailed fundamental understanding of
nucleation and growth mechanisms in organic materials and apply that
understanding to explore device applications, while providing hands-on
introduction to scientific research for 10-15 undergraduate chemistry and
physics majors.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

Molecular crystals are important for many applications, from pharmaceuticals to
plastic electronics. For example, in plastic semiconductors - carbon-based
molecules that are being actively researched as potential lower-cost
replacements for silicon electronics - electrical conductivity depends on how
the molecules pack together in crystals, the shapes and sizes of the crystals,
and other structural details. Consequently, better control over crystal
structure could someday lead to improved electronic devices. Additionally, one
would like to be able to grow and control crystallization using low-cost
processing techniques, which means transitioning from high vacuum, high
temperature methods used today to less severe ambient conditions of pressure and
temperature. This research, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program at NSF, is aimed at developing such methods, and at using them to
perform fundamental scientific studies of crystal growth and structure, while
investigating their possible application in electronic devices like plastic
transistors. The research will also provide hands-on training in advanced
materials and scientific research to 10- 15 undergraduates, helping inspire and
prepare a future generation of scientists.