* 1207573
* US-German Collaboration: Computational and Neural Mechanisms of Inference over Decision-Structure
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/2012,11/30/2016
* Peter Bossaerts, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 11/30/2016
* USD 598,922.00

US-German Collaboration: Computational and Neural Mechanisms of Inference over
Decision-Structure&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: John O?Doherty, Co PI: Peter
Bossaerts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the
Principal Investigators will determine how the brain is able to identify the
relevant rules that apply to a given decision-making problem in order to
effectively make decisions. In most cases, features of the decision structure
are hidden variables, i.e. they can be inferred only through discrete
observations of outcome variables (such as reward feedback). Understanding how
inferences over decision-structure are performed in a noisy and partially
observable environment is therefore a fundamental yet almost unaddressed issue
in the computational neurobiology of human decision-making. Here, we conceive of
inferences over decision problems as a form of hierarchical inference in which
the higher level of the hierarchy represents probabilistic beliefs over which
decision structure is currently in place, while the lower level of the hierarchy
encodes beliefs over which actions are currently rewarded within a specific
decision structure. We will compare and contrast a variety of computational
models deploying different strategies to solve this problem. We will combine
these models with behavioral and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
data from human participants in order to address whether dynamic signals are
present in the brain pertaining to the implementation of such hierarchical
models, and whether different brain regions are involved in performing inference
at different levels of the hierarchy. This project could potentially lead to a
new understanding of the contribution of the prefrontal cortex and other brain
regions in decision-making. This project will also provide insight into the
neural implementation of a fundamental missing part of the picture concerning
the neurobiology of human decision-making: decision-structure
inference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, this research could
provide fundamental new insights into understanding situations where human
learning or decision-making fails or breaks down. Sometimes poor learning or
decision-making may be due to a failure to infer the correct rules governing a
decision-problem rather than a difficulty in learning or deciding per se. Such
insights will not only impact on academic fields studying decision making but
could also be used to develop novel methods to help individuals and
organizations make better decisions (by focusing on improving inference over
structure). The findings could provide relevant data for the development of
artificial agents capable of autonomous, flexible and adaptive decisions. The
proposal also has high potential clinical relevance: disorders with delusional
beliefs such as schizophrenia and borderline personality disorder might involve
in part a difficulty in performing inference over decision structure so as to
rule out inappropriate (decision) structures in lieu of more appropriate ones.
The present research might yield novel tools to study this question in clinical
populations. Furthermore, there are substantial impacts on teaching and
training. The PI and co-PI teach courses at undergraduate and graduate level and
involve undergraduate researchers directly in their research programs. The work
proposed here could lead to the development of new software to enable the
analysis of brain imaging data using computational models. A companion project
is being funded by the German Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF).