* 1207241
* Multiscale theory of memristive materials systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Sokrates Pantelides, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 316,956.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and
theoretical research and education on memristive materials. Memristive materials
exhibit intrinsic nonlinear conduction behavior due to the coupling between
electronic and ionic conduction, the latter being mediated by defects, such as
vacancies and interstitials. A subclass of materials, usually referred to as
resistive-switching materials, can be switched between a high-resistance state
and a low-resistance state and may be ideal for constructing resistive random
access memory. More generally, memristive materials feature a hysteresis loop in
their I-V characteristics. Besides memory applications, they can lead to new
analog applications and even bio-inspired neuromorphic circuits, both of which
utilize a gradual 'switch' in the I-V characteristics. However, the lack of an
accurate description of defect dynamics and its interplay with electronic
conduction has become a major obstacle for realizing the potential of the
materials. The PI will focus on revealing the underlying physics and chemistry
in memristive phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will establish a multiscale
theoretical framework based on first-principles quantum-mechanical calculations
using realistic atomic models and apply it to investigate the memristive
switching in various materials systems. The atomic-scale investigation will
include first-principles calculations of defects, their interactions, and
pertinent electron energy levels. The effects of the defects on the conductivity
will be probed using first-principles transport codes. Defect energetics will be
incorporated in a kinetic Monte-Carlo model to obtain realistic I-V behavior of
the materials. Since the focus is on the microscopic mechanisms of the
memristive switching, the proposed research will identify the fundamental
properties of the materials that affect their switching performance. The
proposed research will also construct physics-based state equations that will be
the foundation of device and circuit design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactions
with experimental and engineering groups at universities and industry will be
pursued. Extensive education outreach will be made to high schools and the
broader society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and theoretical
research and education on memristive materials. Memristive materials conduct
electricity in an interesting way that can lead to devices for memory
applications, be a basis for new types of analog circuits, and even introduce
neuromorphic computers that mimic the biological brain functions. In many
materials, electric current flowing through the material is linearly related to
the voltage across the material. In memristive materials, the relation between
current and voltage is nonlinear. While conduction of electrons through metals
originates from the flow of electrons alone, the non-linearity in memristive
materials originates from the coupled conduction by electrons and conduction by
ions in the materials, the latter being mediated by defects in the regular
arrangement of atoms in the materials, such as missing atoms or vacancies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI aims to develop a fundamental understanding of the
way electric current flows through these materials by coupled electron and ion
motion and the mechanisms that underlie the memristive behavior. The PI aims to
conduct theoretical and computational investigations in order to illuminate the
conduction process at the microscopic level, identify the origin of the
memristive behavior, and establish correlations between atomic-scale properties
of materials and their implications for conductive phenomena.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad interactions with experimentalists and engineers
will be a part of the program. Extensive education outreach will make advances
accessible to high schools and the community.