* 1207445
* Multipoint Observations of Compressional Pulsations: Testing Possible Generation Mechanisms
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2019
* Michael Coplan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

The ultra-low frequency (3 to 15 minute periods) electromagnetic waves called Pc
5 pulsations have been studied for over 50 years. They are an important
magnetospheric phenomenon because they convert energy from one form to another
and transmit energy from one location to another. Although there have been a
number of physical explanations proposed for these waves their origin remains
unknown. This proposal seeks to determine the origin of one class of these waves
? compressional Pc 5 pulsations. The Principal Investigator of this proposal
will be assisted by a graduate student in carrying out this research protocol.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; These are waves in the Pc 5 frequency range
for which there are oscillations along the direction of the background magnetic
field. Three mechanisms have been proposed for these waves: drift mirror
instabilities due to pressure anisotropies, drift bounce instabilities and
injection of blobs of plasma sheet plasma into the inner magnetosphere. The
combination of THEMIS observations near the equator and Cluster observations in
polar orbit now makes it possible to determine which of these mechanisms are
operating. &lt;br/&gt; The following questions have been identified for study:
&lt;br/&gt;1. What mechanism generates compressional pulsations in the dawn and
dusk magnetosphere? &lt;br/&gt;2. What are the characteristics of the
compressional pulsations, including their spatial extent and latitudinal
structure? &lt;br/&gt;3. What mechanism generates the subcategory of
compressional waves exhibiting frequency doubling (the frequency of the
compression component of the waves is twice that of the transverse components)
and how do suprathermal particles respond to the pulsations?