* 1207169
* RUI: Probing the Interplay between Magnetic Properties, Band Structure and Carrier Dynamics of III-V-based Magnetic Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2015
* Frank Peiris, Kenyon College
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 05/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

Technical: This project is to study the interplay of electronic, optical and
magnetic properties of III-V magnetic semiconductors via temperature-dependent
spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE). While most other experiments probe a particular
property of III-V magnetic systems, since SE is capable of detecting the
electronic band structure of a material, the study is planning to uncover the
interplay of various properties comprehensively. Although room-temperature based
SE is widely used presently, that method is incapable of observing the interplay
of III-V magnetic systems adequately, motivating this work to extend SE to cover
a temperature range between 4K and 300K. This technique will specifically
address the following issues related to III-V magnetic systems; how does
exchange and hybridization interactions fine tune the magnetic coupling; what is
the impact of the impurity bands in affecting magnetism and conductivity; and
what is the significance of carrier-phonon dynamics in influencing the
ferromagnetism? Additionally, the details of both the metal-to-insulator
transition and the ferromagnetic to paramagnetic transition will be investigated
thoroughly. Insights gained on these aspects will not only deepen our
understanding of the fundamental physics of III-V magnetic semiconductors but
also benefit applied scientists implementing spin-based
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: This project will significantly advance
scientific research, and research training among physics majors, which will
subsequently influence students to pursue advanced degrees. This is by
incorporating experiments related to optics into several physics courses, all
physics majors will be introduced to these fields, resulting in the increase in
talent and number of students entering the scientific and technical workforce.
Also the work will have a strong impact on minority groups, particularly women,
in light of the fairly high percentage of women majoring in physics at Kenyon.
Engaging high school students on video-based mechanics experiments will expose
them to the intimate connection between the realities outside and the theories
learnt inside the classroom. The project will integrate various aspects of the
proposed research into teaching by: (i) designing a seminar course related to
magnetic semiconductors and spintronics; (ii) injecting four experiments into
Optics and Advanced Lab courses related to classical optics and magneto-optics;
(iii) developing an outreach program for high school students involving video-
based mechanics experiments.