* 1207469
* Investigating Two-Dimensional Systems and Surface States Under the Influence of an Internal Exchange Field and Spin-Filtering
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Jagadeesh Moodera, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2017
* USD 567,000.00

****Technical ABstract****&lt;br/&gt;This experimental project aims at
investigating two-dimensional systems and surface states such as in topological
insulators (TI) and graphene under the influence of an internal exchange field
and spin filtering. This investigation is about ferromagnetic order in these
Dirac electron systems utilizing the proximity-induced ferromagnetism by
magnetic insulator thin film and multilayer stacks, with tailored interfaces. It
is theoretically predicted that the spin sub-bands are split and would
dramatically alter the spin transport that can be controlled by an electric
field. The charge and spin transport behavior in such systems will be studied.
This project will also seek Majorana fermions, theoretically predicted to exist
in exchange split surface state of p + ip superconducting layer with a strong
spin-orbit coupling: nanoscale structures of these, needed, will be
investigated. In addition to the rich physics, it is believed that these studies
could serve as building blocks towards important future quantum information
technologies. Students at all levels (including HS students) and postdocs will
participate in this cutting-edge fundamental physics research. They will learn
state-of-the-art interfacial characterization techniques at the nanoscale
including at the national labs, as well as
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates two dimensional novel quantum
systems to bring about not only scientific advancement, but also for their
potential in future quantum information technologies. The two newly discovered
materials systems (graphene and topological insulators) obeying relativistic
quantum mechanics have extraordinary properties, and even more so when magnetism
is introduced in them. This project will investigate the electrical and magnetic
behavior in the latter case, theoretically predicted to show profound change of
properties opening up new quantum areas of physics to explore. When this is
verified experimentally, as planned in this project, it is expected to serve as
building blocks towards important future energy efficient and economically
viable quantum devices such as nonvolatile spin based memory and logic devices.
Materials characterization tools, including those at the national facilities
will be advancing their capabilities. There will be scientific collaboration
both within USA and abroad. Students (including high school students) and
postdocs participate in this experimental project. They will be trained in the
state-of-the-art science at nanoscale including at the national labs, building
the future scientific base for advanced science and technology in USA.