* 1207511
* Ahtna Language Infrastructure and Training (A-LIT)
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2015
* Julia McConkey, Ahtna Heritage Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 01/31/2015
* USD 99,067.00

This project has two goals. One is to teach Ahtna people about the language
materials previously collected by anthropologists and linguists available to
them, and the second is to create new Ahtna speakers through the use of these
materials. One of the goals of the Documenting Endangered Languages Program is
to provide wider access to documentary materials. The Program solicitation also
encourages language investigators to find innovative ways of training native
speakers in descriptive linguistics. The project proposed by PIs Cain and
Charley-John would accomplish these objectives. While 'wider access' generally
refers to digitization or other means of treating linguistic materials so that
they can be shared through current technological media, this project aims to
widen the access of Tribal members themselves through training in linguistic
analysis. Given the extreme endangerment of a language that has, apparently,
fewer than 100 speakers, all of whom are elderly, providing access to the ethnic
population that has the greatest stake in its preservation is the major
contribution of this proposal. Using Breath of Life methodologies proven to be
successful in other communities to enhance that access is an excellent way to
begin the training of the speakers in linguistic analysis. The hands-on
homework/project plan proposed by the PIs enhances the possibilities for success
in this project.

A language with as few speakers as claimed in this proposal for Ahtna could be
urgently in need of documentation. Unfortunately, while the proposers indicate
that there does exist documentation within 'the Ahtna archive', specifics are
not made available within the proposal. That 'dictionaries, language curriculum
materials, audio and video recordings, transcripts, photo archives and
documents' exist and are available to the Tribe for their study is not
substantially documented within the proposal. It is, therefore, difficult to
assess their quality or their accessibility for the proposed project and to
declare its intellectual merit on that basis. However, the participation of
elders who are speakers of the language assures that language data will be
available to the tribal member student groups for further documentation in
addition to transcription of existing materials, no matter the quality of those
materials.