* 1207844
* RUI: Problems in Geometric Analysis and General Relativity
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Justin Corvino, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2016
* USD 149,052.00

The P.I. will study questions in geometric analysis arising both from physics
(via the Einstein equation) as well as from geometry (geometric variational
problems and scalar curvature). Initial data sets for the Einstein field
equation satisfy a nonlinear elliptic system of equations, the Einstein
constraint equations. The study of this system has proven to be interesting and
fruitful for geometric analysis, and has shed light on the structure of the
space of solutions to the Einstein field equation, which is of interest for
physics. In previous joint work with R. Schoen, the P.I. developed deformation
and gluing techniques for the constraint operator which have been employed (by
the P.I. and others) to construct interesting initial data sets, and have led to
a better understanding of the structure of asymptotically flat solutions of the
constraint equations. Part of the project involves extending results on
asymptotics and gluing, including construction of initial data modeling N-body
configurations, to include certain matter models, and analyzing the extent to
which some of the results that have been developed in the asymptotically flat
setting can extend to the asymptotically hyperbolic case. The P.I. will also
address several questions on the structure of small-data solutions of the
constraints, and as well as on applications of localized scalar curvature
deformation. In a second part of the project, the P.I. will continue the study
of a variational problem in Kahler and symplectic geometry, the Hamiltonian
stationary Lagrangian problem, building on recent joint work with A. Butscher.
Another interesting variational problem, the isoperimetric problem (minimizing
the area required to enclose a given volume), leads to questions on manifolds-
with-density and on spaces relevant to general relativity amenable to research
with undergraduates.

Solutions to the Einstein field equations are used to model gravitational
radiation, strong field phenomena like black holes, isolated gravitational
systems, and the large-scale structure of the universe. A more detailed
understanding of the space of solutions to the Einstein constraint equations
would yield a better understanding of these models. For instance, understanding
the asymptotic structure of solutions to the constraints can yield information
about models of gravitational radiation. Analysis of the constraint system leads
to the construction of initial data with interesting properties, such as
solutions in which two or more isolated systems are fused together into a
connected solution of the constraints. It would be very interesting for the
study of gravitational radiation to numerically implement constructions of small
initial data with special asymptotics, and then numerically solve the Einstein
field equations; similar comments apply to N-body configurations. An important
aspect of the project is to introduce undergraduates to the connections between
geometry, analysis and physics. Students will undertake research with the PI
during the summer (occurring simultaneously with the Lafayette REU Site program,
further enriching the summer research environment in the department), and during
the academic year students will be involved in course work, independent study,
and research with the PI.