* 1207188
* Saloplastic Polyelectrolyte Complexes: Properties and Processing
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,11/30/2015
* Joseph Schlenoff, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 11/30/2015
* USD 420,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polyelectrolyte complexes, molecular
blends of positive and negative macromolecules, are generally believed be
intractable. This project will explore a new processing technique for producing
large-scale, dense polyelectrolyte complexes by employing salt water as a
plasticizing agent. The materials are rugged and highly crosslinked with
numerous projected applications in the physical and biomedical fields. Several
fundamental and practical questions are to be addressed. First to be explored is
the idea that salt concentration and temperature are equivalent parameters for
influencing the mechanical properties of polyelectrolyte complexes. Such a
hypothesis is an extension of the well-known time/temperature superposition
principle for viscoelastic materials. Second, methods for toughening dry
polyelectrolyte complexes using oligomeric (polyethylene glycol) or polymeric
(sulfonated triblock rubbery copolymers) materials will be studied. Finally, the
high level of salt supersaturation in the complexes represents an unusually
complete degree of mixing of an inorganic material with an organic polymer. The
stability of the mixed phases will be evaluated over the long term. The project,
employing easily-accessed components, includes international collaborations with
researchers at the University of Strasbourg and French government research
laboratories. Educational initiatives at Florida State University bringing
together Entrepreneurship and Chemistry students will be supported, as will
outreach to nearby Albany State College. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project exploits a new concept in processing
polymers: salt water will be used instead of heat to soften and form plastics.
The materials are blends of nontoxic water-soluble polymers, many of them found
in personal-care products. These "saloplastics" represent a new class of
environmentally friendly recyclable materials that can be used in numerous
physical and biomedical applications. International collaborations with the
University of Strasbourg, France, will help to unravel the mechanical response
of saloplastics to salt water. Methods to toughen saloplastics with
unconventional plasticizers will be explored in an effort to make them broadly
useful. Saloplastics will be used as a platform to expand a unique educational
initiative, started by the PI, pairing Entrepreneurship and Chemistry students
at Florida State University, with participation support provided to minority
undergraduates from nearby Albany State University.