* 1207466
* IEEE EMBC 2012: Engineering Innovation in Global Health, August 28 - September 1, 2012, San Diego, CA
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Michael Khoo, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 06/30/2014
* USD 25,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;1207466, Khoo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBS) is to advance the application
of engineering sciences and technology to medicine and biology, promote the
profession, and provide global leadership for the benefit of its members and
humanity by disseminating knowledge, setting standards, fostering professional
development, and recognizing excellence. To support this mission, the EMBS has
been organizing annual conferences for over 30 years. Each year, this flagship
annual conference - the largest meeting of biomedical engineers in the world -
is attended by between 2,000 and 3,000 people from all over the world.
Generally, about a third of these attendees are students. Student activities
include a widely-publicized and high-quality Student Paper Competition (SPC),
panel discussions and lunch meetings with pioneers and leaders in biomedical
engineering, special symposia, and mentoring sessions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
2012, the EMBC will be held at the Hilton Bayfront Hotel in San Diego from
August 28 through September 1. Based on the level of participation in EMBC 2011
which was held in Boston, it is expected that close to 3,000 scientists,
engineers, clinicians and students will attend EMBC-12, with attendees coming
from all over the world - particularly from countries in the Pacific Rim and
Latin America, given the attractive conference location in San Diego. About 200
papers are expected to be submitted to the SPC. From these, 15 finalists will be
selected through the use of an on-line review and judging system. These papers
will be part of a special session of oral presentations during the conference.
Funding is requested to help U.S.-based SPC finalists defray the costs of travel
and registration to present their research papers at EMBC-12. As well, part of
the funding will be used to encourage person-to-person interaction between
student participants and established leaders in the biomedical engineering
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The EMBC SPC has
proven to be a useful mechanism for incentivizing students to present their best
work in the setting of an international conference. It provides a channel
through which these young investigators are introduced to the leading figures in
biomedical engineering, since the finalists make their oral presentations in
front of the conference audience, as part of the scientific program. The
competition is conducted in a friendly and supportive environment that allows
top-notch students to network with fellow finalists and other students from a
wide array of bioengineering disciplines. In addition, the SPC and the
conference in general play a crucial role in recognizing the talents of women
and minorities in the field of
bioengineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;The SPC
not only encourages high-quality research in biomedical engineering, but also
fosters the career development of the next generation of top-notch bioengineers
by providing a unique opportunity for students to meet with the world?s leading
biomedical professionals and scientists. The finalists who present their
research at the conference also network with and become role models for other
student participants thus, the SPC does provide a "ripple effect" of
intellectual stimulation and inspiration for the rest of the student community.
The conference will also provide the finalists with opportunities to participate
in special sessions devoted to career planning and social events in which they
can become acquainted with established leaders in biomedical engineering.
Indeed, several past SPC awardees have already become present leaders in the
EMBS community.