* 1207411
* Collaborative Research: Design of Peptide Crystal Growth Modifiers Using Experiments and Simulations
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Shekhar Garde, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2016
* USD 390,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute is to design peptides using rational and
combinatorial approaches with the aim of controlling the shape and growth of
crystals. Engineering crystal shape and size using peptides is a challenging
problem that requires fundamental understanding of water-mediated peptide-
crystal interactions. To this end, this research will use a powerful combination
of experiments, molecular modeling, and simulation methods. Calcium oxalate
monohydrate crystals will be the material of interest and focus on the discovery
and design of peptides that inhibit its growth. Combinatorial approaches based
on phage screening will be employed to explore and harness the vast chemical and
structural space of peptides. In parallel, the project will use molecular
simulations of selected peptides to advance the rational design of them. Using
these peptides, this project will study structural features of growing crystals
using scanning probe microscopy, which will provide insights into peptide-
crystal interactions and enable the design of more effective peptide growth
modifiers. These advances will not only lead to the design of drugs for the
removal of kidney stones, but potentially transform the philosophy and approach
to crystal engineering in the fields of advanced materials for energy,
separation, and catalysis. The researchers of this project are dedicated to the
education and outreach to the broader public, to attracting women and
underrepresented minorities to STEM careers, and using innovative approaches
such as Molecularium movies in reaching mass audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broad goal of this proposal is to design peptides that inhibit the growth of
calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals, which are implicated in kidney stone
formation. The proposed work could enable the design and discovery of novel and
effective therapeutics for kidney stones. Incidence of kidney stones is high in
the U.S., and growing in the developing world. This project will use high-
throughput design of peptides, computer modeling, and specialized microscopy
techniques to study the growth of crystals in the presence of peptides. The
proposed approaches are expected to discover not only potential peptide
therapeutics for the removal of kidney stones, but may uncover the fundamental
mechanisms of the kidney stone formation, which will mark a significant advance
in our understanding of stone therapy. The scientific principles that emerge
from this work may also lead to therapeutics for other diseases (e.g., vascular
plaques, gallstones, gout, osteoarthritis, etc). Understanding of crystal shape
engineering may also lead to new paradigms for advanced materials design with
applications in catalysis and energy. Other goals of this project are equal
commitment to the education of a skilled technical and scientific workforce,
high-school children, and broad public. This project is dedicated in attracting
women and underrepresented minorities to STEM careers, and developing innovative
outreach approaches such as the Molecularium 3D-IMAX movies in attracting
younger generation to science and technology.