* 1207108
* Electronic Properties of Two Dimensional Electron Systems: Exploring the Role of Dimensionality Boundaries and Interfaces.
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Eva Andrei, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 07/31/2017
* USD 553,400.00

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Two dimensional electron systems, by virtue
of their reduced spatial dimension and incomplete screening, present exotic
electronic properties and novel correlated phases which are unavailable in three
dimensional counterparts. To date, in spite of important advances and
discoveries made by studying the conventional two dimensional electron systems
trapped at semiconductor interfaces, many questions remain open. The work
proposed here will employ graphene, one of the latest additions to the family of
two dimensional electron systems, to address questions regarding novel
electronic properties and correlated electron phases that arise due to the
reduced dimensionality, screening, boundaries and chiral nature of the charge
carriers at low temperatures and in high magnetic fields. Answering these
questions may hold the key to novel application including ultra-fast electronics
and building blocks for quantum computers. The experimental probes will include
low temperature high-magnetic field scanning tunneling microscopy, scanning
tunneling spectroscopy, Landau level spectroscopy and magneto-transport. The
proposed research will provide an excellent training ground for young
researchers in state of the art nano-fabrication and spectroscopy techniques. In
addition, the direct and visually oriented nature of the information from this
research project will make it easy to communicate the excitement of physics and
nano-science to students and to the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;Everything around
us, from the smallest creature to the largest object is three dimensional. Our
views and understanding of the world as well as the laws of physics governing it
are grounded in this trio of spatial dimensions: length, width and height. What
would happen if one of these dimensions were taken away leaving us in a
proverbial "flatland". It turns out that strange and counterintuitive phenomena
can occur because in such a two-dimensional world quantum mechanics, the theory
which describes the behavior of the microscopic world of atoms and electrons,
becomes manifest at macroscopic length scales. This project will pursue
experiments to probe these new types of quantum phenomena in a recently
discovered two-dimensional system, graphene. Graphene a membrane made of
crystalline Carbon which is only one atom thick is the closest realization of a
truly two dimensional system known to date. The project will employ the most
advanced tools of experimental science: nanofabrication, low temperatures, high
magnetic fields, atomic resolution scanning tunneling microscopy and
spectroscopy, to probe and manipulate the properties of graphene. Possible
outcomes include the creation of novel electronic phases with properties that
can be tuned by applying a magnetic field or a gate voltage, and devices that
could one day serve as building blocks for quantum computers. This project will
support the education of young researchers in state of the art science and
technological applications providing an excellent training ground for a broad
spectrum of scientific careers ranging from academia to the most advanced
technology industries.