* 1207606
* LIQUID CRYSTALS OF NANONUCLEIC ACIDS: HIERARCHICAL SELF-ASSEMBLY AS A ROUTE TO PREBIOTIC SELECTION, TEMPLATING, AND AUTOCATALYSIS
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Noel Clark, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 08/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
University of Colorado at Boulder is cofunded by the Networks and Regulations
Cluster (BIO/MCB). This research is motivated by our recent discovery of a
variety of liquid crystal phases of nanoscale nucleic acids (nDNA and nRNA),
i.e. of liquid crystals of duplex nucleic acids as short as 6 base pairs, an
exciting, unexplored class of liquid crystal forming molecules. Key to this
project is the finding that in a mixture of complementary and noncomplementary
nDNA, the complementary DNA is found only in the LC domains. Thus in the nDNA
liquid crystal phases, the coupled steps of duplexing, end-to-end stacking of
duplexes, and liquid crystal phase ordering and separation create a structural
gatekeeper that enables only duplexable DNA to enter. Molecules that do enter
are then organized into a structure that if stabilized by covalent links should
enhance their complementarity and the liquid crystal phase stability. Thus,
whether is it possible for a liquid crystal phase to autocatalytically select,
template, and replicate its constituent molecules, will be a principal topic of
the proposed research, with the long-term goal of starting with multicomponent
mixtures of polycyclic aromatics and developing processes that lead to LC
formation by a self-selected subset of molecules. If this can be shown then it
is a strong argument that the linear structure of DNA is itself a result of
liquid crystal templating in early life. This project will enable the training
of a group of graduate and undergraduate students in an exciting new area of
nucleic acid biophysics. As part of the outreach activities, the researcher will
collaborate with industry in the area of liquid crystal science applications in
bioscience, renewable energy and related areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
widely believed by researchers studying the origin of life on Earth that life's
first vestiges were systems of short self-replicating DNA-like molecules, that
got up to about 30 bases long, emerging out of the so-called "primordial soup"
of small prebiotic organic molecules in solution. Such an emergence is an
"explosion" of complementarity, in which small molecules that are complementary,
i.e., that can selectively stick together in pairs, seek each other out, collect
together, and then react chemically into larger complementary units. In this
project, the researcher has proposed the idea that condensation into liquid
crystal droplets is a basic mechanism for selecting complementary molecules in
such a process. With the addition of chemistry that couples up the short DNA
into longer chains, condensation would strongly favor the lengthening of the
already complementary DNA in the liquid crystal droplets. That is,
complementarity would breed complementarity, in a process that selects for rod-
shaped molecular assemblies, in order to promote liquid crystal order and phase
separation. If this conjecture is correct, then we will have shown that the very
linear polymer shape of DNA would have been templated by liquid crystal ordering
in early life. The selection and reaction mechanisms explored are expected to
open avenues to new kinds of hierarchically organized self assembled materials.
The proposed educational activities included graduate curriculum development in
soft condensed matter physics, and summer research activities such as Research
Experience for Teachers, and Research Experience for Undergraduate students.
Western Alliance to Expand Student Opportunities, Science Mathematics And
Research for Transformation, and McNair programs providing undergraduate
research opportunities for minorities and underrepresented groups are planned
activities with this award.