* 1207644
* The Geometry and Topology of Groups Generated by Involutions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Genevieve Walsh, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2016
* USD 129,175.00

Under this grant, the PI will work on problems regarding the geometry and
topology of groups generated by involutions. The first problem involves a new
geometric criterion for when a Coxeter group is a Kleinian group. Specifically,
if the defining graph of a right-angled Coxeter group can be realized as the
1-skeleton of an acute triangulation of the 2-sphere, is the Coxeter group
hyperbolic? This relates the techniques of geometric group theory and classical
3-dimensional hyperbolic geometry to combinatorial problems concerning
triangulations. As part of this study, the PI will investigate the moduli space
of an acute triangulation of the 2-sphere. In particular, is this space
connected? A second question asks when a group generated by reflections in
hyperbolic 3-space contains a knot group. This is deeply related to
understanding commensurability of knot complements. More broadly, the PI seeks
to address the conjecture that there are at most three hyperbolic knot
complements in any given commensurability class. Boileau, Boyer, Cebanu, and the
PI have made significant progress on the conjecture in recent work, and this
project aims to address the remaining case. In a third project, the PI seeks a
CAT(0) space for the group of outer automorphisms of the free product of four
copies of the integers mod 2. This group of outer automorphisms is particularly
pleasing and related to the proposal as it is generated by involutions.

Groups generated by involutions have long been guiding examples in furthering
the understanding of the geometry of groups. They are inherently geometric and
relevant to the modern theory of orbifolds. These groups have been studied in
various ways by Coxeter, Thurston, Davis, and Moussong, as well as by many other
celebrated mathematicians, and they continue to inform current research.
Imposing some condition, such as the presence of a reflection, allows one to
gain traction on a difficult problem and eventually see the whole picture. The
projects proposed here have potential impact in other fields. For example, the
study of triangulations, particularly acute triangulations, is important in
computer-aided design and scientific computing.