* 1207544
* RUI: Investigations of Pattern Formation and Morphology in Two Dimensional Self-Assembled Model Biomembranes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Benjamin Stottrup, Augsburg University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2017
* USD 157,925.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1207544 PI: Stottrup, Benjamin ORG: Augsburg College

Title: RUI: Investigations of Pattern Formation and Morphology in Two
Dimensional Self-Assembled Model Biomembranes

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The complex and multi-component plasma cell membrane
provides inspiration for advances in nanotechnology and the development of new
materials. In the past decade, consensus has grown around the importance of
cholesterol for supramolecular lateral organization within this system. Today,
cholesterol is recognized as crucial in the lateral organization of these
membranes in both in vitro (lipid monolayers and bilayers) and in vivo (plasma
cell membrane) systems. In Langmuir monolayers containing cholesterol and
phospholipids the observed phase separation has been shown to be the result of a
competition between long-range electrostatic forces and line tension in two
dimensions. However, important questions remain regarding the true equilibrium
nature of these systems, the size distribution of their domains, and the role of
cholesterol's molecular structure in the observed phase separation. This project
will test the hypothesis that the morphology of phase separated lipid monolayers
containing cholesterol can be controlled by transition kinetics, monolayer
composition, and sterol structure to enable the patterning of solid substrates.
Motivation to control lipid membrane patterning comes from the applications of
self-assembled lipid systems to the fabrication of biosensors and other
biomaterials. Lipid monolayers are regularly used in the fabrication of
supported lipid bilayers on solid substrates. Additionally, this project will
explore the use of phase separated lipid monolayers to organize nanoparticles at
the air-water interface. Through collaborations and partnerships this project
will extend recently developed techniques in model convolution microscopy, new
line tension measurement methods, and incorporate a novel micro-fluidic flow
cell into a traditional fluorescence microscopy set-up.

BROADER IMPACTS: The scientific objectives of this project will be achieved
within the context of research at a primarily undergraduate institution.
Providing high quality research experiences to train and encourage
undergraduates from diverse backgrounds to pursue careers in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics has been a central component of the
principal investigator's role as an educator and mentor over the past seven
years. Consistent with the demographics of Augsburg College, the principal
investigator will continue to encourage and recruit participation from NSF-
defined underrepresented populations. In addition to close faculty interactions
through research, this project will provide students with opportunities to
develop their understanding of vocational and career objectives through regular
contact with collaborators and practicing scientists. The principal investigator
will leverage Augsburg's Office of Undergraduate Research and Graduate
Opportunities (URGO) to supplement these experiences through professional
training as well as assistance in the application process for fellowships and
graduate school. Weekly group meetings provide students with opportunities to
build communication skills and confidence. Students will participate in the
dissemination of results through presentations at regional and national
conferences as well as co-authorship of on peer-reviewed publications. This
project will also enrich the undergraduate curriculum at Augsburg College.
Fluorescence microscopy and image analysis techniques used in this research will
be incorporated into undergraduate laboratory experiences for physics majors in
sophomore and senior level courses.