* 1207780
* Active Scalar Equations and a Geodynamo Model
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Susan Friedlander, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2016
* USD 190,000.00

Active scalar equations describe a number of physical phenomena that arise in
fluid dynamics. Because of their physical importance and challenging
mathematical nature there is a very extensive literature on such equations.
However, many problems connected with the nonlinearity of the equation remain
open, particularly when the drift velocity U is nonlocal. This project addresses
some of these questions with particular emphasis on examples where the operator
M that encodes the physics of the problem relating U to the active scalar is
singular and unbounded. It is proposed to study the interplay of diffusive
effects and the nonlinearity in singular active scalar equations for a range of
fractional powers of the Laplacian. For certain powers it will be shown that the
system is nonlinearly unstable: for lower powers the system is Lipschitz ill-
posed. These results will be obtained via the construction of unstable
eigenvalues for the evolution equation linearised about an appropriate
equilibrium. Techniques of continued fractions will be employed to produce an
explicit lower bound on the growth rate of the unstable eigenvalues as a
function of the physical parameters. The project will also study the highly
singular limit of vanishing diffusivity. This limit is often physically
appropriate and may be closely connected with turbulent phenomena modeled by
weak solutions of the active scalar equations. The project addresses general
classes of active scalar equations: particular physical examples include the
incompressible porous media equation and the magnetogeostrophic equation. In
both examples the Fourier multiplier symbol for the relevant operator M is even
with respect to the wave number vector. This prevents certain cancellations in
energy estimates arising in the nonlinearity. Hence the problem is more subtle
than some frequently studied equations, such as the surface quasigeostrophic
equation, where the analogous Fourier multiplier symbol is odd and commutator
estimates can be employed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical study of the
partial differential equations that model fluid motion forms an essential
foundation for many applications. These equations are highly complex and
challenging. A subset of these equations are so-called "active scalar equations"
where the evolution in time of a scalar quantity such as the density of the
fluid is governed by the motion of the fluid where the velocity itself varies
with this scalar field. This feedback produces an intricate nonlinearity.
Friedlander uses techniques of "hard" analysis to study general classes of such
equations. A particular example is a model for the geodynamo. This is the
process by which the Earth's magnetic field is created and sustained through the
motion of the fluid core which is composed of a rapidly rotating, density
stratified, electrically conducting fluid. Friedlander will prove that the model
can indeed produce dynamo action by demonstrating the existence of a strong
instability whose growth rate can be bounded from below by an explicit
expression that depends on the physical parameters of the Earth's fluid core.