* 1207389
* Collaborative Research: On-The-Fly free Energy Parameterization in Molecular Aimulations
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Cameron Abrams, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 283,710.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports computational and theoretical research and education with an
aim to develop a new method for extracting free energies from molecular dynamics
simulations. The method is based on temperature-acceleration, wherein free
energy gradients in some desired set of collective variables are sampled in a
running molecular dynamics simulation while simultaneously driving those
collective variables over free energy barriers that would otherwise render
traditional molecular dynamics ineffective. These gradients are used as inputs
into an optimization procedure that minimizes the error associated with
gradients of an analytical free energy.

The major thrusts of the research are: (1) benchmark the performance of the
method against alternative approaches for computing coarse grained potentials,
such as iterative Boltzmann inversion and force-matching, (2) developing the
method as a tool for deriving potentials of mean force for multiscale polymer
molecular simulations, and (3) developing the method as a means of statistical
evaluation of large-scale protein conformational sampling.

The method is formulated in a general way and is therefore expected to be
applicable broadly to almost any desired collective variables. This project will
be devoted to developing this method particularly for applications involving
deriving effective coarse-grained potentials for multiscale simulations and to
the study of conformational statistics of large biomolecules. All simulation
codes developed in this project will be made freely available to the community.

This award also supports training and mentoring of underrepresented students in
state of the art computational and numerical methods.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports computational and theoretical research and education with an
aim to develop a new method of extracting information from computer simulations.
Whether in designing new drugs or new materials, or simply trying to understand
how nature works, computer simulations are important in understanding how matter
behaves at the molecular level. Bringing molecular-level understanding into the
realm of everyday perception requires statistical approaches that are not always
straightforward and often computationally quite expensive. This award supports
developing a new statistical method for extracting information from molecular-
level simulations. The method is potentially much more efficient than existing
approaches. The research will develop and apply this method to test systems
relevant for biological and materials applications. The project could
significantly reduce the cost associated with obtaining high-quality information
from simulations at the molecular level that at the intersections of chemistry,
physics, and biology. All simulation codes developed in this project will be
made freely available to the community.

This award also supports training and mentoring of underrepresented students in
state of the art computational and numerical methods.