* 1207892
* A High Throughput CMB Polarization Receiver with Dual-Frequency-Band Bolometric Pixels
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Brian Keating, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Kurczynski
* 05/31/2017
* USD 1,550,690.00

The most successful model of the universe involves a period of immense expansion
during the first small fraction of a second following the Big Bang. This "phase-
change" in the early universe explains a number of key observations, including
the extreme flatness of the universe, the very similar properties of causally
unrelated regions of the observable universe, and the lack of magnetic
monopoles. An important prediction of inflation is the "handedness" of
polarization imprinted by gravitational waves that are thought to have existed
at the time of the last photon scattering. Searching for this "B-mode"
polarization signal is a fundamental test of inflation, diagnostic of the energy
scale over which the phase change operated, and one of the key science themes
identified for the next decade by the ASTRO2010 survey New Worlds, New Horizons
in Astronomy and Astrophysics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Adrian Lee of the
University of California Berkeley and collaborators elsewhere within the U.S. as
well as in Canada, United Kingdom, and Japan plan an experiment to detect and
explore for the first time the B-mode polarization using a dedicated radio
antenna high on the Atacama Plateau in Chile and a state-of-the-art 7,588 pixel
bolometer array to map the sky at the dual frequencies of 150 and 220 GHz with
higher sensitivity and an order of magnitude faster than current experiments.
The project, POLARBEAR-2, is very well motivated scientifically and equally well
justified on a technical and management footing by the pilot project
POLARBEAR-1, now complete and obtaining initial data at the Chilean site.
Technical developments made through the project will be important at other
wavelength regions of astronomical detection, including the sub-mm. Postdoctoral
and student involvement is included in important elements of the development and
testing, continuing the strong tradition of training in the hardware and
techniques of radio astronomy at U.C. Berkeley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for
the development of the POLARBEAR-2 project is being provided by NSF's Division
of Astronomical Sciences through its Advanced Technologies and Instrumentation
program.