* 1207342
* GOALI: Negative Capacitance in Epitaxial Oxide Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Vijay Narayanan, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2015
* USD 480,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program
(EPM) and Ceramics Program (CER) in the Division of Materials Research
(DMR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This GOALI project explores
the fundamental materials science problems of integrating a single-crystalline,
single-domain ferroelectric material (with polarization out of plane) onto
silicon. A ferroelectric layer in series with a dielectric is predicted to
produce negative capacitance, which will lower the sub-threshold slope of a
field effect transistor and significantly lower the power dissipated in a
transistor. This research project develops the materials and the fundamental
understanding necessary to make the predictions a reality. Molecular beam
epitaxy is used to grow strontium titanate epitaxially on single-crystal silicon
as a buffer layer for the nucleation and growth of single-crystal ferroelectric
films, such as barium titanate. The research explores routes to integrate these
single- crystal layers on silicon, approaches to achieving out-of-plane
polarization in the ferroelectric layer for thicknesses up to 50 nanometers,
approaches to achieving a single-domain ferroelectric state, and integration of
these layers into transistor devices to harness the negative capacitance state
of the heterolayers and realize sub-threshold slopes less than 60 millivolts per
decade. The experimental growth studies are guided by ab-initio theory, and
materials properties are characterized using in-situ and ex-situ
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: Scaling of the
complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) technology is at the heart of
Moore's law; it is driven by the desire to produce ever faster field effect
transistors. However, the faster the transistor is the more heat it generates in
the switching process. New device concepts are required to enable significantly
lower power dissipation and to realize the full speed potential for the smaller
devices. This research project explores one of the new device concepts of using
a ferroelectric/dielectric composite film in place of the dielectric that is
currently used in field effect transistors - a concept that is yet to be
realized because of the challenges in growing the layers with the proper crystal
structure and orientation on the silicon surface that forms the transistor. The
research combines an interdisciplinary team and explores growth and properties
of barium titanate layers (the ferroelectric) on strontium titanate (the
dielectric) on a silicon wafer. The research partners university researchers
with a technology leader in advanced device design to broaden the student
experience as they are exposed to problem definition that keeps the end goal of
developing a viable technology front and center. The outreach activities are
aimed at attracting high-school female students to physical sciences and
engineering; in collaboration with the physics instructors in local high
schools, the students spend summers in research groups at the University of
Texas at Austin and participate in real science in a supportive environment.