* 1208690
* NRI-Small: Co-Robots for STEM Education in the 21st Century
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Harry Cheng, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* David Haury
* 09/30/2016
* USD 950,958.00

This project studies how to use co-robot systems and math-oriented co-robotics
competitions to enhance student engagement, increase student motivation in
learning Algebra and subsequent STEM subjects, and interest in pursuing STEM
related careers and post-secondary study. The project leverages a unique
robotics platform called Mobot (an intelligent modular system designed for K-12
education) to prepare a cohort of teachers to engage their students with
relevant pedagogy that illustrates abstract math concepts with concrete
applications using computing and robotics. As such, there are four basic
research questions that guide project: (1) To what extent do fellows' students
exhibit (a) increased interest in STEM coursework and careers, and (b) increased
knowledge of computing and robotics? (2) How do fellows' students compare to
similar students in non-participating teachers' classes in indicators of
academic achievement and engagement? (3) How does students' participation in
robotics dance and math robotics competitions contribute to their interest in
pursuing computing and STEM careers and coursework? (4) To what extent do after
school programs integrate the curriculum developed by this
project?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each year, the project recruits 15 mathematics,
computer science, and technology teachers to participate as Robotics Fellows.
These fellows experience an intensive week long summer professional development
with follow up throughout the academic year. For implementation in formal and
informal settings, the project team works with curriculum experts and teachers
in creating teaching plans, instructional materials and evaluations for a co-
robot curriculum. The project is integrated with the annual UC Davis Center for
Computing and STEM Education Day, where teachers and students participating in
the project showcase their accomplishments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A mixed methods
approach is used to determine the effects of the professional development and to
measure student outcomes. Both formative and summative evaluation strategies
inform the development and implementation of the project. As such, the project
will advance theory, design, and practice in middle and high school mathematics,
technology and design-based classrooms through the use of a field tested co-
robotics curriculum.