* 1208968
* Modeling and Analysis of Genomic Imprinting and Maternal Effects
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Shili Lin, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2018
* USD 220,000.00

Genetic imprinting and maternal genotype effects are two epigenetic phenomenon,
which may lead to heritable changes in gene expression or cellular phenotype
without altering the underlying DNA sequence. These epigenetic factors, also
known as parent-of-origin effects, have been increasingly explored for their
roles in complex traits as part of a concerted effort to find the "missing
heritability". Research on parent-of-origin effects has taken on a new dimension
as the next generation sequencing technology becomes wildly available. However,
despite the great biological and technological progress and innovation,
statistical methods are lacking behind. Most existing methods for studying
imprinting/maternal effects are restricted to data from nuclear families. The
applicability of such methods is further hindered by the need to make strong but
unrealistic assumptions to reduce the number of parameters to avoid
overparametrization. In addition, imprinting and maternal effects are confounded
and maternal effect is believed to be heterogeneous; all these further
complicate modeling and analysis efforts. This project takes up this challenging
problem and aims to develop novel statistical and computational models/methods
and software for extended families and nuclear families without making the
strong but unrealistic assumptions. For nuclear family data from retrospective
studies, in addition to case families, the study design also considers controls,
which can be in the form of control nuclear families or internal controls from
unaffected siblings of case families. This novel design makes it possible to
formulate a partial likelihood approach, wherein the likelihood component of
interest is free of the nuisance parameters. This circumvents the problem of
overparametrization and unrealistic assumptions that plague existing methods.
For extended pedigrees from prospective studies, the focus is on the development
of a method for incorporating heterogeneous maternal effects and addressing the
issue of missing data, which is common for extended pedigrees. Methods proposed
will be implemented in software that will be made publicly available.

The importance of epigenetics in the twenty first century cannot be overstated.
To borrow science writer David Shenk's words, epigenetics is ``perhaps the most
important discovery in the science of heredity since the gene''. In this regard,
genomic imprinting and maternal effects, two aspects of the epigenetic process,
holds important roles as they are essential for normal mammalian growth and
development but can also cause devastating diseases and birth defects. Genetic
imprinting refers to the epigenetic marking of the parental origin of a gene,
which leads to the same DNA sequence being expressed differently depending on
whether it is inherited from the mother or from the father. It is well known
that Prader?Willi syndrome and Angelman syndrome are genetic disorders involving
genetic imprinting. Maternal effect refers to the influence of the prenatal
environment provided by a mother, which may arise from the expression levels of
some genes carried by the child being altered by the additional genetic
materials passed from the mother during pregnancy. Biological research
increasingly reveals the presence and importance of maternal effect in many
diseases such as childhood cancer and birth defects. This projects aims to
develop novel statistical methods and computational software that circumvent
difficulties in identifying genes that bear imprinting and/or maternal effects
using nuclear and extended family data. The tools developed will be made
available to the larger scientific community to aid scientific discoveries and
finding treatments for genetic diseases. This project will also contribute to
the training of the next generation of researchers in a cutting-edge
interdisciplinary research area that fuses knowledge in biology, statistics and
computer science.