* 1208138
* International Summer School on Biocomplexity from Gene to System    Summer School Istanbul, Turkey on July 1-7, 2012 and 2013.
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Metin Akay, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 09/30/2014
* USD 50,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;1207466, Akay&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The biological sciences
have become more quantitative and information-driven science since emerging
computational and mathematical tools facilitate collection and analysis of vast
amounts of biological data. Complexity analysis of biological systems provides
biological knowledge for the organization, management and mining of biological
data by using advanced computational tools. The biological data are inherently
complex and non-uniform and collected at multiple temporal and spatial scales.
The investigations of complex biological systems and processes require an
extensive collaboration between biologists, mathematicians, computer scientists
and engineering to improve our understanding of complex biological process from
gene to system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: The main objective of
these summer schools is to expose undergraduate and graduate biological science
and bioengineering students to the relatively new approaches of Health
Informatics, Regenerative Medicine, Personalized Medicine. This summer school
will be helpful, also, to students in computer science and mathematics who are
interested in pursuing research in biology, bio-molecular engineering and
bioengineering, since the summer school provides exceptional insights into the
fundamental challenges in biological sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Imapcts: The summer school uses lectures, oriented toward biological science
students, by expert faculty and will focus on the Health Informatics,
Regenerative Medicine, Personalized Medicine. In addition to these lectures, the
summer school will employ 2 two-hour panel discussion, with active participation
of undergraduate and graduate students, focused on Engineering Better Medicines
and Advances in Biomedical Engineering Research and Education in the World. The
summer school will stimulate further interdisciplinary research and
collaborations among engineers, mathematicians, computer scientists, and medical
researchers, and will help in identifying new, challenging directions in complex
biological science and bioengineering research.