* 1208892
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Classic Maya Human-Animal Interactions
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2014
* David Freidel, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2014
* USD 23,033.00

Under the direction of Dr. David Freidel, Diana Fridberg will analyze remains
and depictions of animals excavated since 2003 at the Classic Period (ca.
200-750 CE) sites of El Perú-Waka and La Corona, Guatemala. The sites of El Peru
and La Corona are located in Laguna del Tigre National Park, a protected jungle
enclave in northwestern Petén, Guatemala. Although these ancient cities were
politically important during the Maya Classic Period (ca. 200-750 CE), research
has not yet addressed how inhabitants utilized the surrounding environment. Ms.
Fridberg's research will address the ways in which humans interacted with and
made use of tropical forest fauna in activities related to both daily living and
ceremonial pursuits. The research is innovative in combining data from multiple
sources since both actual faunal remains as well as iconographic images will be
combined within a single analytic framework. This will provide a model for
similar approaches to sites from multiple time periods and multiple regions of
the world.

Human-animal relations underpin many aspects of food consumption, craft
production, and the development of cultural and religious practices. They are
understood to vary in time and space, but little is known about this variation
in the vast Maya region. Knowledge of the ways in which human populations have
managed and utilized the natural environment, including animals, is essential
for understanding the success or failure of these strategies. This study will
utilize material that has been excavated from El Perú and La Corona but for
which specialized analysis has not previously been available. Skeletal analysis
of animal remains will be performed to determine taxonomic identity of
represented fauna. The abundance and diversity of animals represented in
ceremonial and mundane contexts such as palaces, temples, tombs, and residential
areas will be used to assess the nature of animal use. Depictions of animals in
art and architecture will also be analyzed. Considering the ways in which people
both used physical animals and represented the natural world artistically has
been fruitful for untangling how ancient populations elsewhere in the world
thought about and interacted with their environments.

This project involves collaboration with between American and Guatemalan
archaeologists and universities. The results of this research will be presented
in conferences and peer-reviewed journals in the United States and Guatemala.
The specimen collection portion of this research will aid the biology
departments at the Universidad del Valle de Guatemala and Universidad de San
Carlos de Guatemala in augmenting sparse faunal collections used for teaching
and research. In addition, public outreach efforts will involve the production
of accessible and publically available media to aid in the dissemination of
knowledge about both ancient culture and modern wildlife. This will include
Internet publication of datasets and the creation of English and Spanish
language brochures on ancient uses and modern conservation status of animals in
Laguna del Tigre. Although a protected zone, the Park and its endangered
habitats are threatened by the encroachment of settlement. The presence of
ongoing research camps, such as those of the El Perú and La Corona
archaeological projects, slows encroachment while gathering data on threatened
natural and cultural resources.