* 1208862
* International Global Atmospheric Chemistry (IGAC) International Project Office
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Megan Melamed, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2015
* USD 294,336.00

The International Global Atmospheric Chemistry (IGAC) Project is a core project
under the auspices of the International Geosphere Biosphere Programme (IGBP) and
is co-sponsored by the international Commission on Atmospheric Composition and
Global Pollution (iCACGP). IGAC's mission is to coordinate and foster
atmospheric chemistry research towards a sustainable world. IGAC's priorities
and activities are guided by an international volunteer Scientific Steering
Committee (SSC). The IGAC International Project Office (IPO) is responsible for
fostering implementation of the SSC priorities by facilitating international
collaboration in field campaigns, organizing international efforts to address
specific scientific issues, and coordinating the preparation of synthesis and
assessment documents. This award through the Atmospheric Chemistry Program is
NSF's component of larger funding package provided in collaboration with NASA's
Tropospheric Chemistry Program and NOAA's Atmospheric Composition and Climate
Program to support the IGAC IPO for the next three years. These funds will cover
operating costs for the IPO including salaries, supplies, computer/web page
maintenance costs, and travel expenses. Funds will also support travel for early
career scientist and scientists in developing countries to participate in
workshops and conferences.

IGAC contributes to the international atmospheric chemistry community, the wider
earth system research community, and stakeholders both by advancing atmospheric
chemistry research and contributing to understanding earth system sustainability
science. It also builds scientific capacity globally by engaging early-career
scientists and scientists from developing countries through travel grants to
IGAC sponsored workshops, meetings, and conferences and by featuring their work
in the IGAC newsletter. IGAC broadly communicates results of atmospheric
chemistry research to the scientific community, policy makers, and the broader
public through its newsletter, web site, email announcements, and conference
presentations.