* 1208589
* Collaborative Research:  Institutional Networks and Continuous Learning to UnDo Effects of Micro-inequities on Women (INCLUDE-Women)
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2012,09/30/2016
* Judith Ockene, University of Massachusetts Medical School
* Continuing Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 09/30/2016
* USD 359,090.00

The unique collaboration between the University of Massachusetts Lowell and the
University of Massachusetts Medical School has as its primary focus to quantify
microinequities that affect the recruitment, retention and advancement of women
in the STEM disciplines. Many advances have been made in addressing the most
visible barriers to increased participation of women in STEM fields. However, to
date, the focus on microinequities has relied on qualitative analysis of the
subtle biases that prevent women STEM faculty from achieving their full
potential. To date, little to no evidence has been provided on the creation or
development of quantifiable metrics and tools for the assessment of subtle
gender biases and other roots of microinequities in an effort to eliminate these
subtle discriminations and, ultimately, make them negligible. A scientific
understanding of and metrics for microinequities are expected to be relevant in
refining existing techniques and designing new methods for addressing gender
biases in the academy. This project, because of the nature of the partnership
between these institutions, is expected to impact not only the campuses
involved, but also multiple campuses within the Massachusetts public higher
education system. The products that result from this project are also expected
to benefit not only women, but also male faculty in all fields; and they will
provide the foundation for addressing similar subtle biases in non-academic
and/or international environments. Ultimately, with a robust dissemination plan,
this project will transform the study of microinequities and how their impact on
all underrepresented groups, both within and outside of academic arenas, is
determined.