* 1208990
* Rod Dynamics in Turbulence:  Simultaneous 3D measurements of Anisotropic Particles and Velocity Fields
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Greg Voth, Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 05/31/2016
* USD 330,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;In a wide range of natural and industrial
situations, turbulent flows carry particulate material. As such, the dynamics of
turbulent suspensions and aerosols has been an active area of research.
Significant progress has been made in characterizing the motion of spherical
particles in turbulence; much less is known, however, about the dynamics of
anisotropic particles. The rotation of anisotropic particles is determined by
small scale properties of turbulence that are nearly universal across a wide
range of flows, and so anisotropic particles provide a rich system where
experiments can be directly compared with theory and simulations. The research
proposed here will provide the first high-resolution experimental measurements
of the 3D dynamics of rod shaped particles in turbulence. We will then extend
these measurements to anisotropic objects across the full range of aspect ratios
from rods to isotropic particles to disks. We will also implement a recently
developed measurement system that will allow extremely high seeding densities
necessary to measure the velocity gradients of the flow simultaneously with
measurements of rod motion. This will allow measurement of the stretching
experienced by the particle along its trajectory which is the fundamental
quantity responsible for preferential alignment of anisotropic particles.
Education and research training are central to this project, which will support
the mentoring of undergraduates, graduate students, and a postdoctoral
scientist, as well as training K-12 educators in physical
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;In a wide
range of natural and industrial situations, turbulent flows carry particulate
material. For example, clouds are turbulent flows containing water droplets and
ice crystals. Papermaking uses turbulent suspensions of fibers. If the particles
are spheres, there are a variety of tools available for measuring their motion.
But usually the particles are not spheres, and the movement and rotations of
non-spherical particles have never before been measured as they are carried by a
turbulent flow. This project will develop experimental tools to make these
measurements. Particle rotations are of particular interest because their
statistics are expected to be similar in all turbulent flows, and measurements
can be compared with theoretical predictions for the universal properties of
turbulence. This work seeks to establish a clear understanding of the
fundamental characteristics of non-spherical particle motion in laboratory
turbulent flows that can be used to understand more complex applications such as
icy clouds and papermaking. Education and research training are central to this
project, which will support the mentoring of undergraduates, graduate students,
and a postdoctoral scientist, as well as training K-12 educators in physical
science.