* 1208287
* NRI-Small: Robot Movement for Patient Improvement - Therapeutic Rehabilitation for Children with Disabilities
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Patricio Vela, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 09/30/2016
* USD 644,516.00

In the United States, the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA)
states that children with a physical disability are entitled to a "free
appropriate public education that emphasizes special education and related
services designed to meet their unique needs and prepare them for further
education, employment, and independent living." Unfortunately, access to
necessary assistive robotic technology remains unequal and children with
physical disabilities and movement disorders are largely overlooked. However,
recent successes in commercial robots appear to foreshadow an explosion of
promising robotic applications for individuals with disabilities. Not only can
robots be tasked to assist with Activities of Daily Living (ADL) but they can
also help individuals through rehabilitation exercises such that therapists and
family members can provide assistance in other arenas. The major barrier is
that, to date, most assistive robotic devices are not designed for children. And
although robotic systems for rehabilitation can generally be used to record
information about motor performance during active movements, these systems are
not ideal for rehabilitation with respect to children. This causes a unique
challenge for deploying such robotic devcies for this target
demographic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To overcome this barrier, state-of-the-art
techniques must be created to facilitate the interaction necessary for robots to
be useful for therapeutic rehabilitation with respect to children. Based on the
fact that logically, animate playthings naturally engage children, the goal of
this project is to fuse play and rehabilitation techniques using a robotic
design to induce childrobot interaction that will be entertaining as well as
effective for pediatric rehabilitation. Of importance within this proposed work
are approaches that allow therapists to provide instruction to robots on
rehabilitation tasks that can be remapped to play behaviors specific to the
individual child. In addition, robots must have internal perception and
inference algorithms that allow them to learn new play behaviors and incorporate
them to evoke corresponding behaviors in the child.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major
research questions are (1) How can child play behavior most effectively be
assessed and shared with an assistive robot, (2) How can this knowledge be
captured and generalized into behaviors useful for rehabilitation and (3) What
are the most effective robot interfaces for communicating these behaviors both
to the therapist for evaluation and the child for directing
movement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The objective of this
research effort is to further rehabilitation techniques for children by
developing and validating the core technologies needed to integrate therapy
instruction with child-robot play interaction in order to improve pediatric
rehabilitation. A principal goal of the research endeavor is to examine how
evaluation of upper and/or lower limb body movement can be achieved through
robot observation and how different rehabilitation exercises can be recoded to
allow the mapping of therapist instruction to play behaviors. The focus is on
using human-centered capabilities to enable robots to assist in rehabilitation
exercises, an ability that is increasingly needed, especially given the desire
to have daily therapeutic activities performed safely and consistently in almost
any home environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The successful
development of a framework that builds upon proven human-centered observation
techniques has the ability to tremendously increase the capabilities of robots
that interact with children in a safe and effective manner. The significance of
the approach will be emphasized in terms of providing assistance for children
with cerebral palsy, but the results of this effort could lay the basis for
similar efforts for children with varying disabilities. The PIs plan to
incorporate these approaches into courses designed for robotics and software
engineering. In addition, the education plan will incorporate many of these
ideas into a "boot-camp" workshop for underrepresented students. Undergraduate
research projects and demonstrations to middle-school students are anticipated
to inspire and encourage the next generation of engineers and scientists and
acclimate them into a new robot-integrated world.