* 1208909
* Water in a Changing West:  The Wyoming Center for Environmental Hydrology and Geophysics
* O/D,OIA
* 07/01/2012,02/28/2018
* Anne Sylvester, University of Wyoming
* Cooperative Agreement
* J.D. Swanson
* 02/28/2018
* USD 20,000,000.00

This Research Infrastructure Improvement (RII) Track-1 award establishes the
Wyoming Center for Environmental Hydrology and Geophysics (WyCEHG), a center
based at the University of Wyoming and involving Wyoming's community colleges,
the Wind River Tribal College, the Arapaho Ranch, Jackson State University
(Mississippi), and several federal, state and private business partners. The
specific focus is to improve the understanding of the mechanisms by which water
is transformed from precipitation (snow and rain) into river flow, groundwater
recharge, or soil moisture, and how these mechanisms respond to natural and
anthropogenic changes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on developing a multidisciplinary center to enable a
comprehensive research program linking surface and subsurface watershed
hydrology, geophysics, remote sensing, and computational modeling. Scientific
goals include improving the understanding of mountain front hydrology, the
mechanisms by which disturbances affect water flux, and the integrated modeling
of the fate and transport of water. Realistic computer models of hydrological
systems are being generated, informed by geophysical data of the subsurface
acquired at the watershed scale, and validated by geochemical, hydrological, and
ecological monitoring data. The project team is developing an open-access,
national facility for hydrogeophysics that includes state-of-the-art
instrumentation, to be sustained after the award ends by an industry
endowment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;WyCEHG is designed to
address pressing water-related issues in WY. It supports water research in areas
of key importance to the state, generating products and tools of use to water
resource managers charged with allocating scarce resources and forecasting water
deliveries in an environment of profound hydrological change. Methods, models,
observational platforms, and information relevant to decision support are shaped
by, and communicated to, decision makers. A major focus of the project is to
meet educational and outreach needs in WY through an integrated program fully
coupled to the scientific agenda. The project encompasses education initiatives,
diversity programs, workforce development, public forums, and stakeholder
engagement. Graduate student training includes the new Ph.D. Program in
Hydrologic Sciences at the University of Wyoming. Also included is a vigorous
mentoring and recruitment effort to attract Native American, Hispanic, African-
American, and female students, along with persons with disabilities, to the STEM
workforce.