* 1208007
* Preparing the Hardware Foundations of Environmental Vetoes for the Advanced LIGO Era
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Szabolcs Marka, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2014
* USD 70,000.00

Highly reliable, finely tuned gravitational-wave telescopes with exquisite
sensitivity are required for the detection of gravitational-waves - ripples in
the fabric of spacetime - and for astrophysics investigations that follow the
first direct detection of them. This award will enable activities that ensure
reliable operation and well understood data flow from the advanced LIGO
gravitational wave detectors. Our focus will be on mission-critical activities
targeting the precisely documented, well-characterized and traceable operation
of the aLIGO detectors and specifically their physical environment.
Environmental disturbances, such as seismic, electromagnetic and acoustic
signals, can couple into the complex infrastructure of the gravitational-wave
detectors and cause transient, temporary, or continuous deterioration of the
datastream that shall contain the gravitational wave signal. These artifacts in
the gravitational wave data stream caused by the environment or sub-optimal
interferometer tuning must be identified, tracked down, and eliminated or
reduced if possible. We will focus on aspects of the evaluation, calibration and
upgrade of the hardware components aimed to identify these physical
environmental artifacts.

The identification of environmental noise sources and the mitigation of their
effect in the advanced LIGO era will be vital (1) for ensuring a discovery that
is justifiable to the scientific community, and (2) for the realization of a
spectrum of science goals for the LIGO Scientific Collaboration, all relying on
achieving the design sensitivity for the advanced detectors and on achieving the
lowest possible false event rates. The proposed experimental efforts therefore
will significantly contribute to all gravitational wave searches using the
advanced detectors, including the multimessenger type transient searches.
Students from high school through graduate level will have the opportunity to
participate in this research. In addition, the urban setting and existing
outreach infrastructure of Columbia University will enable unique educational
and outreach activities based on this research that target schools not only in
the local community but also in the greater New York City metropolitan area.