* 1208421
* In-depth development and assessment of covariance models for multivariate nonstationary processes on a sphere
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Mikyoung Jun, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2016
* USD 100,000.00

With the advancement of science and technology, many geophysical problems
involve data sets on a global scale with multiple variables of interest. As a
consequence, there is a pressing need for flexible nonstationary covariance
models for multivariate processes defined on a sphere. On the other hand, the
development of covariance models for geostatistical data should accompany
methodologies for thorough goodness-of-fit diagnostics of the proposed models.
The goal of this project is to provide in-depth development of multivariate
spatial (-temporal) covariance models on a spherical domain that address certain
nonstationary properties of the covariance structures, in small and large scale,
paired with thorough goodness-of-fit diagnostics of the proposed models.
Proposed covariance models are flexible to capture complex nonstationarity, such
as varying smoothness and geometric anisotropy. The investigator develops
Bayesian and non-Bayesian methods for goodness-of-fit diagnostics and studies
the effect of plug-in estimators of covariance models. The investigator applies
the models developed in this project to the problem of validating multiple
climate model outputs from the CMIP5 archive with thorough diagnostics of the
model fits. Different covariance structures over land and the ocean, as well as
their dependence on latitude, are thoroughly investigated. The investigator also
explores efficient computation methods for large data sets.

The motivation of this project is the scientific problem of combining multiple
climate model outputs and studying the relationships between different climate
variables. A great deal of effort is being invested in developing state-of-the-
art climate models by climate scientists worldwide, and a new set of climate
model outputs (CMIP5-Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5), that are
the basis of the results in the fifth assessment report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), are becoming available. This project will
provide climate scientists and climate modelers with useful tools to
intercompare and combine climate models and test the improvement of the CMIP5
results over the previous CMIP3 results. Statistical models developed in this
project will enable more accurate assessments of the relationships between
multiple climate variables such as temperature and precipitation, and future
climate change.