* 1208317
* Formation, Dynamics, and Applications of Ultracold Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Edward Eyler, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2016
* USD 460,000.00

This grant enables the PIs to continue and expand their research program on the
formation, dynamics, and applications of ultracold molecules at sub-miliKelvin
temperatues. Prior research by the group has focused on diatomic alkali
molecules produced by the process of ultracold photoassociation, in which pairs
of ultracold alkali metal atoms are associated into bound vibrational levels of
electronically excited molecular states. These electronically excited molecules
then decay by spontaneous emission of light, some to near-dissociation
rovibrational levels of the singlet ground state (the X state) or the metastable
triplet state (the a state). New experiments will focus on methods to
efficiently create KRb and Rb2 molecules in the lowest rovibrational levels of
both the stable X state, X(v=0, J=0), and the metastable a(0,0) state. The
program also includes related studies of radiative lifetimes and
collisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two promising methods for continuous and simple
production of X(0,0) are: (1) resonance-enhanced coupling of two different
electronic states, one with long-range character to enhance photoassociation and
the other with short-range character to enhance decay to X(0,0); (2) Feshbach-
Optimized Photoassociation (FOPA) in a magnetic field to greatly enhance
photoassociation rates by mixing of high levels of the X and a states, again to
enhance the short-range character of the wave function. For the metastable
a(0,0) state, a novel "blue-detuned" photoassociation scheme can produce large
populations, and is being used to study the purely radiative lifetime at low
density as well as inelastic and reactive collisions in an optical
trap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By trapping ultracold molecules at high densities,
the group seeks to observe for the first time ultracold atom-molecule
photoassociation. This will produce ultracold triatomic molecules such as Rb3
and KRb2 in previously unexplored excited states, which can be detected either
by laser ionization or autoionization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interest in X(0,0)
molecules is particularly strong because only in this quantum state can it be
assured that collisions will not cause heating due to changes in the internal
quantum state. This enables long trapping times and investigations of subtle
quantum interactions. Possible applications of cold polar molecules for quantum
information are of great current interest, and at high enough densities even a
molecular Bose-Einstein condensate becomes a possibility. The new production
methods explored in this project offer large advantages in simplicity over
alternative approaches such as Raman transfer in quantum degenerate gases, and
they enable continuous or near-continuous generation of cold molecules.
Systematic studies of the spectroscopy and dynamics of these cold molecules will
provide much-needed data and physical insights to inform future investigations
of both ultracold and room-temperature molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will be well-integrated into the large ultracold physics program at the
University of Connecticut, currently including seven faculty and about 40
students and postdoctoral fellows. Elements of this integration include project-
based group meetings, mentoring, workshops, seminars, and numerous national and
international collaborations. Presentations by our research group members
locally and at meetings and other educational institutions contribute to
scientific understanding. Broader long term benefits include new understanding
and applications in areas such as ultracold chemistry, measurements of
fundamental symmetries and physical constants, quantum information science, and
nanoscience, as well as improved international collaboration.