* 1208170
* NEESR: Levees and Earthquakes: Averting an Impending Disaster
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Jonathan Stewart, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 06/30/2016
* USD 651,066.00

The Sacramento / San Joaquin Delta, the hub of California's water delivery
system that serves over 20 million people, is home to many unique
endangered/threatened species, and is rich farmland. It is composed of "islands"
circumscribed by approximately 1100 miles of levees that constantly impound
water, preventing flooding of the islands. Peaty organic soils that comprise
much of the Delta have oxidized and blown away over the past 150 years,
resulting in rapid subsidence and many islands are now 3 to 5 meters below sea
level. The levees are composed of uncompacted loose dredged soils that are
saturated, and are therefore susceptible to liquefaction. The Delta lies on the
eastern margin of the San Andreas fault system in a zone with moderate seismic
hazard. Recent projections indicate that a Delta earthquake could result in
widespread levee failures and simultaneous inundation of multiple islands. Such
an event would locally reverse the flow direction in the Delta, causing
intrusion of saline water from the west that would contaminate the water supply
and halt water delivery for a period of years. The research objective of this
award is to investigate the deformation potential of liquefiable levees
supported on peaty organic soils. Model levees will be constructed from soils
that are similar to Delta levee fills, and will be founded atop peaty organic
soil excavated from the Delta. The models will be constructed on a geotechnical
centrifuge that enables a small scale model to behave like a much larger
prototype. Water will be introduced on one side of the levee and allowed to
reach a steady state seepage condition prior to testing. Scaled versions of
ground motions recorded during real earthquakes will be imposed on the base of
the centrifuge models. Hundreds of sensors will be embedded in the models to
record acceleration, porewater pressure, and deformation, to enable accurate
characterization of levee response and the transmission of seismic energy
through the various soil layers. Data from this project will be archived and
made available to the public through the NEES Project Warehouse data repository
at http://www.nees.org.

The Delta earthquake scenario is one of the most important hazards facing the
United States because the consequences of such an event would be unimaginably
catastrophic considering that Delta water is the sole source for many
agricultural communities and constitutes a significant fraction of urban water
supply. Consensus among the scientific community is that the Delta earthquake
scenario is a significant threat, but many Delta landowners and local engineers
perceive the earthquake threat as a scare tactic created by special interests to
justify construction of an alternative water conveyance system that bypasses the
Delta. Much of their mistrust of the scientific community stems from a lack of
understanding of liquefaction hazard, and there is an acute need to effectively
and clearly communicate risk to lawmakers. Video of the testing performed
through this award will provide an excellent educational tool to demonstrate the
effects of earthquakes on liquefiable levee fills. The primary educational
objective of the proposed work is to help advise the important decisions that
are currently being made regarding California's water distribution system. The
research team consists of PI Scott J. Brandenberg (UCLA), co-PI's Jonathan P.
Stewart (UCLA) and Anne Lemnitzer (UC Irvine), and senior personnel George
Mylonakis (U. of Patras). The research will utilize the George E. Brown, Jr.
Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) facility at UC Davis. This
award is part of the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP).