* 1208522
* NRI-Small: A Biologically Plausible Architecture for Robotic Vision
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Nuno Vasconcelos, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,150,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop a generic robotic vision
architecture that is both biologically plausible and jointly optimal, in a
decision theoretic sense, for attention, object tracking, object recognition,
and action recognition, in both static and dynamic environments. The research is
motivated by the observation that all these problems are solved by biological
vision with very homogeneous neural computations. The approach is to exploit a
mapping of accepted computational models of visual cortex into the elementary
computations of statistical learning and inference in order to derive unified
algorithms for all tasks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: the proposed
unification of vision tasks is novel and of paramount importance for robotics,
since it is computationally infeasible for a robot to implement a large set of
disjoint vision algorithms. It will also exploit task synergies, producing
algorithms that leverage the solution of one task to improve performance on
another. This will likely enable overall better performance of vision systems.
Finally, the project will produce novel insights on the structure of the visual
world, and how it can be leveraged by robotic vision, by introducing new models
for natural image statistics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The
research has applicability in manufacturing, intelligent systems, health care,
homeland security, etc. The expected theoretical insights are likely to be of
wide application in statistics (models of feature dependence), neuroscience
(models of neural computation), and computer vision (synergistic models).
Educationally, the project provides an exciting opportunity for the involvement
of undergraduates in research.