* 1208147
* NEESR: Interaction of Tsunamis with Short Waves and Bottom Sediment - Numerical and Physical Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Alexandru Sheremet, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2016
* USD 787,941.00

The interaction between short ocean waves and long transient tsunamis is studied
in conjunction with sediment transport process. This is in keeping with the
theme of the study of tsunami-generated processes in concert with natural
oceanographic processes, and will be done from two viewpoints: that of the
tsunami's effect on the transported and reworked sediment bed; and that of the
effect of the sediment load on the transporting power of the tsunami. Numerical
modeling will form the backbone of this work, with physical modeling providing
data for process study, parameterization and validation. A sophisticated model
based on smoothed particle hydrodynamics will be tightly integrated into the
experimental plan. Experiments are planned for the George E. Brown, Jr. Network
for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) Large Wave Flume Facility at Oregon
State University during the first two years. The first set of experiments will
focus on evaluating the transport power of the tsunami in order to develop the
pickup function and other parameterizations for the transport model. The second
set of experiments will investigate full bed evolution. In all experiments,
forcing will consist of tsunamis and combined tsunami-swell conditions.
Measurements will be comprised of: free surface elevations; near-bottom
velocities (from acoustic Doppler velocimeters); sediment concentration (from
vertical stacks of optical and acoustic backscatter devices); and vertical
velocity profiles (via pairs of upward/downward looking pulse-coherent acoustic
Doppler profilers). These measurements will also be used to evaluate the
dissipation of the tsunami in several different ways. To gage the degree of
sediment reworking and redistribution under a tsunami, sediment samples will be
analyzed using a digital-optical grain size analyzer. Data from this project
will be archived and made available to the public through the NEES Project
Warehouse/data repository (http://www.nees.org). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the proposed work address the present state of knowledge
concerning the destructive nature of the tsunami and how effectively it is
represented in laboratory studies. It is anticipated that the results of this
work will affect present policies governing infrastructural health, emergency
procedures and public safety in coastal areas potentially subject to tsunamis. A
plan is also outlined concerning work with the NEES Large Wave Flume Facility's
education and outreach personnel in aiding their established plans concerning
public engagement and education regarding tsunamis and associated hazards, as
well as their plans for encouraging careers in science and engineering. This
will include live demonstrations of tsunami-sediment interaction in the Large
Wave Flume Facility, during which the public will be able to witness the power
of an onrushing tsunami. This award is part of the National Earthquake Hazards
Reduction Program (NEHRP).