* 1208117
* NEESR: Reduction of Seismic Shaking Intensity on Soft Soil Sites Using Stiff Ground Reinforcement
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Daniel Wilson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2015
* USD 925,542.00

The primary objective of this project is to develop a new seismic design concept
for reinforced ground that can be used to reduce the intensity of strong ground
shaking on soft sites. The study involves centrifuge and shake table testing as
well as numerical modeling to demonstrate that stiff soil-mix panels, installed
in lattice-type grids, can reduce the amplification of seismic energy up through
soft soil profiles. In most cases, such ground reinforcement is used to increase
bearing support, limit permanent deformations, and/or reduce liquefaction
potential. Additional benefits, such as favorably altering the dynamic transfer
function of the soil profile and thereby reducing the shaking levels input into
the superstructure are not considered in current design provisions. Such
reductions in ground shaking can lead to safer and more economical designs. This
detailed study utilizes model testing with the centrifuge facility at the
University of California Davis and a shake table at California State University
Fullerton to demonstrate the effects of reinforcement geometry and layout,
stiffness ratio, layering and properties of the soil profile, and other factors.
Advanced three-dimensional nonlinear finite element modeling will be used to
extrapolate the model test results to a wide range of field and site conditions
so that design curves can be developed. This work represents an unprecedented
approach to design ground improvement to reduce surface ground motions and base
input into structures at seismically vulnerable soil sites. Data from this
project will be archived and made available to the public through the NEES
Project Warehouse/data repository
(http://www.nees.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mitigation of the earthquake
damage potential of soft soil sites remains one of the leading challenges in
earthquake engineering. It is well-established through observations of
earthquake damage patterns that structural damage is strongly correlated with
local geological and soil conditions. Soft, weak sites generally fare worse than
stiff sites. This is because soft sites tend to amplify the intensity of ground
shaking and often undergo large deformations that can cause major structural
damage. Earthquake damage potential can be significantly reduced by reinforcing
and effectively stiffening such sites. Preliminary studies suggest that mixing
cement with the soft soils to form stiff soil-cement panels in the ground (i.e.,
?deep soil mixing?) can be an effective ground reinforcement technique for such
purposes. Therefore soft soil sites can be transformed to behave like stiff
sites, thereby greatly reducing earthquake vulnerability. The project is
organized around an integrated plan of physical and analytical modeling to
investigate and validate the effectiveness of various ground reinforcement
techniques and develop a practical, economical design approach. This work has
the potential to improve building performance, increase safety margins, and
reduce development costs in earthquake prone regions. The findings will have
implications not only for the engineering community, but also for business
owners, developers, communities, and other stakeholders. As such, there is a
well-developed plan for transferring knowledge into practice through partnership
with the National Institute of Building Sciences (NIBS), the Deep Foundations
Institute (DFI), and soil improvement contractors who are collaborating on this
research. Results will be also be disseminated via conferences, journals, the
project website, and incorporated into academic courses and professional
shortcourses for groups such as American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE),
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
(FERC), and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. There is also an aggressive outreach
plan for the involvement of students from a predominantly undergraduate and
minority serving institution, as well as from area K-12 schools. This award is
part of the National Earthquake Hazard Reduction Program (NEHRP).