* 1208029
* US-German Collaboration:  The effects of chloride dynamics in cerebellar computation
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2017
* Fidel Santamaria, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 10/31/2017
* USD 550,104.00

Although inhibitory synapses are only a small fraction of all the connections
present in the nervous system, without them brains cannot function and animals
die. A large majority of inhibitory synapses are mediated by chloride currents
that flow through the cell membrane when the synapses are activated. The
objective of this project is to quantify the effects of changes in chloride
concentration inside cells on the strength of inhibitory synapses. For this
purpose a genetically encoded molecule, designed at the University of Heidelberg
in Germany, will be expressed in Purkinje cells in the cerebellum at the
University of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA). These cells are involved in motor
control and learning. These changes will be measured with a state-of-the art
microscope at UTSA, and the results will be shared with collaborators at Goethe
University in Frankfurt, Germany. In collaboration, the UTSA and German teams
will develop computer models that will be used to predict the behavior of
inhibitory synapses on Purkinje cells during complex sensory and motor tasks.
These models will be used to determine how the cerebellar cortex processes motor
and sensory information under conditions in which chloride changes due to the
complex structure of neurons or due to changes in the metabolism of cells. The
results obtained from this project will determine how changes in chloride
concentration contribute to the normal functioning of the brain. Furthermore,
the education of students at UTSA, a minority serving institution, will be
enhanced and enriched by offering opportunities to do collaborative research
with German Universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A companion project is
being funded by the German Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF).