* 1208908
* Hamiltonian and Celestial Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Richard Moeckel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Lora Billings
* 06/30/2016
* USD 225,001.00

This is a research project in the general area of dynamical systems theory with
applications to problems arising in mechanics, especially celestial mechanics.
The gravitational n-body problem remains an active topic for research three
centuries after Newton proposed it. In addition to its direct relevance for
astronomy and space mission design, it has served as a stimulus for the
development of new mathematical techniques. The research is focussed on three
main areas: regularization of singularities, topological and variational
existence proofs for periodic orbits, and studies of relative equilibrium
solutions. One of the characteristic features of celestial mechanics is the
presence of collision singularities. It has long been known that simple binary
collisions can be ``regularized'' by cleverly chosen changes of coordinates.
More complicated singularities like the triple collision in the three-body
problem can be ``blown-up'' so as to reveal the quite complicated behavior of
near-collision solutions. Part of the proposal is to give a complete
regularization and blow-up for the three-body problem which combines the older
work on the subject with modern developments in symplectic reduction theory. A
similar project for the four-body problem will involve many new ideas and has
surprising connections to algebraic surface theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Periodic motions have always played an important role in
dynamical systems theory. They are often the simplest solutions of the equations
of motion and provide a framework for understanding other, more complicated
solutions. Recently, variational methods have been used to construct some
remarkable symmetric periodic solutions of the n-body problem. This project will
develop topological techniques for finding such solutions and will explore the
relationship between the variational and topological approaches. The simplest
periodic orbits arise from central configurations -- special arrangements of the
masses such that the gravitational forces can be exactly balanced by centrifugal
forces when the configuration rotates. It is a difficult algebraic problem to
find or even count the central configurations. Techniques developed for this
problem could be applied to other complicated systems of algebraic equations.