* 1208521
* A Numerical Renormalization Group for Low Dimensional Field Theories
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Robert Konik, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 05/31/2016
* USD 210,102.00

This program will extend and apply a numerical technique developed by the PI and
CO-PI by which the properties of a wide range of interacting field theories in
low dimensions can be studied in a nonperturbative fashion. The approach takes
as input already available data, in the form of spectra together with matrix
elements, arising from integrable and conformal field theoretical treatments of
a wide class of strongly interacting zero and one dimensional systems. Using
this as a foundation, more complicated field theories, built by either
perturbing or coupling together such systems, are analyzed numerically through a
controlled truncation of the Hilbert space guided by a renormalization group
procedure. This is the renormalization group improved truncated spectrum
approach (RGTSA). The strongest interactions are taken into account at the very
start. Using it one can study arbitrary perturbations of 1+1 dimensional
integrable and conformal field theories as well as study large arrays of coupled
one-dimensional field theories, permitting the extension of the approach to 2+1
dimensions. The numerical renormalization group technique borrows ideas from the
study of quantum impurity problems and density matrix renormalization group
approaches to one dimensional lattice models. This technique is sufficiently
versatile to extract the spectrum, correlation functions and non-equilibrium
phenomena such as the dynamics following a quantum quench.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This technique is able to characterize the properties of real
materials. As a proof of principle of the technique, the excitonic spectrum of
semi-conducting carbon nanotubes has been studied and it has been shown that the
modeling well describes experimental data. This technique will be used to study
the optical properties of hybrid nanosystems with the aim of better
understanding this hybrid's potential as a solar energy device. Two graduate
students will receive extensive training in low dimensional quantum field
theories as well as their application in condensed matter settings. They will
conduct original research and develop theoretical methods with cross-field
applicability. The results will be presented in journals and through seminars,
colloquia, and conference presentations.