* 1208454
* RAPID: Fine- and Microstructure Observations in Conjunction with a GEOTRACES Section along 40 degrees S in the Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2012
* Jong-Jin Park, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 11/30/2012
* USD 199,967.00

This project funds the acquisition and analysis of fine- and microstructure data
in conjunction with the UK funded GEOTRACES A10 section along 40S in the South
Atlantic. A combination of vertical profiling and glider platforms will be used.
The resulting data will be used to estimate regional diapycnal mixing and
isopycnal stirring rates. It is anticipated that there will be significant
regional variability in response to variations in tides, eddies, topographic
morphology and mean geostrophic currents. Estimates of diapycnal mixing will be
aided by radiation balance equations and estimates of isopycnal stirring will be
informed by comparison to published scalings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a great deal of uncertainty regarding the
details of how oceanic budgets of heat, mass, momentum, energy, potential
vorticity or passive tracers are balanced, particularly at the submesoscale and
especially with regards to the roles of nonlinearity versus wave radiation and
the role of internal waves versus geostrophic motions. The proposed work will
address this uncertainty by documenting fine- and microstructure fields along
the GEOTRACES A10 section and will quantitatively investigate the relationship
to, and dependence upon, variability on larger spatial and temporal scales.
Measured diapycnal mixing rates will be compared to radiation balance equation
based estimates of turbulent production associated with the regional internal
wave climate. Isopycnal stirring rates will be compared to published scalings
based upon both weakly nonlinear and turbulent
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of
the proposed research will contribute to the understanding and prediction of
global climate change and the carbon cycle. Efforts will be in direct support of
the GEOTRACES program as the biogeochemical budgets that are the focus of that
study depend upon diapycnal mixing and isopycnal stirring rates. The project
will provide direct estimates of these and will assist with the interpretation.
It will also assist with the development and implementation of turbulent mixing
and isopycnal stirring parameterizations for general circulation models used to
predict the ocean climate response. Specifically, the characterization of
diapycnal mixing and isopycnal stirring derived from the microstructure
observations will be incorporated by collaborators at Oxford University in their
general circulation model simulations of tracer transport.