* 1208338
* Geometry in nonsmooth optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Adrian Lewis, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2016
* USD 412,971.00

While nonsmooth optimization is ubiquitous across science and engineering,
variational analysis - its elegant mathematical foundation - has achieved
narrower practical impact than it warrants. This project attacks that deficit
through "structure": not in the traditional explicit computational sense, but
rather in the sense of intrinsic geometry. The investigator studies two
overlapping mathematical strategies. The first uses semi-algebraic geometry as a
rich and natural model for the world of concrete optimization problems. In that
world, much of the technicality and pathology obscuring variational analysis for
practitioners is transformed, leaving powerful stratification tools and simple
access to "generic" properties in optimization. The second strategy emphasizes
partial smoothness, a powerful geometric property originating from the theory of
optimality conditions and sensitivity analysis, but also in perfect resonance
with active-set algorithms. With these theoretical tools at hand, the
investigator focuses foremost on two fresh and promising computational methods
for nonsmooth optimization. The first is, counter-intuitively, just the
classical BFGS method for smooth optimization, mildly adjusted for the nonsmooth
world. BFGS is simple, intuitive, general-purpose, much easier to implement
successfully than traditional "bundle" methods, and broadly effective in
practical applications, notably in robust control. Mysteriously, BFGS always
(essentially) seems to converge linearly and to identify partly smooth
structure. The investigator seeks explanations. The second focal computational
method is a proximal algorithm for composite optimization that is simple,
versatile, and, in contrast with BFGS, well-grounded theoretically. This
algorithm has proved successful on huge problems, such as compressed sensing,
but is potentially slow. Partial smoothness will strengthen convergence in
theory, and speed it in practice.

The broader significance and importance of this project derive from the
investigator's transformative goal of bridging the gulf between mathematical
theory and data-driven practice in resource allocation problems beyond the reach
of traditional calculus. A particularly important example is the kind of robust
control engineering underlying applications like modern aircraft electronics.
The investigator builds on a strong track-record of high-calibre publications,
innovative scholarship and outreach, and intellectual leadership. PhD students
based in Cornell's highly ranked School of ORIE (where the investigator is
Director) will engage all aspects of the project, publishing and presenting at
professional meetings; the investigator will engage more broadly through
seminars and his award-winning teaching, as well as through graduate texts,
survey articles, multidisciplinary collaboration, and prominent international
lectures to broad scientific and engineering audiences.