* 1208929
* France-US Joint Conference on New Methods in Rock Art Research
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2011,02/28/2013
* Margaret Conkey, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2013
* USD 15,697.00

This award provides support for a 3 day conference to be held at the Lower Pecos
Texas rock art research center, SHUMLA. It brings together French researchers
and US-based scientists to share new and emerging methods in the documentation,
archiving, preservation, and interpretation of rock art.

Rock art refers to images made on rock walls, rock shelters, inside caves or
architectural structures. It is found globally with concentrations in North
America, Africa, Australia, Europe, China and many other locations where one
finds rock surfaces. This marking on rock has been a part of the human cultural
repertoire for at least 30,000 years and takes many forms, including engravings
and use of pigments for paintings and drawings. In recent decades, research
attention on rock art has been increasing with a correspondingly rapid
development of multiple methods of photography, digital and GIS recording, and
web-based documentation and archiving. Given the fragility of many images and
rock art manifestations, and given the increasing attention to what one can
infer about human cultural lives from rock art, this is an ideal moment to bring
together some of the most active researchers who are developing sophisticated
and innovative methods and techniques. This collaborative project will include
researchers from both US and French based institutions to permit sharing of
methods and approaches across several research traditions. The US and France are
two world centers for rock art research and to date there has been relatively
little interaction between them.

This conference will explicitly provide researchers with increased exposure to a
multiplicity of scientific approaches and methods that can be taken back to a
variety of scholarly and lay public communities in both France and the United
States, as well as Australia. The conference itself is being held at a non-
profit educational research center (SHUMLA) where the results of the meeting
will be integrated into the newsletters and educational activities. These
include K-12 events and audiences. The conference will be filmed by one of the
participants who is also the Director of a for-the-public production company in
France that presents archaeology to the lay public through films and other
media. The participants at the conference include a broad range of researchers
(e.g., half are women and one of the U.S. researchers is an active member of a
Native American tribe) from a variety of institutions including a small liberal
arts public college in the US, private research consultancy, the SHUMLA
educational center, and from European museums. Materials from the conference,
such as powerpoint presentations on new methods and their applications, will be
made available to avocational as well as professional groups.