* 1208192
* NEESR: Seismic Performance of Conventional and Innovative Special Structural Walls
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Jack Moehle, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 04/30/2017
* USD 999,999.00

Solid reinforced concrete structural walls that span from the foundation to the
building roof are one of the most common structural systems used to resist
earthquake forces in the United States and worldwide. In many buildings, these
walls surround stairs and elevators or are located at the building perimeter.
Evolution in wall design and construction practices has resulted in thinner,
more efficient wall geometries that are pushing the seismic performance limits
of this structural system. Indeed, poor performance in some recent earthquakes
and structural engineering laboratory tests demonstrate that revisions in
seismic design practices now are necessary to ensure that future construction
meets the high performance expectations for modern construction. This research
will explore seismic design and performance limits for structural walls,
considering both conventional and innovative wall construction practices. The
research will investigate: (a) mechanics models to understand poor performance
of conventional construction, (b) innovative yet practical new systems that can
transform design practices, (c) performance-based design limits for conventional
and innovative systems, and (d) international collaborative development and
interpretation of shake table tests of full-scale, three-dimensional building
structures. This research is a collaborative effort among researchers at the
University of California at Los Angeles and University of California at
Berkeley. Primary tests will be conducted at the George E. Brown, Jr. Network
for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) facilities at the University of
California at Berkeley and University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. In
addition, the project team will collaborate with researchers from the University
of Tokyo and Japan's National Research Institute for Earth Science and Disaster
Prevention, who will conduct full-scale building tests on the E-Defense shake
table facility in Miki, Japan. Data from this project will be archived and made
available to the public through the NEES Project Warehouse/data repository
(http://www.nees.org). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program tackles an
important and challenging problem that will advance discovery and understanding
of one of the most common building systems used to resist earthquake forces. The
results of the research will be disseminated in multiple ways: by sharing
results using NEES resources, by involving earthquake professionals, and by
disseminating educational materials. The results will benefit society most
directly by helping define appropriate seismic design requirements for efficient
and high-performance building construction. These goals will be accomplished by
the active participation of the researchers with professional organizations and
by utilizing an advisory board of expert engineering professionals actively
involved in earthquake engineering. Graduate and undergraduate student
experiences will be enhanced by active participation in research and by
collaboration among the participating universities, with Japanese researchers,
and interactions with design professionals. This award is part of the National
Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP).