* 1208623
* NRI-Small: Multi-modal sensor skin and garments for healthcare and home robots
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Frank Lewis, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 05/31/2017
* USD 1,349,766.00

The objective of this research is to answer fundamental design questions for
multi-functional robotic skin sensors, optimize their placement onto assistive
robotic devices, have the robot and human "learn" how to use the skin sensors
efficiently, and quantitatively assess the impact of this assistive technology
to humans. The approach is to design and fabricate integrated micro-scale
sensors in conjunction with iterative simulation and experimental studies of the
performance of physical human-robot interaction enabled by this technology.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute efficient
algorithms for optimal placement and data networking of distributed skin sensors
on robots; new learning and control algorithms to sense human intent and improve
interactivity; practical robotic skin and garment hardware with distributed
sensors to include tactile, thermal imaging, and acceleration sensing in
flexible materials that can be easily attached on and peeled off robots; and new
metrics to evaluate the impact of this skin to humans including level of
assistance, safety, ease of use, aesthetics, and therapeutic
benefits.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Co-robots of the future will share
their living spaces with humans, and, like people, will wear sensor skins and
clothing that must be interconnected, fitted, cleaned, repaired, and replaced.
In addition to aesthetic purposes that increase societal acceptance, these
sensorized garments will also enhance robot perception of the environment, and
enable extraordinary levels of safety, cooperation, and therapy for humans. The
research proposed here will unlock near-term and also unforeseen applications of
robotic skin with broad applicability, and especially to home assistance,
medical rehabilitation, and prosthetics.