* 1208509
* NRI-Small: Core Technologies for MRI-powered Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Pierre Dupont, Children's Hospital Corporation
* Standard Grant
* jeffrey trinkle
* 08/31/2015
* USD 800,000.00

The goal of this project is to create a transformative robotic technology that
utilizes Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) systems to power, control and image
robots under the guidance and control of a clinician. Specifically, the research
effort will be organized around three tasks: (1) creation of design principles
for MRI-powered actuators, (2) development of motion planning and control
algorithms for MRI-powered robots, and (3) design of MRI pulse sequences for
closed-loop motor control. This tether-less robot technology addresses the needs
for small, low cost medical robots identified in the Roadmap for US Robotics and
can be exploited for robots ranging in size from centimeters down to fractions
of a millimeter. At the centimeter scale, it could be used for robots designed
to crawl inside body cavities to perform interventions and also for robotic
prosthetic implants. At the millimeter and sub-millimeter scale, groups of MRI-
powered robots can swim inside fluid-filled regions of the body to perform
targeted therapies, such as drug and cell delivery, or to assemble as a sensor
network. Two testbeds at these different scales will be used to evaluate and
demonstrate the technology.

This research addresses a largely unexplored frontier in medical robotics that
could revolutionize the standard of care for many serious medical conditions
currently associated with both high mortality rates and high societal costs. The
location of the PI's lab inside a teaching hospital provides a unique
environment to integrate the research and education of the engineering and
medical disciplines. To promote an understanding of engineering and medicine
along with the value of learning and research to low income and minority school
students, the project team will partner with local educational organizations.
Furthermore, the project technology will consist of algorithms and software that
can be utilized by researchers and educators throughout the country to provide
fundamentally new capabilities to existing multi-million dollar equipment. The
ultra-minimally invasive medical robots developed using this technology can
potentially provide substantial societal benefits in terms of reduced trauma,
precise image-based control and lower cost.