* 1208091
* Direct absorption spectroscopy of individual nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Masaru Kuno, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2016
* USD 410,562.00

Masaru K. Kuno at the University of Notre Dame is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in the Division of
Chemistry in work addressing an existing need in the nanoscience community to
conduct the direct absorption spectroscopy of individual nanostructures. While
robust techniques now exist for measuring the emission intensity and spectrum of
individual molecules and nanoparticles, entire classes of materials exist that
are non-fluorescent or which possess low emission quantum yields. These species
are therefore invisible to current single molecule imaging techniques. Apart
from developing single nanostructure absorption methodologies, one of the
primary goals of the work will be to measure the length-dependent absorption
spectrum of single CdSe nanowires and nanorods as the system transitions from a
1D to a 0D (quantum dot) system. This will allow us to fully map out the
competition between confinement, dielectric contrast and dielectric confinement
in this (or any other) low dimensional system for the first time. We will
furthermore investigate the defect absorption of individual nanostructures such
as CdS nanowires where an apparent Urbach tail exists in the ensemble extinction
spectrum. These defect studies touch on an important, yet underserved, area of
modern nanoscience, given the enhanced surface-to-volume ratios of low
dimensional materials and the important role played by defects in influencing
their optical and electrical properties.

There have been two decades of research devoted to detecting individual
molecules and nanostructures. The motivation for such studies has been to find
ways to probe the individuality of these species. In this regard, just like we
all like ice cream, the above research essentially aims to find out why you like
vanilla best whereas I like chocolate. Unfortunately, nearly all existing single
molecule detection techniques rely on monitoring the emission of the probed
species. The problem then is that not all molecules (or nanostructures) are
emissive. Hence we must find new ways to study them. One of the most universal,
yet challenging, approaches to do this involves looking at their absorption.
This is the topic of the proposed research and, by successfully achieving this
goal, we believe that we will learn important new physics about the fundamental
behavior of semiconductor nanostructures underpinning modern nanoscience. The
proposed work also ties into the PI's educational initiatives in undergraduate
education, which focus on increasing student interest in nanoscience and
microscopy through the development of new laboratory modules. Finally, the study
aids the training of domestic graduate students in an important area of future
science and technology vital to US national security.