* 1208598
* NRI-Small: The Intelligent Workcell - Enabling Robots and People to Work Together Safely in Manufacturing Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Daniel Huber, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 09/30/2017
* USD 690,000.00

The research objective of this award is to investigate methods to enable people
and industrial robots to work safely within the same workspace. Current robotic
manufacturing practice requires the physical separation of people and robots,
which ensures safety, but is inefficient in terms of time and resources, and
limits the tasks suitable for robotic manufacturing. This research will develop
an "Intelligent Workcell," which augments the traditional robotic workcell with
perception systems that observe workers within the workspace. Methods to
explicitly track workers and estimate their body pose will enable dynamically
adaptive safety zones surrounding the robot, thereby preventing the robot from
injuring workers. Algorithms will be developed to recognize the activities that
workers are performing. These algorithms will learn a task-independent
vocabulary of fundamental action components, which will form the building blocks
for a hierarchical activity recognition framework. Finally, mechanisms for
providing feedback to workers about the robot's intended actions will be
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is expected to provide new
capabilities in robotic workcell safety and monitoring, allowing people and
industrial robots to work safely and effectively in the same environment. Such
capabilities would improve the efficiency of existing robotic workcells, since
the robot would not be required to stop whenever a person enters the workspace
(as is current practice). Furthermore, new manufacturing processes that involve
robots and people working together on a single task would be enabled. Students
at the graduate and undergraduate level will benefit from using the prototype
Intelligent Workcell in project courses, and grade-school students will
participate in short courses and workshops designed to ignite interest in STEM
activities related to industrial robotics and computer vision.