* 1208927
* Alaska Adapting to Changing Environments (Alaska ACE)
* O/D,OIA
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2018
* Anupma Prakash, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 12/31/2018
* USD 20,999,897.00

This Research Infrastructure Improvement (RII) Track-1 award seeks to understand
complex, coupled human-natural interactions. The specific focus is to evaluate
vulnerabilities, resilience, and adaptive capacities of Alaskan communities to
the effects of environmental changes occurring in their region. The work
involves interdisciplinary research and education in the area of Social
Ecological Systems (SES) and is scientifically significant and regionally
relevant. The project participants are the three main campuses of the University
of Alaska (UA) located in the urban centers of Fairbanks (UAF), Anchorage (UAA),
and Juneau (UA Southeast - UAS), 13 satellite campuses in rural areas across
Alaska, a Tribal College, and learning centers in small communities around the
state. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The Alaska Adapting to
Changing Environments (Alaska ACE) project will examine how the pronounced
changes in the environmental and natural processes affect and are affected by
the adaptation capacity of Alaskan communities. The work is organized around
three Test Cases in the Southeast, Southcentral, and Northern Alaska to study
the changes in landscape and water resources. The project will also support
processes that enable communities to better adapt to environmental changes. The
results of the Test Cases study will be linked in a broader comparative
framework by a Coordination, Integration, and Synthesis Working Group. This
group will undertake integrated modeling and deliver research findings as
decision-support tools, hold annual Regional Outreach Workshops, and help to
craft cyber-enabled visualizations of SES modeling results. Policymakers,
resource managers, and members of the public will be invited to participate in
'Decision Theater' events in which they will be able to use decision support
tools in real time to view and manipulate possible scenarios of environmental
changes and adaptive strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The Alaska ACE project will advance interdisciplinary SES
research methodology and translate research results into visualization tools
useful for researchers, local communities, resource managers, and policy makers.
The program will train and educate a diverse set of students across Alaska and
strengthen partnerships with local communities, government and non-government
organizations. At the college level, the program focuses on the training and
mentoring of junior faculty and graduate and undergraduate students through
grant-writing workshops, interdisciplinary science courses and seminars, student
fellowships and internships, and travel support to professional conferences.
Engagement of rural, mostly Alaska Native, K-12 students and teachers is
targeted through summer scholarships and ongoing statewide programs.
Partnerships with the private sector are enabled through student internships at
Native Corporations and competitive grants to assist small Alaskan businesses
apply for large federal and state funding. The Alaska ACE project will build
human capacity for STEM research and education as well as the infrastructure for
sustained engagement of rural campuses, local communities, resource managers,
and policy makers in socially relevant science.