* 1208412
* NRI-Small: Collaborative Research: A Design Methodology for Multi-fingered Robotic Hands with Second-order Kinematic Constraints
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,05/31/2017
* John McCarthy, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 05/31/2017
* USD 399,997.00

This project, developing a systematic methodology for the design of multi-
fingered robotic hands and grasping devices for a desired kinematic task,
represents a novel formalization of the kinematic synthesis of articulated
systems as a tree structure. The kinematic task is to be defined as positions
and higher motion derivatives of the fingers, with accelerations related to the
contact geometry at the fingertips for grasping actions. This research team aims
to develop multi-fingered grasping devices for human-robot and anthropomorphic
tasks, however the method will be a general tool for the design of any kind of
multiple-finger grasping device. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has a
number of broader impacts affecting both the academic community and society at
large. First, the project will directly result in a design tool for multi-
fingered robotic hands to enable the automatic transformation from task
specifications to design alternatives ? an important development in its own
right. This design tool will increase the ability of industry to design high
performance, cost-effective multi-fingered robotic hands and other end
effectors. This directly impacts manufacturing by speeding the development of
end-of-arm tooling, with secondary benefits to the cost and quality of the final
product. This will assist the U.S. to maintain its leadership and encourage the
creation of high-quality jobs. The proposed curriculum additions resulting from
this project will produce competent engineers for industry with a greater
ability of approaching and solving design problems.