* 1208420
* NRI-Small: Virtualized Welding: A New Paradigm for Intelligent Welding Robots in Unstructured Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* YuMing Zhang, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2018
* USD 800,000.00

This project is to develop a new robotic platform with novel 3D modeling and
visualization algorithms. An existing "dumb" welding robot will be augmented
with sensors to observe the work piece, as well as its surroundings. New
algorithms will be developed to record and reconstruct in 3D the welding
process. The reconstructed data are transmitted to a control room and visualized
with augmented reality techniques: A skilled welder can look at the welding
process from different angles, as if he/she was right next to the actual welding
system. Welding parameters can be adjusted by the human (with intelligence) and
executed by the robot (with precision). More importantly, the adjustment,
together with the reconstructed welding process, will be recorded and analyzed.
System modeling techniques will be developed to correlate the human adjustment
with the 3D reconstruction of the welding process. In this way, a welding robot
can "learn by examples" the knowledge and experiences of a human welder and make
similar intelligent adjustments by itself in the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary use for this new technology is in
manufacturing. Successful completion of the proposed project paves the
foundation for intelligent welding robots with closed-loop intelligent control.
Such a robotic system can perform high-speed and high-precision welding while
allowing more variations in the work pieces and environments. In addition,
virtualized welding can be integrated with a mobile platform to allow welding in
places that are hazardous or unsuitable for human welders. The proposed welding
extension platform will significantly expand the use of welding robots as well
as reduce manufacturing costs. Under-represented students will be recruited to
participate in the research through exiting institutional programs. Additional
funding and industrial collaboration to transfer technology from research labs
to industry will also be pursued.