* 1208369
* HRRBAA:   Development of New Early Miocene Sites in Northern Uganda
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2014
* John Kingston, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2014
* USD 16,640.00

The goal of this research is to search for new fossil localities in eastern
Uganda to understand the evolutionary processes associated with the origin of
hominoids, the group of primates that includes apes and humans. The few known
fossil sites in this area have yielded ancient animal and plant communities that
include fossils of the oldest known apes. One of these apes,"Morotopithecus,"
shows evidence of using an upright trunk, the earliest known precursor of
bipedalism in humans. Fossil data relevant to human origins is rare and evidence
of such evolutionary specializations in apes provides critical insights into our
evolution in Africa. Eastern Uganda represents one of the few known areas in the
world where evidence has been found and further discoveries are
essential.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Although the general locations of known fossil
sites were established over 50 years ago, there have been no systematic attempts
to explore this area for fossil localities. This has been due to the remote
nature of this region, rugged terrain, large areas to reconnoiter (over 500
km2), heavy vegetation during all but the two-month dry season, limited geologic
maps, and political instability related to armed livestock raiding. A recent
national disarmament campaign has led to improved safety as well as the
establishment of new settlements and access roads. Using newly available high-
resolution satellite imagery, an extensive survey will be conducted (during the
critical dry season) for fossiliferous sediments for the first time, possibly
resulting in new sites and new fossils.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The broader
impacts of this project include fostering of the career of women
paleontologists, who are under-represented in field projects, as well as
fostering the careers of African scholars in the form of collaborators and
students. Researchers will disseminate their science widely through timely
publication, teaching, the training of museum staff and public lectures.