* 1208784
* EAGER: Use of ecogenomics and metabolomics to investigate the evolution of pathogenicity
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Laurie Richardson, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 02/28/2015
* USD 299,191.00

Recent research has suggested that many emerging diseases are caused by
opportunistic pathogens derived from populations present in the environment. An
underlying assumption of this hypothesis is that non-pathogenic microbes harbor
the genetic potential to become pathogenic if the opportunity arises. This
project will address this question by comparing, using metabolomics and
metagenetics, two cyanobacterial-dominated microbial mat communities, one that
is a pathogenic biofilm and one that is based on autotrophy in an extreme
environment. Microbial communities in extreme environments are considered to be
primitive in an evolutionary context and have been studied intensively as
analogues to early life on Earth. Microbial mats in a hot spring contain the
same major microorganisms to the genus level as the pathogenic microbial
consortium known as black band disease (BBD) of corals. Furthermore, the overall
physicochemical structure and major physiological organization of the two
systems are identical. Despite the identical taxonomic/physiological structure
of the two populations, they are very different in terms of trophic structure.
The hot-spring mats are photoautotrophic with two energy sources: light, which
powers cyanobacterial photosynthesis, and sulfide dissolved in the geothermal
source waters, which powers sulfur chemolithotrophy. The BBD mats, which also
contain photosynthesizing cyanobacteria, are fueled by organic carbon (the coral
host tissue) as well as sulfide produced by sulfate-reducing BBD bacteria that,
in turn, grow on coral-derived organic carbon. This project will use an
evolutionary context and comparative approach to construct metabolic networks
for both systems based on complementary metabolomics and metagenetics, a
comparison of the genetic potential (genomics data) with targeted metabolites
(metabolomics data) and an assessment of differences in metabolites between the
ancient photoautotrophic based community and the modern pathogenic community.
The health of coral reefs is now of global concern. This study will enhance
existing knowledge by investigating the underlying potential for natural
microbial communities to evolve pathogenicity. Research will include training of
minority and female undergraduate and graduate students who will assist in the
proposed research. All participating institutions are active in the recruitment
and training of underrepresented groups. Florida International University is a
doctoral-degree granting minority institution that is ranked first in the US
among four year colleges for awarding bachelor's and master's degrees to
Hispanic students, and first in awarding degrees to underrepresented minorities
in STEM disciplines. The results of this study will be presented at national and
international meetings, including the biannual scientific meetings of the
Association of Marine Laboratories of the Caribbean (AMLC). The AMLC has
science/education representatives and members from over 30 Caribbean/Latin
American countries.