* 1208218
* CRCNS: Collaborative Research: The Role of Dendritic Processing in Persistent Neural Activity
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Mark Goldman, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2016
* USD 394,988.00

Memories on the time scale of seconds to tens of seconds are stored as patterns
of neural activity that persist long after the offset of a stimulus. This
persistent neural activity is believed to be critical for processing new
information and forming cognitive perceptions. Recent studies suggest that
purely circuit-based mechanisms are insufficient to explain the robustness of
persistent activity to biological noise and perturbation. This proposal will
test the hypothesis that persistent activity is maintained by a hybrid
cellular/circuit mechanism in which circuit level feedback mediates the
activation of memory processes in a neuron's dendrites known as plateau
potentials. To quantitatively understand how active dendritic properties
contribute to persistent activity, a new modeling framework will be developed to
directly and simultaneously fit a memory network to data from a diverse set of
experiments characterizing intrinsic excitability, anatomical connectivity,
neural coding, and response to perturbations. These models will be used to
predict the patterns of dendritic activity that can be seen with fluorescence
calcium imaging. To test these predictions, the zebrafish preparation will be
used to directly measure dendritic activity during eye movement behavior from
cells storing a memory of desired eye position. Two-photon imaging of calcium
indicators will be used to measure spatiotemporal patterns of activity in the
dendritic neuropil, and separately in individual dendritic branchlets, to
determine the presence of plateau potentials. Together, these computational and
experimental results will help determine how cellular and circuit properties
work in concert to generate one of the most important brain dynamics, persistent
neural activity.