* 1208974
* Dissertation Research: Climatic warming shapes the structure of function of natural communities: an experimental test with ants
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2013
* Katharine Stuble, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2013
* USD 12,881.00

Climatic warming is shifting where species occur, disrupting interactions among
them, and altering how ecosystems work. In collaboration with scientists from
Vermont, Massachusetts, and North Carolina, the proposed research uses an
experimental temperature manipulation at field sites in North Carolina and
Massachusetts to examine the impact of temperature on ant communities and their
influence on the rest of the ecosystem. Many plants in eastern forests rely on
ants to disperse their seeds, but it is unknown how changes in climate might
affect how, or whether, ants disperse seeds. In some cases, warmer temperatures
might increase seed dispersal by ants, but in others, it might totally shut down
seed dispersal because some important ant species go locally extinct and are
replaced by species that do not disperse seeds. This study will examine the
potential for warming to indirectly affect plant community composition through
changes in seed dispersal mutualisms. Additionally, this research will seek to
determine traits indicative of species that respond strongly to climate change.
Results of this research will provide a better understanding of the often
complex and idiosyncratic responses of biodiversity to
warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is little doubt that changes in temperature
are causing species to move outside of their historic ranges and are affecting
interactions among species. Understanding the mechanisms driving these shifts,
and predicting the consequences, will enhance our ability to plan for and
mitigate the effects of warming on ecosystems. This project will educate and
prepare students for future careers in science by involving undergraduate
researchers from diverse backgrounds and geographic regions on all aspects of
conducting environmental research. The warming project also has a strong public
outreach component, which is key to informing the general public on this
important issue.