* 1208002
* NEESR: Collaborative Developments for Seismic Rehabilitation of Vulnerable Braced Frames
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Charles Roeder, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 04/30/2016
* USD 1,032,350.00

Steel concentrically braced frames (CBFs) are stiff and strong, making them
efficient seismic load resisting systems. Modern CBF seismic design was
initiated with significant code changes in 1988 and is differentiated from older
CBFs (classified as non-seismic CBFs or NCBFs) because NCBFs were designed
without consideration of the brace behavior or capacity-design principles. In
regions of high seismicity, thousands of NCBFs remain in service. In regions of
low and moderate seismicity, these systems are still being constructed. A
cursory review of the NCBF inventory indicates that braces and connections vary,
and there is a large potential for unwanted and brittle response modes. Research
into these systems is largely absent from the literature. Taken together, these
systems are both widespread and unpredictable, making this category of lateral
force resisting system a critical seismic hazard. This research project will
advance evaluation and rehabilitation of NCBFs. Large-scale experimentation will
be conducted using the George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering
Simulation (NEES) facility at the University of California, Berkeley, to
simulate existing and rehabilitated multi-story NCBFs. The experimental results
will provide high-resolution data to support nonlinear simulation of NCBFs. The
integration of the experiments and simulations will provide key information
about the system performance, identify vulnerabilities, and inform the retrofit
requirements. The identified deficiencies will be addressed through retrofit
schemes based on innovative rehabilitation strategies investigated in prior NSF-
supported NEES research projects, whose data is available through the NEES
Project Warehouse/data repository (http://www.nees.org). Retrofit categories
slated for study include use of innovative braces and bracing systems, column
uplift and rocking, and connection designs balanced with the replaced and
existing components. These strategies will be integrated with the existing
frames in the second phase of the large-scale, integrated multi-story testing,
with the design informed from nonlinear analytical simulation and archived NEES
Project Warehouse data. The final phase of the experimentation will study a full
building using advanced hybrid simulation. In older construction, the seismic
response may depend more heavily on the gravity frames. This culminating
experiment will study a partially retrofitted NCBF building which may be an
economical option to meet a collapse prevention performance objective in many
cases; the non-retrofitted NCBFs are simulated in the computer and the
retrofitted NCBFs and gravity frames are simulated experimentally. The research
will result in unique data to support the evaluation and retrofit of these
seismically vulnerable systems. This award is a collaboration among researchers
from the University of Washington, University of California, Berkeley, National
Taiwan University, and the American Institute of Steel Construction. Data from
this project will be archived and made available to the public through the NEES
Project Warehouse/data repository.

As a whole, the research results will transform the understanding of and
facilitate rehabilitation strategies for NCBFs. The results will provide
important findings to validate and advance engineering approaches for NCBF
evaluation and rehabilitation. Specific tools that will be developed using the
research data include acceptance criteria, backbone curves, and collapse margin
ratios for both NCBFs and retrofitted NCBFs. The project will also advance
student learning and exposure through the research process. High school students
from underrepresented groups will be selected for summer research internships to
aid in the experimental research in collaboration with the Seattle Mathematics,
Engineering and Science Achievement program. The research results will also be
integrated into the senior level curriculum, using a senior-level cross-class
project on seismic evaluation and retrofit of a NCBF building as the central
learning tool. Analysis of the building will be conducted in the senior-level
structural analysis class. Analysis of the individual components will be the
focus of the project in the structural steel design class. The retrofitted
system will be designed in the capstone design class, taught in the spring of
the students' senior year. Technology transfer will be achieved through webinars
and a diverse industry coalition who will help disseminate results. This award
is part of the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP).