* 1208315
* Rare and Weak Signals in Big Data: How to Find Them and How to Use Them
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Jiashun Jin, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2017
* USD 119,999.00

A research effort is proposed to create new tools for high dimensional data
analysis, focusing on the very challenging regime where signals are both rare
and weak. In particular, the proposer proposes to: (a). Develop graphlet
screening as a new tool for high dimensional variable selection, introduce a new
theoretic framework for assessing the optimality of variable selection, and show
that graphlet screening achieves the optimal rate of convergence in terms of
Hamming distance of the selection errors. (b). Develop a new method of spectral
clustering by using the recent idea of Higher Criticism thresholding, and
investigates the fundamental limits for several problems related to low-rank
matrix recovery, including high dimensional clustering, sparse Principle
Component Analysis, and a testing problem related to the underlying large-size
covariance matrix. (c) Extend and apply the proposed methods and theory to the
analysis of Big data generated in various scientific fields, including genomics
and machine learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are often said that we are
entering the era of 'Big Data', where massive datasets consisting of millions of
observations are mined for associations and patterns. What is never said about
this pervasive trend is that, unfortunately, the signal we are looking for is
usually very rare and weak and is hard to find, and it is easy to be fooled. The
project introduces new ideas, new tools, and novel theory that are appropriate
for rare and weak signals in Big Data, and apply the theory and methods to
various scientific fields, including genomics and machine learning.