* 1208174
* CRCNS:   Data Sharing: Open Web Atlas for High-Resolution 3D Mouse Brain Data
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Louise Abbott, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2015
* USD 206,868.00

This Project will support the web-based data sharing of high-resolution, high-
quality, whole mouse brain data obtained from an innovative 3D microscopy
technology called Knife-Edge Scanning Microscopy (KESM). Furthermore, the data
from KESM will be linked to other existing, complementary data sets such as the
Allen Brain Atlas containing extensive gene expression data, effectively
multiplying the utility of the resource for neuroscientists studying the brain
by relating structural data (microstructure) to functional data (gene
expression).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of this project is to devise
a web-based data dissemination framework to link and to deliver massive amounts
of mouse brain data (up to 2 terabytes per brain) to the neuroscience research
community in an easily accessible form. To this end, the research team will
design and develop a light-weight, web-based 3D visualization and annotation
framework so that the KESM data can be viewed, annotated, and analyzed at
multiple resolutions (imagine Google Maps in full 3D). The project is expected
to result in a unique resource that provides an unprecedented look into the
wiring of the entire mouse brain in the context of large-scale gene expression
data. Such a resource can help scientists begin to unravel the intricate
functions of the brain, and in the long term enable the construction of
intelligent artifacts based on such an understanding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will involve graduate and undergraduate researchers, and a simplified
version of the resource will be created to kindle interest and fascination for
brain science in K12 students and in the general public. The framework developed
in this project is expected to have broader application in geology, meteorology,
and even in astronomy where huge amounts of 3D data are gathered routinely yet
the access limited due to the massiveness and 3D nature of the data. All data
and software resulting from this project will be released in the public domain,
available in full at http://kesm.org.