* 1208131
* US-German Collaboration:   Somatic Na Channels and Spike Precision
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2012,02/28/2017
* Bina Ramamurthy, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 02/28/2017
* USD 438,151.00

Nerve cells in the brain send messages to each other using fast electrical
pulses that are referred to as action potentials. A signal response is initiated
in a nerve cell axon, and the resulting action potential travels forward along
the axon which acts like a cable going to other nerve cells. In most brain
cells, the action potential also travels backwards up the axon and into the
nerve cell body and its dendrite projections. There are, however, three types of
nerve cells in the auditory system, where, for unknown reasons, the action
potential does not travel backwards. These auditory nerve cells encode
information about sounds through the unusually precise timing of their action
potentials. This project will investigate whether the lack of backward action
potentials in these cells explains their notable ability to precisely time their
forward action potentials. To investigate this distinct neurobiological problem,
two laboratories, one in the US and another in Germany, have set up a
collaboration. An existing computerized, real-time interface will be used to
simulate backward action potentials in auditory cells that normally do not
produce backward action potentials in response to sound. The results of this
analysis will be used to determine whether sodium conductance disrupts the
precise timing of the forward action potentials that are normally exhibited by
these cells. The experimental data will be tested against a fully computational
model of nerve cells to gain insight into the relationship between normal action
potential initiation and the precise timing of action potentials, as well as to
understand the enhanced capabilities of these three unusual cell types. The
software for the computer interface that will be developed in this project will
be made freely available online to other researchers. The project will provide
significant training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students in
laboratories with differing, but complimentary, areas of expertise. Development
of the computer interface will involve computer science undergraduates taking a
course in Real-time and Embedded Operating Systems. (A companion project is
being funded by the German Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF).