* 1208153
* NRI-Small: Collaborative Research: Assistive Robotics for Grasping and Manipulation using Novel Brain Computer Interfaces
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Peter Allen, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 09/30/2018
* USD 800,498.00

This is a collaborative proposal (with UC Davis) which is aimed at making
concrete some of the major goals of Assistive Robotics. A team of experts has
been brought together from the fields of signal processing and control, robotic
grasping, and rehabilitative medicine to create a field-deployable assistive
robotic system that will allow severely disabled patients to control a robot
arm/hand system to perform complex grasping and manipulation tasks using novel
Brain Muscle Computer Interfaces (BMCI). Further, the intent of this effort is
not just technology-driven, but is also driven by clear and necessary clinical
needs, and will be evaluated on how well it meets these clinical requirements.
Validation will be performed at the Department of Regenerative and
Rehabilitation Medicine at Columbia University on a diverse set of disabled
users who will provide important feedback on the technology being developed, and
this feedback will be used to iterate on the system design and
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit
of this proposal includes:&lt;br/&gt;o Novel research in Human Machine
Interfaces that has the potential to be transformative in eliciting rich, multi-
degree-of-freedom signal content from simple and non-invasive surface
electromyographic (sEMG) sensors.&lt;br/&gt;o Development of smart adaptive
software that employs machine learning algorithms that can continually monitor
user performance, and then automatically calibrate and tune system parameters
based on system performance.&lt;br/&gt;o Data driven methods for real-time grasp
planning algorithms that can be used with both known and unknown
objects.&lt;br/&gt;o Methods for finding pose-robust grasps that are tolerant of
errors in sensing.&lt;br/&gt;o Evaluation of an underactuated hand as a grasping
device for certain application tasks.&lt;br/&gt;o Integration of 3D vision with
real-time grasp planning.&lt;br/&gt;o Scientific evaluation at the clinical
level of the impact of these new technologies on the disabled
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader impacts of this
proposal include:&lt;br/&gt;o Development of a complete system to aid the
severely disabled population with tetraplegia.&lt;br/&gt;o Extensions of this
technlogy to others lacking motor control function including multiple sclerosis,
stroke, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS or Lou Gehrig disease), cerebral
palsy, and muscular dystrophy.&lt;br/&gt;o New technology that can extend the
reach and impact of the field of Assistive Robotics.&lt;br/&gt;o Major
extensions to the open-source GraspIt! software system that will allow many
other researchers to leverage the results of this project.&lt;br/&gt;o
Educational thrusts that will bring together engineering students, clinicians
and the disabled population to extend the reach and scope of Assistive
Robotics.&lt;br/&gt;o New directions in Human Machine Interfaces that can extend
beyond the disabled population and into a variety of other applications.