* 1208891
* A Lyman-alpha View of the Late Stage of Reionization
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Zheng Zheng, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 08/31/2016
* USD 497,855.00

A short time after the Big Bang, the Cosmic Dawn emerged and featured the
formation of the first stars, black holes, and galaxies. Neutral hydrogen gas
dominated the Universe during this epoch. As the life cycle of the first stars
ended and the first black holes formed, the intergalactic medium (IGM) was
heated, and the neutral hydrogen was ionized during the Epoch of Reionization.
The cosmic reionization of hydrogen remains one of the poorly understood and
constrained frontiers of modern cosmology. Current constraints of reionization
from observations of cosmic microwave background and high-redshift quasars point
to a rapid change of the ionization state of the universe from a redshift of z
between 6 and 10. The crucial stage of reionization in between and the formation
of first galaxies are closely linked to each other. Observations of galaxies
beyond a redshift of z around 6, one of the main science goals of many space-
based and ground-based facilities and surveys, can provide critical data for
learning about cosmic reionization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will carry
out a comprehensive theoretical investigation of using Ly-alpha emitting
galaxies (LAEs), efficiently detectable beyond a redshift z around 6, to
constrain the late stage of reionization. Because Ly-alpha photons emitted from
these galaxies interact with the circumgalactic and intergalactic media, Ly-
alpha emission is a sensitive probe of the reionization state. The investigators
will combine a state-of-the-art cosmological reionization simulation with an
efficient Monte Carlo Ly-alpha radiative transfer code to obtain detailed and
realistic L-alpha emission properties of LAEs in a large survey-like volume. The
primary science goals include (1) studying and designing a variety of statistics
to address how to use different aspects of observed LAEs to probe reionization;
(2) implementing several prescriptions of galactic winds to address one of the
major uncertainties in the visibility of LAEs during reionization; (3) making
specific predictions and forming mock LAE observations to help developing
observational strategies and guiding observational efforts. Advancing the
understanding of early structure formation, the comprehensive Ly-alpha radiative
transfer modeling of star-forming galaxies in a cosmological volume across the
reionization epoch will provide a solid theoretical basis to interpret
observations and to constrain reionization and will provide support to current
and future space- and ground-based facilities and surveys. The data generated
from this study will be made available to the scientific community through a
designated web page for a variety of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educationally, undergraduate students will be
actively involved in projects that support the research program. The principal
investigator will help establish a collaboration in education and outreach
between the Museum of Natural History of Utah and the Observatory of the
University of Utah. He will enrich the astronomy component in the "Scientist in
the Spotlight" program at the Museum, and he will also interact with the general
public at weekly star parties on campus.