* 1208339
* Dynamical, computational and statistical aspects of stochastic processes on networks
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Allan Sly, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2015
* USD 179,649.00

The main theme of this proposal is the development of new theory and
applications in the study of Markov random fields (MRFs) and other stochastic
processes on networks. One aspect involves studying dynamical processes on such
systems, particularly the Glauber dynamics Markov chain. It will consider the
question of universality of the cutoff phenomena at high temperatures as well
pursuing a better understanding of the dynamics in the low temperature regime. A
second theme is the development of new tools for estimating the partition
function of MRFs on locally tree-like graphs and inferring their local
distributions. Understanding these distributions will enhance the understanding
of links between phase transitions and transitions in the computational
complexity of combinatorial counting, sampling and randomized optimization
problems. The final topic of the proposal is to apply probabilistic theory and
results for MRFs to widely used statistical estimators from phylogenetic
reconstruction in computational biology and to develop new methods for detection
of communities within social and other networks.

Markov random fields (MRFs) are models of random processes on networks which
play a major role in a wide range of areas including mathematical physics,
machine learning and statistics, theoretical computer science and computational
evolutionary biology. This proposal seeks to develop new theory for MRFs to
better understand models, algorithms and estimators and other probabilistic
techniques in these areas. It considers the problem of how much data is needed
for standard statistical procedures, such as maximum likelihood estimation, to
recover the underlying evolutionary tree for a collection of species. The
proposal addresses questions from computer science about when combinatorial
counting problems, such as counting the number of independent sets in a graph,
become computationally intractable and how is it related to the transitions of
MRFs on trees. It also studies questions of how long it takes random processes
on networks, such as the Glauber dynamics Markov chain, to reach their
equilibrium distribution and how does this depend on the local interactions of
the model. Each of these questions is related to probabilistic properties of
MRFs and their transitions between different phases. The proposal focuses on
development of mathematical theory with a view to better understanding these
problems.