* 1208806
* Collaborative Research: Sonic Logging the NEEM Corehole, Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Erin C Pettit, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 02/28/2014
* USD 58,414.00

Past deep ice cores recovered from the Greenland Ice Sheet have failed to obtain
intact Eemian ice, ice from the last interglacial period. The recent NEEM effort
has successfully recovered ~150 m of such ice. The proposed continuous sonic
monitoring of the ice fabric will resolve small scale variability that is missed
by the traditional techniques used in thin section analyses of ice cores, which
tend to under-sample the core. The scales to be recovered with the sonic
sampling are more comparable to those that can be observed with new gas-sampling
technologies. The proposed work would add to the physical data set required to
fully interpret data being recovered from the NEEM ice core, such as the gas
content analyses used to infer past atmospheric conditions. The presence of a
special USGS winch this summer, a winch required for the operation of University
of Washington instrument proposed for deployment, and the planned abandonment of
the NEEM field camp after the summer of 2012, make this proposal appropriate for
a RAPID award. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will provide international experience for a graduate student and support
for a female scientist during the formative years of her career. It will
contribute to international collaborations with Scandinavia.