* 1208273
* Application of Statistics in Assessing Nanoreliability
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Nader Ebrahimi, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2016
* USD 130,000.00

Modern programs for improving reliability of existing nanocomponents and
nanosystems, and for assuring continued high reliability for the next generation
of these systems, require stochastic modeling and statistical methods for
predicting and assessing various aspects of the reliability. Recent work, by
using on/off type models that capture interactions between atoms of a
nanocomponent, arrived at an integrated probabilistic model, which was used to
assess reliabilities for two nanocomponent structure functions. Also, by using
the notion of copula, a model that captures interactions between atoms was
developed and used to assess the reliability function of a nanocomponent having
the series structure. A goal of this proposal is to extend and refine both
models by accounting for the more complex dependencies among atoms and assess
nanocomponents reliability/reliability function with different structure
functions based on those models. The proposed modeling framework will advance
understanding of nanocomponents failure in different environments and will lead
to novel approaches to assessing nanocomponents reliability/reliability
function. Another direction of proposed research aims to assess nanosystems
reliability/reliability function. Motivated by palladium nanowire nanonetwork-
based hydrogen sensors, the original aim was to assess the reliability of a
nanonetwork. Here, the nanonetwork plays a role of a nanosystem which is
composed of ultra palladiuim nanowires where each nanowire is a nanocomponent of
the nanonetwork/nanosystem. The nanonetwork topology was assumed to be a square
lattice and the reliability, which differs from the traditional definition, is
defined as the probability that a nanosystem percolates for a certain number of
cycles of hydrogen exposure without failure. The investigator proposes to extend
and refine previous work by accounting for interactions that might exist between
nanocomponents as well as considering different topologies for a nanosystem.
These advances will not only provide methods to assess reliability for specific
nanosystem/nanonetwork topologies, but also will bring about new perspectives to
nanosystem's reliability evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoproducts have
great potential in many industrial applications that involve electronics,
sensors, solar cells, super-strong materials, coatings, drug delivery and
medicine. In today's market, the number of consumer products with nano-sized
components and systems is growing exponentially. Similar to nanotechnology's
success in consumer products and other sectors, nanoproducts have the potential
also to improve the environment by direct applications to detect, prevent and
remove pollutants as well as indirectly by using nanotechnology to design
cleaner industrial processes and create environmentally responsible products.
Due to the fact that nanoproducts account for a high proportion of costs,
knowing the reliability of such products is necessary to guarantee the
advancement of nanotechnology. This project represents a multi-disciplinary
effort that develops stochastic models and statistical tools for assessing
nanoproducts reliability. This, in turn, will lead to a better understanding of
design optimization against reliability which is always crucial in technology
and will be even more so in complex nanotechnologies.