* 1208126
* CRCNS:   Computational Characterization of C. Elegans Nociceptive Behavior as a Quantitative Model for Pain Transduction
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Ilya Nemenman, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 08/31/2016
* USD 650,000.00

It is well established that appropriate responses to pain are essential for the
survival of all animals, but there are inherent difficulties in carrying out
studies aimed at understanding the biology of pain. Pain research in humans is
practically difficult, inherently subjective, and ethically constrained. Pain
research in non-human animals is problematic because animals cannot rank and
communicate their pain consciously and thus, especially when using invertebrate
models, one must infer the pain level from high precision experiments that
characterize animal behavior. Such analyses are typically qualitative and not
necessarily reflective of the complex and multidimensional nature of pain
behavioral responses. This project will solve the multidimensional data analysis
and behavioral modeling problem using modern information-theoretic tools. The
roundworm, C. elegans, will serve as the model organism for pain studies since
it is genetically tractable and offers opportunities for high-throughput,
quantitative, behavioral characterization. Worm behavioral data will be
collected in response to nociceptive stimuli using a custom tracking microscope.
Data will be fitted to a computational model that will allow reconstruction of
the applied pain level as predicted from the behavioral output. The model will
filter out confounding effects of the worm's physiological state. The project
will explore reliability and robustness of the pain response, and it will
identify neuronal mediators of the response. This will be the first
comprehensive characterization of stimulus induced whole-organism behavior in
eukaryotic organisms and will build on pioneering work carried out on bacterial
chemotaxis. The project is expected to impact biomedical research by enabling
objective characterization of pain transduction in animal models. It will impact
the scientific community by promoting research and education on quantitative,
computational characterization of sensory induced behaviors using topical
workshops. It will further impact STEM training in high schools and colleges by
developing new classes, modules, and curricula related to quantitative studies
of behavior, and, more generally, to quantitative biology.