* 1208896
* Geostatistical Modeling of Spatial Discrete Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Victor DeOliveira, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2016
* USD 149,991.00

Statistical methods for the analysis of spatial discrete data are relatively
underdeveloped when compared to methods for continuous data. This is a notable
methodological gap since the former are routinely collected in the earth and
social sciences. For instance, death counts due to different causes are
collected on a regular basis by government agencies throughout the entire U.S.
and classified according to different demographic variables, such as age, gender
and race. This project aims at filling this gap by developing a comprehensive
study of models for geostatistical discrete data. The project consists of three
parts. First, a class of hierarchical spatial models is developed that seeks to
ameliorate some limitations identified by the investigator of currently used
models. Some of these limitations, relating to the spatial association
structures representable by these models, are especially severe when the data
consist mostly of small counts, precisely the case when models describing the
discreteness of the data are most needed. The properties of these new models and
likelihood based methods to fit them are studied. Second, a class of non-
hierarchical spatial models is developed that seeks to represent a wide range of
spatial discrete data, not just counts, having spatial association structures
that are complementary to those in the class of hierarchical spatial models. The
models in this class are constructed by separately modeling the marginal and
spatial association structures, using an approach akin to copulas. The
properties of these models and likelihood based methods to fit them are also
studied. Third, a recently proposed Bayesian method to assess goodness-of-fit of
statistical models is studied and its soundness for use in the aforementioned
classes of models explored. The method, based on a distributional identity
between pivotal quantities evaluated at different parameter values, is
applicable to both hierarchical and non-hierarchical models. Developing such
methods is a pressing need since formal methods to assess model adequacy of
spatial models are notoriously lacking.

Spatial data are nowadays routinely collected in many earth and social sciences,
such as ecology, epidemiology, demography and geography, but methodology for the
analysis of discrete data (say death counts) is much less developed than the
corresponding methodology for the analysis of continuous data (say temperature).
The investigator proposes to fill this gap by constructing new classes of models
that on the one hand ameliorate some limitations identified by the investigator
of currently used models, and on the other hand increase the data patterns
represented by the models. The project will also develop methodology to assess
model adequacy for the newly proposed models, a ubiquitous task in science since
any model is an imperfect representation of the phenomenon under study. The
statistical methodology developed in the course of this project would have
immediate methodological and practical impacts on the earth and social sciences,
where spatial discrete data are routinely collected but models and methods for
their analysis are scarce. The proposed classes of models will substantially
increase the arsenal of tools available to spatial data analysts and the
possibility of representing a wide range of behaviors for spatial discrete data.
Graduate students will be engaged in the project which will contribute to their
statistical training in Bayesian methods and Spatial Statistics, as well as the
projection into the future of the Ph.D. program in Applied Statistics at the
University of Texas at San Antonio.