* 1208934
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Modeling, Simulation, and Design for Performance and Reliability in Carbon-based Electronics
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Kartik Mohanram, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 08/31/2014
* USD 238,672.00

Carbon-based nano-materials such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and, more recently,
graphene layers and graphene nanoribbons (GNRs), have attracted strong interest
as alternative device technologies for future nanoelectronics applications. This
collaborative research project will potentially result in transformative
advances required to harness the early science of these nano-materials into
practical design technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, PIs will
develop a multi-scale simulation framework that integrates quantum simulations
with compact model development for CNT and GNR field-effect transistors (CNTFETs
and GNRFETs). They will develop ambipolar logic circuits and ultra-steep sub-
threshold logic circuits as two promising candidate solutions with applications
to both CNTFETs and GNRFETs. PIs will identify, model, and explore the effect of
different variability and defect mechanisms in these devices to provide
expedient means to systematically understand and predict their effects on the
performance and reliability of practical carbon-based
circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results will be disseminated through an
integrated testbed for research and education in beyond-silicon computing, with
an emphasis on carbon-based electronics. Through collaborations with a broad
range of academic investigators as well as government and industry affiliates,
this collaborative effort will strengthen ties between the device and CAD
communities, help create links among them, and accelerate convergence to key
design parameters essential for large scale integration of carbon-based
electronics. Additionally, the development of learning modules, inter-
disciplinary courses, and outreach efforts such as the Design Automation Summer
School will bring the architectures, design tools and methodologies -- alongside
fabrication and basic physics -- that will most likely define the first
generation of nano-computing systems into the mainstream academic curriculum.