* 1208748
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Early Human Settlement of the High-Altitude Pucuncho Basin, Southern Peruvian Andes
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Daniel Sandweiss, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2013
* USD 18,774.00

Under the direction of Dr. Daniel Sandweiss, Mr. Kurt Rademaker will collect
data for his doctoral dissertation research. His project focuses on determining
the timing of early human occupation in the Andes Mountains. Human settlement of
Earth's high-altitude mountains and plateaus is among the most recent of our
species' bio-geographic expansions. Current anthropological models emphasize the
physiographic and biological challenges inherent to these extreme environments
to explain a lack of pre-11,000 year-old archaeological evidence above 3500 m
elevation in the Andes and on the high Tibetan Plateau. However few
archaeological studies targeting hunter-gatherer sites have been conducted in
these areas.

This interdisciplinary project's primary objectives are to better understand the
timing, environmental setting, and adaptations involved in human settlement of
the high Andes of southern Peru. Rademaker's investigations so far have led to
the discovery of early archaeological sites in the Pucuncho Basin, a wetland
oasis ringed by glaciated volcanoes and situated at ~4500 m (~14,760 ft)
elevation. One of these sites, Cuncaicha rockshelter, has yielded preliminary
radiocarbon dates that indicate an initial settlement of this high-altitude area
between 12,400 and 11,800 years ago. These dates establish Cuncaicha as one of
the oldest known directly-dated archaeological sites in the Andes Mountains and
the highest ice-age site yet discovered anywhere in the world.

The final laboratory phase of this dissertation project, to be funded by NSF,
will significantly strengthen the preliminary chronological data from Cuncaicha
shelter and provide information on the development of local habitats important
to Andean animals and people for successful colonization of high-altitude zones.
Rademaker will obtain additional radiocarbon dates for the Cuncaicha rockshelter
site and the nearby Rio Blanco geologic section. These archaeological and
paleoecologic data will be directly comparable with local glacial geologic
records, and these comparisons will shed light on links between late ice-age
climatic change, the formation of Andean habitats, and early human settlement of
extreme high-altitude environments.

This project will have several broad impacts. By conducting pretreatment of
samples at the University of Arizona accelerator mass spectrometry lab,
Rademaker will receive valuable training in archaeological scientific
methodology. Completion of this dissertation project will yield numerous peer-
reviewed journal publications and ultimately lead to publication of an edited
volume for a more general audience. The project team has given, and will
continue to give, guest lectures at Peruvian and North American universities, in
addition to presenting scientific results at professional meetings at home and
abroad. Since 2005 this project has provided limited temporary economic benefits
to some local inhabitants of the Pucuncho Basin who have assisted in surveys and
excavation and provided related support for the project team. The team has
brought medicine, vitamins, and educational materials for the school children in
Pucuncho's three villages and worked to instill a conservation ethic about
archaeological remains in the region. Continued scientific work in the Pucuncho
area, which will build upon this Ph.D. dissertation project, will undoubtedly
reinforce this ethic and yield additional valuable information on climatic
change, ecology, and human prehistory.