* 1208874
* Quantile regression with random censoring
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Yijian Huang, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2016
* USD 180,000.00

This project aims at developing quantile regression methodology for time-to-
event data with random censoring. As a primary statistical tool to assess
functional covariate effects, quantile regression has been extensively developed
for uncensored data and for data with fixed censoring. However,time-to-event
data are often subject to random censoring where the censoring time is observed
only for censored individuals but not for uncensored ones. Such censoring poses
substantial challenges for the estimation and inference, particularly under the
standard conditional independence censoring mechanism that the censoring time
and survival time are conditionally independent given the covariates. Building
on recent advances, the investigator will pursue three important research
directions. First, the model will be generalized to accommodate time-dependent
covariates, which are common in survival studies. Second, two-stage sampling,
including case-cohort and case-control designs, will be accommodated for
censored quantile regression. These designs may have tremendous cost savings in
large-scale studies. Finally, data-driven transformations of the survival time
will be incorporated in the model for further flexibility. Statistical and
computational methods will be developed for the resulting nonlinear quantile
regression model. The proposed work will significantly advance the existing
censored quantile regression methodology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Time-to-event
data arise in survival studies from a wide range of fields including biomedical
sciences, engineering, economics, sociology, public health, and demography.
Scientific questions of interest are often concerned with how survival time
might be affected by covariates, i.e., predictors; for instance, whether HIV-
infected individuals may survive longer with a new intervention. Standard
survival analysis techniques, as routinely adopted, presume constant effects of
covariates over time. Such a practice has contributed to many scientific
controversies in circumstances where effects of interest may evolve over time.
This research tackles the problem by adopting censored quantile regression,
which accommodates varying effects of covariates in a realistic and robust
fashion. The proposed developments will complement standard survival analysis
techniques and have the potential to substantially influence survival analysis
in practice.