* 1208881
* In Search of Gravitational Waves: Modeling the Inspiral, Merger and Ringdown of Spinning Compact Binaries
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Alessandra Buonanno, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2016
* USD 720,000.00

The projects span several topics in general relativity, gravitational-wave
physics, and data analysis. The principal goals are to: (i) compute spin effects
at higher post-Newtonian order in the gravitational radiation from compact
binaries, and use these results, together with inputs from gravitational self-
force calculations, to improve the effective-one-body formalism; (ii) calibrate
effective-one-body templates of precessing, spinning, compact binaries to
accurate numerical simulations in the comparable and small mass-ratio limits;
(iii) implement these effective-one-body templates in LIGO software; and (iv)
develop detection strategies for spinning, compact binaries and carry out
searches with LIGO data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coalescing compact binaries are
among the most promising sources of gravitational waves for detectors such as
the Laser Interferometer Gravitational wave Observatory (LIGO). Templates for
detecting non-spinning, merging, compact binaries have been built and used in
LIGO searches. The upgrade to the Advanced LIGO configuration has already
started and will be completed in 2014-2015, improving the facility's sensitivity
by a factor of ten with respect to LIGO, thus increasing the event rates for
many astrophysical sources by a factor of one thousand. The research proposed
herein seeks to build on these progresses, develop highly refined templates for
detecting precessing, spinning compact binaries, thereby extracting the unique
physics encoded within the waves that such binaries produce. Thus, the proposed
research would enhance the potential of Advanced LIGO's detectors to make
important discoveries.