* 1208809
* Collaborative research:   Automated and community-driven synthesis of the tree of life
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Paul Manos, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2018
* USD 1,967,292.00

The tree of life links all biodiversity through a shared evolutionary history.
This project will produce the first online, comprehensive first-draft tree of
all 1.8 million named species, accessible to both the public and scientific
communities. Assembly of the tree will incorporate previously published results,
with strong collaborations between computational and empirical biologists to
develop, test and improve methods of data synthesis. This initial tree of life
will not be static; instead, the investigators will develop tools for scientists
to update and revise the tree as new data come in. Early release of the tree and
tools will motivate data sharing and facilitate ongoing synthesis of knowledge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological research of all kinds, including studies of
ecological health, environmental change, and human disease, increasingly depends
on knowing how species are related to each other. Yet there is no single
resource that unites knowledge of the tree of life. Instead, only small parts of
the tree are individually available, generally as printed figures in journal
articles. This project will provide the global community of scientists who study
the tree of life with a means to share and combine their results, and will
enable large-scale studies of Earth's biodiversity. It will also create a
resource where students, educators and citizens can go to explore and learn
about life's evolutionary history.