* 1208027
* CRCNS: Collective Coding in Retinal Circuits
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Frederick Rieke, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 499,999.00

Circuits across the brain display correlated activity, in which the responses
among neurons are coordinated at a level beyond that expected from the stimulus
structure itself. What role does such correlated activity play in neural coding?
The retina provides a strong opportunity for progress: widespread correlated
activity is generated by key circuit mechanisms that recur throughout the brain.
Moreover, the impact of these mechanisms can be studied in the context of
stimuli with clear functional significance. Nevertheless, circuit-level
nonlinearities at multiple locations cause retinal outputs to depend on stimuli
in a manner that defies traditional filter-based models. This demands a tightly
coupled computational and experimental approach: purely computational attacks
will become lost in the combinatorics of all possible circuit configurations at
the difficult "mesoscales" relevant to retinal computation, where averaging
approaches fail; purely experimental strategies cannot predict and prioritize
the most critical circuit mechanisms and stimulus parameters to explore. The
investigators apply this interdisciplinary approach to the mechanisms producing
correlated activity in directionally-selective (DS) ganglion cells. In
particular, they determine how convergent and divergent pathways in the DS cell
circuit interact to shape correlations and encoded information across the cell
population, and asses the possible roles of recurrent coupling in modulating
this process. These circuit features are the basis of correlated activity in
many retinal pathways, and in circuits throughout the brain. Thus, our findings
will guide studies of collective neural computation and dynamics currently under
intense study in a variety of domains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The brain
translates the sensory environment into its own code, that of neural spikes
distributed across vast numbers of neurons. Neuroscience seeks to understand the
nature of this code -- what aspects of the spiking activity carry what
information, how it is implemented by the cellular hardware of the brain, and
how this process can fail in disease. A key puzzle is deciphering what it means
when many neurons spike simultaneously -- is this just inevitable statistical
coincidence, an artifact of neural hardware, or a key symbol in the code? The
investigators take a direct approach to answering this question in the earliest
stage of the visual pathway, the retina. Here, the team rigorously combines
experiment and theory to connect biological circuit mechanisms and coding, and
to identify principles that could be tested in other brain areas. Matching the
interdisciplinary demands of this endeavor, investigators from Applied
Mathematics and Physiology and Biophysics will unite, and will mentor a small
team of undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral researchers with diverse
backgrounds including both mathematics and biology. They will share their
results with peers through an open, user-friendly database, and their most
exciting findings with students in the interdisciplinary courses that they
teach.