* 1208808
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Lauren Aguilar, Aguilar                 Lauren         J
* Fellowship Award
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 07/31/2014
* USD 120,000.00

Why are women underrepresented at all stages in Science, Technology, Engineering
and Math (STEM) professions? The current research investigates the role of
negative stereotypes about women in STEM and how such stereotypes affect
patterns of interaction between women and men in STEM in ways that may exclude
women. Past research demonstrates that women can experience stereotype threat in
STEM--a disruptive concern that one will be seen through the lens of a negative
group stereotype. This threat can undermine women's sense of belonging in STEM,
intellectual performance, health and well-being. Training and work in STEM is
highly social and collaborative, so having the sense that one belongs socially
in STEM is crucial. Social belonging--the quality of one's social relationships
and the perception that others value, respect, and include one--is a basic human
need which, in academic settings, has a tremendous influence on students'
motivation, achievement, and on individuals' health and well-being. Yet evidence
suggests that women are less included than men in social networks in STEM and
experience a weaker sense of belonging in these fields.

Stereotype threat is, in large part, a social-relational concern--a worry about
whether one will be fully included and valued by others in a setting. As such,
even subtle, nonconscious cues embedded in everyday social interactions may
affect women's feelings of exclusion from these fields. Yet little research has
examined how interpersonal interactions affect women's experience in STEM. To
further understand the factors that limit women's representation in STEM, this
research examines dyadic interpersonal interactions. In particular, it
investigates subtle cues embedded in dyadic interactions between women and men
in STEM that signal social inclusion--nonverbal mimicry, an important signal of
rapport and inclusion that creates feelings of social connectedness. The
research tests how mimicry affects women's feelings of belonging in STEM, and
their performance and retention therein. Further, the studies examine
psychological strategies to promote more inclusive interactions between STEM
women and men. First, the studies (1) examine whether nonverbal mimicry from a
male peer can foster a sense of social connectedness among women in STEM and
buffers women against stereotype threat, improving performance and reducing
stress and (2) examine whether men may mimic women less than other men in STEM
and how individual levels of sexism may affect how much men mimic female STEM
peers. Second, the research tests social psychological strategies to promote
more incliusive interactions between men and women in STEM. Finally the research
will extend these studies to the field by analyzing to the role of mimicry-
related processes in a professional STEM context.

Intellectual Merit. The proposed research takes a new approach to studying the
retention of women in STEM by examining how gender stereotypes influence women's
experience in everyday dyadic interactions. It is hypothesized that men may
unknowingly behave in ways that subtly exclude women in STEM. Social exclusion,
even if subtle, may play an important role in whether women in STEM feel
included and valued, how they perform on relevant tasks, and whether they
persist in STEM fields in the face of challenges and difficulties. This project
is intellectually innovative on several levels. First, the studies use cutting
edge interdisciplinary methodology to unobtrusively measure nonconscious,
nonverbal communication patterns, which are revealing and important for social
relational processes. Second, the research uses dyadic methodology that uniquely
allow for testing holistic process models of how stereotypes affect women's and
men's interpersonal communication, which then may affect downstream processes
like sense of belonging, achievement, and persistence in STEM. Third, the
research builds on and expands the psychological theory of stereotype threat to
encompass real-time dyadic social processes. Finally, the research program
translates the work into a real-world strategic model that can be implemented at
the institutional level.

Broader Impacts. Not only does this research have the potential to expand
theoretical approaches to examining diversity both within and beyond STEM, but
the proposed project also translates the science into a strategic intervention
plan for increasing women's representation at all levels of the STEM pipeline.
The work trajectory inherently includes the design, research, and implementation
of a social psychological intervention, which is simple, cost-effective, and
efficient to scale to the institutional level. Ultimately, the aim is to create
a strategic intervention model that can be utilized in schools, universities and
businesses. The strategic intervention is targeted at improving women's everyday
social experience in STEM, an arena that is seemingly beyond the reach of
institutions' influence. Although the strategic intervention will initially be
designed to increase the representation of women in STEM, it will also be
adapted to increase the representation of minorities who also often have a sense
of non-belonging in STEM. The research and corresponding outreach plan has the
capacity to make a powerful positive impact on women and minorities' experience
and persistence in STEM, thereby increasing the diversity and strength of STEM
fields at all levels.