* 1208523
* Collaborative Research:   AVATOL - Next Generation Phenomics for the Tree of Life
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Marymegan Daly, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 08/31/2016
* USD 85,859.00

Darwin's theory of evolution explained that millions of species are related, and
dealt biologists and paleontologists the enormous challenge of discovering the
branching pattern of the Tree of Life. Work on this great challenge is producing
a map of species-relatedness through Earth history, and answering questions such
as "what is the closest relative of a species?" and "what species make important
products?" To do this scientists draw on all heritable features, including
genotypes (e.g., DNA) and phenotypes (e.g., anatomy). Studying phenotypes,
however, has remained complicated and slow, because it has not been
revolutionized by computer science and engineering
innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A team of biologists, computer scientists,
and paleontologists will extend and adapt methods from computer vision, machine
learning, crowd-sourcing and natural language processing to enable rapid and
automated study of phenotypes for the Tree of Life on a vast scale. The three-
year goal is to release large phenomic datasets built using new methods, and to
provide the public and scientific community with tools for future work. Planned
is the training of teachers and students (kindergarten - postdoctoral levels)
and the engagement of "citizen scien-tists." Enormous phenomic datasets, many
with images, will fill an important public interest in biodiversity and the
fossil record.