* 1208639
* NRI-Small: Robot Assistants for Promoting Crawling and Walking in Children at Risk of Cerebral Palsy
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Hlapang Kolobe, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2017
* USD 1,175,000.00

Effective robotic assistance of infants with or at risk of developing Cerebral
Palsy (CP) has the potential to reduce the significant functional limitations as
well as the potential deficits in cognitive development. This project focuses on
the development and testing of a sequence of robotic assistants that promote
early crawling, creeping, and walking, along with a model of infant-robot
interaction that encourages the continued practice of movement patterns that
will ultimately lead to unassisted locomotion. Typically developing infants
initially learn to crawl through the generation of spontaneous limb and trunk
movements. Early in the process, these spontaneous movements transport the
infant across the floor. The rewarding locomotory experience drives the infant
to refine the movements to intentional and exploratory skills. Ultimately, the
infant intentionally engages these skills to solve larger problems, such as
obtaining an interesting toy or exploring the environment. Infants with
conditions such as CP lack the muscle strength, postural control, and motor
coordination necessary for these early exploratory limb and trunk movements to
result in locomotion. Without this positive feedback, the development of the
neural pathways for productive limb use is diminished, which results in delayed
or lack of development of crawling and walking. These limitations in mobility
negatively affect other domains of development such as perception and cognition,
with effects being visible even into adulthood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The robotic
assistants to be developed in this project will aid the infant in developing
locomotory skills by selectively supporting a portion of his/her weight and
providing artificial, rewarding locomotory experiences. The PI's approach to
infant-robot interaction is to first instrument the infant with a set of
sensors, allowing for reconstruction of the trunk and limb positions in real
time. A semi-supervised clustering process will then identify a menu of
canonical spatio-temporal limb and trunk movement patterns given observations of
behavior that is exhibited by children who are either typically developing or at
risk of developing CP. The robot will respond to the recognition of a canonical
movement by assisting in the corresponding postural support and transport of the
child. The PI's hypothesis is that this positive feedback will encourage the
continued practice of the canonical movements, as well as their use in solving
larger problems. The infant-robot interaction model will selectively reward
specific canonical movements as different levels of capabilities are exhibited.
As the child becomes proficient at using a simple movement to trigger robotic
assistance, the robot will reduce (and ultimately eliminate) its response to
that particular canonical movement. Other canonical movements that encode
related, but more complex and/or coordinated limb movements, will continue to be
available. As the limb movements are mastered the vertical support will be
reduced to encourage the infant to bear more of his/her own weight. The
hypothesis is that this early intervention approach will help to guide the child
along a progressive developmental trajectory that will end with locomotory
skills and muscle strength that require little or no assistance. EEG-based
neuroimaging will be used to monitor the progression of the infant's
development. The hypothesis is that the degree of proficiency of certain skills
will be identifiable using the EEG index related to motor output. This
information will be used to guide the semi-supervised clustering process, as
well as the decision process for selectively rewarding certain canonical
movements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Equipping children with CP at
an early age with locomotory skills will not only bring them more in line with
typically developing children, but will also reduce their reliance on long-term
care while increasing their success in self-help, in education, and in the
workplace. The techniques will be applicable to a range of other childhood
disorders (including Down Syndrome), to retraining patients following stroke,
and to the creation of tunable gestural interfaces for intelligent prostheses.