* 1208835
* Collaborative Research: Digitization TCN: Mobilizing New England Vascular Plant Specimen Data to Track Environmental Changes
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,10/31/2017
* David Foster, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 10/31/2017
* USD 1,059,374.00

Herbarium specimens provide a source of historical information useful to the
study of global environmental change. The goal of this project is to provide
data to support studies of the nature and consequences of environmental change
in the New England region over the last three centuries. This project will
digitally capture specimen data and images from about 1.3 million vascular plant
specimens from herbaria across New England, enhancing the data with
georeferencing, habitat, and phonological information. The digitization process
will integrate with existing community efforts and will develop novel high-
throughput digitization technologies to increase efficiency and decrease costs.
All resulting data and images will be freely available on-
line.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data from this project will be of immediate use
to scientists who study climate and land-use change, and will provide a better
understanding of how global changes will impact the distribution of native and
introduced plant species. This project will benefit research in taxonomy,
ecology, morphology, biogeography, and evolutionary history by making available
data on an entire regional flora in an electronic format. The methodologies
developed will provide a model for other regions around the nation. In addition
the project will utilize citizen scientists, school groups, and students
providing training, research, and educational opportunities. . This award is
made as part of the National Resource for Digitization of Biological Collections
through the Advancing Digitization of Biological Collections program and all
data resulting from this award will be available through the national resource
(iDigBio.org).