* 1208388
* NRI-Small: Collaborative Research: Addressing Clutter and Uncertainty for Robotic Manipulation in Human Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Siddhartha Srinivasa, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Satyandra Gupta
* 09/30/2013
* USD 150,456.00

The long-term goal of this project is to develop personal robots that share a
workspace with humans. To achieve the goal of personal robots in homes, the
robots must adapt to the humans' living space, not vice-versa. Unfortunately,
most human living spaces appear cluttered and unstructured to a robot. Much of
this "clutter" is in fact structure, but structure for humans, not robots. The
preliminary work proposed in this revised project addresses preliminary work in
robot manipulation in the presence of clutter and uncertainty. The demonstrator
task is a canonical example of human-robot coexistence: sharing a refrigerator.
The robot must be able to extract specified items from a refrigerator that may
also be accessed and altered by humans. We will develop the beginnings of a
solution based on the following principles: such manipulation tasks can be
solved by a hierarchical two-level planning strategy, consisting of a high-level
metaplanner making use of low-level primitives; the low-level primitives should
include push-grasping, sweeping, and other nonprehensile actions that take
advantage of mechanics to manipulate cluttered environments when simple grasp-
and-carry is impeded; and uncertainty in the state of the environment and its
physical properties should be accounted for at both the metaplanner and
primitive levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Although not all
outreach goals can be completed within the revised scope, cluttered tasks are
critically important for an aging population of about 35 million people (one in
eight) in the United States. Furthermore, graduate students involved in this
project will benefit from an ongoing collaboration with TU Munich, a world
leader in robot control and personal robotics. TUM, CMU, and Northwestern have a
history of graduate student exchange and have agreed to host exchange students
under this project. Undergraduates will participate in the research as REU
students or in other capacities. Several recent undergraduates working in the
labs at CMU and Northwestern have gone on to PhD study in robotics, some with
NSF graduate fellowships. Graduate students on this project will participate in
internships at the Museum of Science and Industry during its upcoming Robot
Revolution exhibit. They will interact with the public and help develop a robot
manipulation demonstration for the exhibit main stage. These students will
provide technical expertise to the exhibit while benefitting from a valuable
outreach experience. Other planned outreach activities include lab tours and
talks at local high schools. Both PIs serve as mentors in research programs for
underrepresented undergraduate students. These students would have an
opportunity to work on state-of-the-art manipulation hardware as part of this
project.