* 1208382
* SoCS: Collaborative Research: Strategies for Crowdsourcing Complex Design Work
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Steven Dow, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2016
* USD 411,800.00

This project investigates how education and training methods from traditional
work settings can be applied to paid online crowdsourcing. The focus is on how
methods such as scaffolding, examples, critique, and apprenticeship affect
worker performance, learning, task perseverance, and satisfaction. The project
will produce guidelines for a more sustainable crowdsourcing infrastructure
where employers can embed relevant domain knowledge into online tasks, and
workers can learn key principles and then train less experienced members. The
research focuses on worker-centered training strategies in the domain of visual
design, which will yield knowledge about effective design principles and
instructional methods for visual design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
The project will contribute to increase the availability of online work. It will
expand the capabilities and skills of crowd workers, thereby allowing online
work to become a more viable part of the American economy. The project will also
lead to novel methods for organizations to achieve complex visual design work.
More generally, the project will lead to new knowledge about how to train crowds
to perform a complex activity and produce practical guidelines to help
requesters write tasks and manage the crowd. Finally, the project will provide
interdisciplinary training for graduate and undergraduate students in socio-
computational system design, HCI concepts, educational theory, and evaluation
methodologies. All course materials will be available online for reuse and
adaptation. Undergraduate researcher training will focus on supporting
underrepresented student groups.