* 1208812
* Materials World Network: Stability of Colossally Supersaturated Structural Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Frank Ernst, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 07/31/2016
* USD 374,998.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY Case Western Reserve University will collaborate with the
University of Birmingham, UK, on novel methods of engineering the surface of
structural alloys, including austenitic stainless steel, Ni-Cr, and Co-Cr
alloys. Both groups have carried out extensive prior work, which revealed that
infusing interstitial solutes - carbon or nitrogen - from the alloy surface at
low temperature effectively suppresses the precipitation of second phases and
enables the formation of an approximately 25 micrometer thick homogeneous,
precipitate-free hard shell ("case") with carbon or nitrogen concentrations that
can exceed the equilibrium solubility limit by about 100,000 times (!). Such
colossal supersaturation with interstitial makes the surface up to 5 times
harder, increases the wear resistance and the fatigue life by about 100 times,
and elevates the corrosion resistance to that of the most corrosion-resistant
alloys. The new project will focus on the hitherto unexplored reliability and
lifetime of these unusual non-equilibrium materials at elevated temperature and
under applied mechanical stress. A second thrust the project is to explore the
possibility actually using controlled thermal post-processing for further
improving the alloy surface properties and durability. Under the high driving
force for precipitation it should be possible to generate an ultrafine
dispersion of second-phase particles, which is expected to further improve
hardness without compromising corrosion resistance.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY The usefulness of austenitic stainless steel and related
structural alloys for a broad variety of technical applications can be
dramatically improved by exposing finished parts of these materials to a process
that infuses carbon or nitrogen atoms into their surface. Such "case hardening"
was already applied to arms in the middle age. However, while improving the
surface hardness, the conventional way in which it was carried out it
compromises other properties, e.g. the resistance against damage from repeated
loading or chemical impact from the environment. Recently, new concepts have
been developed that overcome these limitations. It has been demonstrated that
appropriately conducted surface infusion of carbon or nitrogen at low
temperature actually dramatically improves all alloy properties because by
providing very high concentrations of carbon/nitrogen while suppressing the
precipitation of carbide or nitride particles. However, this leaves the alloy in
a non-equilibrium state, and hardly anything is known to date about the
durability, lifetime, and temperature stability of alloys treated in this way.
Moreover, a great potential seems to exist for transforming the non-equilibrium
state into one providing further improved alloy properties by tempering the
material after the infusion of carbon or nitrogen. Case Western Reserve
University will collaborate with another leading group in this field at the
University of Birmingham, UK, to develop a fundamental scientific understanding
of these highly technologically relevant aspects. This is of great importance
for many applications of surface-engineered structural alloys, e. g. for
bearings, food processing blades, valves, dies, nuclear reactor components,
medical implants, and surgical and dental instruments.

The project is supported by the Metals and Metallic Nanostructures program and
the Office of Special Programs, Division of Materials Research.