* 1208978
* Generalized Semiparametric Regression with Longitudinal Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Yanqing Sun, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2015
* USD 120,000.00

This proposal explores the generalized semiparametric regression model (GSRM)
for longitudinal data. The GSRM model allows the effects of some covariates to
be constant and others to be time-varying. The model is an extension of the
generalized linear model for cross-sectional data. Different link functions can
be selected to provide a rich family of models for longitudinal data. Both
categorical and continuous longitudinal responses can be modeled with
appropriately chosen link functions. Statistical analysis of longitudinal data
often involves modeling treatment effects on clinically relevant longitudinal
biomarkers since an initial event (the time origin). The proposed research
includes two parts with important applications. In the first part, the
investigator proposes to examine the GSRM model when the time origin is observed
for all subjects. In the second part, the exact time origin may be unknown. The
GSRM model provides a big platform for model building and variable selection.
The investigator proposes a sampling adjusted profile local linear estimation
approach. The nonparametric components of the model will be estimated using the
local linear estimating equations and the parametric components are to be
estimated through weighted profile estimating functions. In the situation where
the exact time origin may be unknown, an EM procedure based on the missing data
principle will be investigated. The proposed method will automatically adjust
for heterogeneity of sampling times, allowing the sampling strategy to depend on
the past sampling history as well as possibly time-dependent covariates without
specifically modeling such dependence. Many important issues will be
investigated, including variance estimation, hypothesis testing of covariate
effects, weight function and bandwidth selections, and goodness of fit. The
estimation and hypothesis testing of the link function will also be
investigated. The proposed research will be applied to real examples from AIDS
clinical trials and vaccine efficacy trials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Longitudinal
data are common in medical and public health research. Statistical analysis of
longitudinal data often involves modeling treatment effects on clinically
relevant longitudinal biomarkers since an initial event. The proposed research
investigates a unified approach to the generalized semiparametric regression
model for longitudinal data for both the situations where the time of the
initial event is known and where the exact time of the initial event may be
censored. The proposed research is motivated by real problems in AIDS clinical
trials and HIV vaccine efficacy trials. By pursuing the directions outlined in
the proposal, significant progress could be made in building biologically
interpretable models and in developing statistically efficient methods to deal
with the complexity of longitudinal data. The proposed research will contribute
to efforts to overcome the medical and public health challenges facing the world
today.