* 1208390
* NRI-Small: Contextually Grounded Collaborative Discourse for Mediating Shared Basis in Situated Human Robot Dialogue
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Joyce Chai, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 09/30/2017
* USD 981,000.00

In human robot dialogue, although human partners and robots are co-present in a
shared environment, they have completely mismatched capabilities in perceiving
and reasoning about the environment. Their knowledge and representations of the
shared world are drastically different. In addition, the shared environment is
full of uncertainties and unexpected events. Humans and robots may have
different capabilities in attending and responding to these uncertainties. All
of these contribute to a misaligned perceptual basis between a human and a
robot, which jeopardizes their collaborative activities and task performance. To
enable situated human robot dialogue, a critical component is to develop
techniques that will support mediating the shared perceptual basis for effective
conversation and task completion.

The objective of this National Robotics Initiative project is to develop a novel
framework that tightly integrates high level language and dialogue processing
with low level sensing and control systems and contextually grounds the
collaborative discourse to mediate shared perceptual basis. By capturing
grounded symbolic representations as well as continuous representations of the
internal configuration of a robotic system and continuous information sensed
from the changing environment, the framework allows the robot to promptly modify
its execution without interrupting the on-going tasks. It further enables
collaborations between humans and robots to mediate a shared perceptual basis
and support efficient interaction in a highly dynamic environment.

This project will provide insight as to how the misaligned perceptual basis
between a human and a robot should be mediated through a collaborative process
and how such a process should be integrated to produce intelligent and
collaborative robot behaviors. The expected results will benefit many
applications such as manufacturing, service, assistive technology, and search
and rescue.