* 1208499
* NRI-Small: Cooperative Underwater Robotic Networks for Discovery &amp; Rescue
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Kazem Kazerounian, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2015
* USD 567,719.00

The goal of this project is to develop a cooperative underwater robotic network
for underwater discovery and rescue. With technological advancements, human
involvement in underwater activities has increased. Vulnerable oceanic
engineering systems, however, can have drastically negative environmental and
economic consequences. The oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010 was a case in
point for the impact of underwater infrastructure has on marine ecosystem and
local economy. Compared to manned systems, underwater robots, also called
autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs), have inherent advantages by eliminating
the need of life support systems and potential risk of human life. Further, an
AUV network (with a swam of AUVs) can offer more benefits in efficiency and cost
in underwater exploration, discovery and rescue. In this project, innovative
algorithms, methods and techniques in autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV)
design, cooperative control and underwater acoustic communication networks are
proposed to ensure the AUV network's performance in highly uncertain
environments. Deliverables for this project include key enabling technologies
for the AUV networks and the demonstration of a network including several
prototype AUVs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A high performance, energy efficient and
autonomous AUV network is significant to science, economy and society. It will
have significant impact to underwater infrastructure inspection, wildlife and
habitat monitoring, and search and rescue missions. It can also be leveraged for
oceanography data collection and water pathway monitoring. Beyond the research
significance, this project has important impact on education and outreach by
supporting undergraduates, women and other under-represented groups, as well as
promoting multi-disciplinary collaboration across departments, campuses, and
institutions.