* 1208208
* NEESR: Seismic Performance and Design of Partially-Grouted Reinforced Masonry Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* P. Benson Shing, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 05/31/2016
* USD 1,200,000.00

Reinforced masonry construction constitutes about ten percent of all low-rise
buildings in the United States. Many of them are commercial, industrial, and
school buildings. It is also used for multi-story hotels, college dormitories,
and apartments. While most of the reinforced masonry structures constructed in
the west coast are fully grouted, almost all reinforced masonry construction in
the rest of the country, including regions of high seismic risk, has partial
grouting to make it economically competitive. Walls are the main seismic load
resisting elements in a masonry structure. The seismic performance of partially
grouted reinforced masonry wall systems has not been sufficiently studied and is
not well understood due to the complexity of their behavior, which can be
attributed to the heterogeneity and anisotropy introduced by masonry blocks,
block cavities, mortar joints, and grouted cells. Recent studies have shown that
current seismic design provisions for partially-grouted masonry walls are not
adequate and likely to be unconservative. However, the seismic safety of these
structures also depends on their system-level performance, which is even less
understood. This research will advance understanding of the behavior of
partially-grouted masonry structures at the system, as well as component, level
and develop and validate economically competitive design details and retrofit
methods to make new and existing partially-grouted reinforced masonry structures
better achieve current seismic performance standards. To this end, seventeen
partially-grouted reinforced masonry wall components and subassemblies will be
tested with quasi-static cyclic loading, and two full-scale, one-story buildings
will be tested with earthquake ground motions on a shake table. An analytical
method will be derived to provide more comprehensive assessment of the shear
capacities of these walls than available in current codes. Furthermore, advanced
computational models will be developed and calibrated with the test data to
provide a simulation tool that can be used to better understand the performance
of these structures at the global and local levels, and for use in performance-
based seismic design. This research is a collaborative effort among the
University of California at San Diego, Drexel University, and University of
Minnesota. The experimental work will use the George E. Brown, Jr. Network for
Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) shake table at the University of
California at San Diego, and the hybrid simulation facility at Lehigh
University. Data from this project will be archived and made available to the
public through the NEES Project Warehouse/data repository
(http://www.nees.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reinforced masonry has many
desirable properties as a construction material, such as durability and energy
efficiency. Masonry can also contribute significantly to green and sustainable
construction with the use of recycled aggregate and high quantity of fly ash in
the ingredients. However, the lack of adequate research and well-developed
seismic design provisions as compared to other construction materials has led to
a steady decline in the use of reinforced masonry. The seismic performance of
partially-grouted masonry is of primary importance for many regions in the
United States that are susceptible to low-probability but high-consequence
seismic events. The research will result in economically competitive design
details and retrofit methods to enhance the seismic performance and safety of
these structures. The research will provide unique educational experiences and
training to graduate and undergraduate students at the three participating
universities. The K-12 education component will develop a demonstration module
that relates mathematics and sciences to technologies that enhance the safety of
the built environment. The project will utilize an advisory panel with members
from code development bodies, industry, and professional practice. Research
results and recommendations from this project will be communicated to relevant
seismic design code committees for timely implementation to lead to safer,
earthquake-resilient masonry construction. This award is part of the National
Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP).