* 1208233
* NRI-Small: Robust, highly-mobile MEMS micro-robots based on integration of piezoelectric and polymer materials
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Kenn Oldham, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2014
* USD 195,195.00

The research objective of this award is to integrate polymer and piezoelectric
micro-structures to create robust, sub-centimeter terrestrial micro-robots, and
to use a combination of modeling and experimentation to evaluate leg dynamics of
such robots. Specifically, high-aspect ratio parylene flexural mechanisms will
be integrated with thin-film lead-zirconate-titanate (PZT) actuators in complex,
multi-degree-of-freedom micro-robotic leg joints. Experimental measurements of
parylene structure response to integrated thin-film PZT actuation or external
bulk PZT ceramic or load cell actuation will be used to characterize parylene
stiffness and damping characteristics at varying strain rates, relative to high-
strain rate piezoelectric actuation. Adhesion between bulk-micromachined silicon
trench surfaces and PZT/metal stack layers will also be evaluated. Measured
parylene properties will then be incorporated into existing micro-robotic foot-
terrain models developed by the PI and students to produce simulation models of
PZT-polymer robots that can be validated against experimental robot
prototypes.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of this work would
dramatically improve the ability of walking millimeter-scale micro-robots to
move over uneven terrain, thus increasing the range of possible interactions
between human operators and engineered or natural systems. The target user
community for millimeter-scale autonomous robots includes disaster response
teams, infrastructure maintenance and monitoring workers, and national security
organizations. The framework to be deployed would be a technique to embed
piezoelectric microactuators in resilient micro-robotic appendages, producing
sample walking micro-robot platforms. Results from this research would be
coupled into both undergraduate and graduate curriculum and secondary school
education. The latter effort will consist of interactive hands-on and web-based
projects developed by the PI for use in science education for the local
Ypsilanti, Michigan school district and the broader community of interested
citizens.