* 1208626
* NRI-Small: Measuring Unconstrained Grasp Forces Using Fingernail Imaging
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2012,09/30/2018
* John Hollerbach, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 09/30/2018
* USD 917,999.00

This project develops the technology for unconstrained measurement of human
grasp forces. Measurement of multi-fingered grasp forces typically requires a
human to grasp an object at predefined sensor locations or to wear instrumented
gloves that impede haptic sensations. The objective of this project is to
characterize the ability to estimate three-dimensional grasp forces at the
fingertips by measuring the color change of the fingernail. This fingernail
imaging technique allows the human subject to freely choose where to place the
fingers on the object, allowing for completely unconstrained multi-finger
grasping. A magnetic levitation device is used to apply a range of 3-D forces to
the human fingertip while collecting images of the fingernail. Various image
processing techniques are being explored to register the fingernail images to a
standard template, and various mathematical models relating pixel intensity to
force are being investigated to determine an optimal method. A robotic motion-
tracking technique is being implemented to keep the fingers in view of the
camera as the hand moves during grasping experiments. The fingernail imaging
technique is first validated using constrained grasping experiments, and then
applied to unconstrained grasping experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research enables a co-robot to detect the individual finger forces of a human
partner using a technique that does not interfere with the human's haptic sense.
A co-robot trained with the appropriate calibration data could recognize and
emulate or adapt to a human partner's grasp forces, measured using only vision.
Research efforts are being integrated into the Robotics education and outreach
at the University of Utah.