* 1208059
* Strong Field and Ultrafast Atomic and Molecular Processes
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Anthony Starace, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 08/31/2016
* USD 270,000.00

Intellectual Merit: This project focuses on understanding theoretically the
interaction of intense coherent laser radiation with electrons, atoms, and
molecules and on investigating the use of ultrashort (attosecond scale) laser or
electron pulses to image the time-dependent motion of electrons in atoms and
molecules. The interactions of electrons with both intense laser fields and with
atomic and molecular potentials are difficult to describe accurately; also,
their interactions with ultrashort laser or electron pulses must be described
time-dependently. We have developed a number of theoretical approaches to
overcome these difficulties. In particular, we have solved essentially exactly
the problem of a weakly bound electron in a short-range potential interacting
with an intense laser field and the results obtained for this particular system
can be accurately generalized to the case of other, more complex atomic and
molecular systems. Our investigations include: (1) using short (attosecond
scale) electron pulses as both temporal and spatial probes of electron motion in
both atoms and molecules; (2) investigating the utility of using intense lasers
to assist or induce electron scattering from atoms, electron recombination with
atoms, and electron bremsstrahlung (radiative) processes in the vicinity of
atoms; (3) developing analytic formulas for laser-induced high-order harmonic
generation for the heretofore analytically unexplored cases of elliptically-
polarized laser fields, crossed two-color laser fields, and chirped, few-cycle
laser fields, both for atoms and for asymmetric diatomic molecules.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers involved with this project are given a broad education in
theoretical atomic physics, first hand experience in all aspects of scientific
communication, and in teaching undergraduates at a large Big 10 Land Grant
university. Project results are not only published in leading physics journals
and presented at national and international meetings, but are also periodically
distilled and integrated with related work by others in review articles written
by the PI and collaborators. All graduate students and postdoctoral researchers
involved with this project in the past have been sought after by a variety of
other employers, including technology companies, medical researchers, and other
leading AMO theory groups. The basic research supported by this project
contributes broadly to our understanding of means to control matter on an atomic
scale. Our work on increasing the intensities of high order harmonics may one
day lead to sources of coherent x-rays, thus providing a new means for
visualizing living biological structures as well as nanoscale material
structures. Our investigations involving ultrashort (attosecond) pulses of
electrons may lead to ways of resolving electron motion both temporally and
spatially. The P.I.'s membership on the American Physical Society's Publications
Oversight Committee (2010-2013) and on the Science Advisory Board of the Max
Planck Institute on the Physics of Complex Systems (2007-2013), a major
theoretical atomic physics center in Dresden, Germany, is evidence of his
continuing service to the scientific community.