* 1208056
* RUI: Studies of Nucleon Structure Using Electromagnetic Probes at Jefferson Laboratory
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Fatiha Benmokhtar, Christopher Newport University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 05/31/2015
* USD 555,000.00

One of the primary goals of experiments at the Jefferson Laboratory (JLab) is to
elucidate the underlying structure of hadrons - protons, neutrons, and mesons.
Our group's long established program of experiments at the laboratory - past,
present, and future - embody this goal. We focus on experiments which will
further our understanding of the quark spin structure of the proton in the non-
perturbative regime. Moreover, the longer term future of JLab is focused on an
upgrade of the maximum electron energy of the facility to 12 GeV, and the CNU
group is actively involved in this effort. For example, we will continue to lead
the efforts to extend the measurement of the proton electromagnetic form factor
ratio to the highest momentum transfers possible at JLab, and also investigate
the possible modification of this form factor ratio within the nuclear medium.
These experiments will provide severe tests of the available theoretical models
of proton structure, and will serve as a strong impetus for the development of
more advanced models based upon quantum chromodynamics (QCD). In addition, in
Hall B at JLab, we are involved in a program of experiments to map out the spin
structure of the nucleon through the measurements of the semi-inclusive
electroproduction of pions and kaons.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Consistent with the
goals of the RUI program, education of undergraduates and masters-level graduate
students is a central component of this project. We will continue to engage in
software development efforts at JLab; this is a continuation of work that we
have been involved in for many years. Due to the nature of these efforts, we
anticipate that we can involve computer science and computer engineering
students, as well as our physics students. Indeed, our projects will provide
excellent training for our students in the areas of programming, modeling,
analysis techniques, and in critical judgment. Finally, we have demonstrated
that our physics program at Jefferson Lab provides an exciting opportunity to
expose our undergraduates to the field of nuclear physics, and that our students
do continue on to graduate study in the field.