* 1208804
* Cascades, islands, or streams? Time, topic, and scholarly activities in humanities and social science research
* SBE,SMA
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2014
* Cassidy Sugimoto, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Tran
* 01/31/2014
* USD 126,522.00

The objective of this study is to create tools to allow for analysis of topic
lifecycles across heterogeneous corpora. While the growth of large-scale
datasets has enabled examination within scientific datasets, there is a lack of
research that looks across datasets--examining how different scientific
activities enable or propel scientific discovery. This project will examine the
development of topics in four domains: history of science, social network
analysis, cognitive science, and digital humanities. Examination of the
lifecycle of topics in these domains should provide insights into how
scholarship evolves across genres in the social sciences and humanities.
Triangulation of the methods (word analysis, topic modeling, burst detection,
and survival analysis) will be used to ensure the highest level of validity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is innovative in its combination of datasets;
this research will combine data from formal sources (dissertations, conference
proceedings, journal articles, and grant proposals) and informal communication
channels (listservs, blogs, and twitter) in order to provide a more holistic
lens on scientific communication. For years, our knowledge of the scholarly
landscape, and subsequently, our understanding of innovation, productivity, and
impact, has been largely informed by data from a single source. However, the
growth of diverse datasets that reflect unique areas of scholarly activity have
altered the research landscape and provide an opportunity to create more
accurate understandings of the nature of science. The results of this work will
have implications for policy makers, as they seek to identify emergent areas of
research. It will also provide an indicator of the importance of certain
communication channels for identifying emerging areas of knowledge--identifying
which scholarly activities are most indicative of emerging areas and, thereby,
identifying datasets that should no longer be marginalized, but built into our
understandings and measurements of scholarship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the
chief broader impacts of this proposal is the development of new researchers
through the use of Indiana University's student emissary program, which will
allow students to work alongside the PIs, travel to meetings, and have a retreat
in which they will share their own research and engage in peer mentoring.
Further, the project should help inform both scholars and policy makers about
emergent areas of research and for ways of disseminating and sharing new
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant was made as part of the Digging Into
Data Challenge, an international competition designed to foster research
collaboration across countries and to encourage innovative approaches to
analyzing large data sets in the social sciences and humanities. In addition to
the US research team, this project includes researchers from Canada and the
United Kingdom.