* 1208046
* Computational Studies of Complex and Frustrated Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jonathan Machta, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2016
* USD 307,350.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical and computational research in
statistical physics and condensed matter physics organized in three related
projects.

1. The PI will develop algorithms for simulating frustrated spin systems and
related systems with rough free energy landscapes. The PI aims to improve both
the parallel tempering and the population annealing algorithms.

2. The PI will carry out a large-scale computational study of Ising spin glass
models. The primary goal of this research is to resolve the controversy over
whether, in finite-dimensional systems, spin glass ordering occurs in the simple
way as proposed in the droplet picture with only two thermodynamically pure
states or through the more complex replica symmetry breaking scenario involving
a large multiplicity of pure states. In this study, the PI and collaborators
will carry out large scale simulations of Ising spin glasses and analyze the
statistics of the overlap distribution using new observables that sharply
distinguish these scenarios. The problem of packing hard objects will also be
studied using both parallel tempering and population annealing.

3. The last area involves the application of the theory of parallel
computational complexity to problems in statistical physics. The notion of
P-completeness in parallel computational complexity theory will be extended to
sampling problems and applied to prove that growth models such as diffusion
limited aggregation are inherently sequential. This work extends and builds on
early results that show that diffusion limited aggregation and other processes
in statistical physics are P-complete.

This project has a significant emphasis on education and much of the budget is
devoted to supporting graduate and undergraduate students who will be trained in
the concepts and techniques of statistical, condensed matter, and computational
physics.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical research and education in
statistical and condensed matter physics. The research consists of several
related projects that involve computation and concepts that cross disciplinary
boundaries.

The PI aims to develop computer algorithms that can overcome the computational
challenges of materials that exhibit frustration or barriers to finding the true
solution among many possibilities, such as the folded structure of a protein.
This general class of problems is important not only in the physical sciences
but also in computer science and engineering where they are called combinatorial
optimization problems. Spin glasses provide an example of frustration. They are
magnetic materials with random interactions between the atomic scale magnetic
constituents in these materials often referred to as spins. The random
interactions lead to "frustration" spins receive conflicting signals from
different neighbors as to which way they should orient themselves. Due to
frustration spin glasses take a very long time to reach equilibrium. This is
also true for computer simulations of models of spin glasses; they require very
long computation times. The PI aims to develop computer algorithms that can
overcome the challenges of simulating frustrated systems. The algorithms will
then be used to carry out a large scale computational study of spin glasses that
will help to resolve a long-standing and fundamental controversy in the theory
of disordered materials. The PI will be able to carry out more extensive
simulations for lower temperatures than has been possible up to now, and utilize
new techniques that can more sharply distinguish between the existence of many
equilibrium states or a single pair of states.

The PI also seeks to understand whether computational difficulty of simulations
of materials systems on computers with processors that can work in parallel has
a fundamental connection to the physical system. The PI will study diffusion
limited aggregation, a growth process that describes, for example, mineral
deposition and snowflake growth, and creates complex patterns. The question is
whether patterns that arise from this process can be generated rapidly by a
parallel computer or whether the pattern formation process itself is
fundamentally sequential one and not parallelizable. These results may guide the
understanding of whether parallelization on a computer will lead to higher
performance for a particular problem, and a new way to measure the inherent
complexity of a material or other physical system.

This project has a significant emphasis on education and much of the budget is
devoted to supporting graduate and undergraduate students who will be trained in
the concepts and techniques of statistical, condensed matter, and computational
physics.