* 1208729
* RAPID: Low-Cost, Strong-Motion Sensor Packages to Obtain Full Spectrum Waveforms for Earthquake Early Warning and Structural Monitoring Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2012,07/31/2012
* Yehuda Bock, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2012
* USD 85,500.00

This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) investigates low-cost, strong-
motion instrumentation for the earth sciences and structural engineering
research communities to provide a new interdisciplinary data type: real-time,
full spectrum displacements based on an optimal combination of high-rate global
positioning system (GPS) and very high-rate accelerometer data. These new data
both fully capture dynamic and static near-field strong motion and enable its
analysis and characterization in real time. The ability to obtain full spectrum
waveforms in three dimensions with millimeter precision is also a breakthrough
for rapidly and fully estimating the response of large engineered structures
(for example, bridges, buildings, and dams) at the full range of periods. This
approach improves the timeliness of earthquake characterization by an order of
magnitude and improves its fullness by spanning the full spectrum of ground
deformation from the very high frequencies all the way through to direct current
(DC) offsets. The project will gather perishable structural response data from
five prototype sensor packages placed on the five-story building test specimen,
constructed under NSF award CMMI 0936505, that will undergo strong seismic
motion on the NEES outdoor shake table at the University of California, San
Diego in early 2012.

The sensors enable a new technological paradigm for studying the processes of
large earthquakes and the hazards they pose by taking fuller advantage of
seismic and geodetic instrumentation through integration, thereby providing a
new data observation type. The sensor devices have applications in the fields of
seismology, tsunamis, and structural engineering, where early detection, warning
or damage assessment is needed. Information gathered and processed with the
device could be used by authorities and first responders in the very immediate
aftermath of a strong earthquake. This project also promotes collaborative and
interdisciplinary research, education of technologically sophisticated graduate
and undergraduate students, strengthening of diversity in support of workforce
development, and enhancement of curricula through engagement with integrated
data sets that have direct societal impact.