* 1208687
* NRI-Small: Improved safety and reliability of robotic systems by faults/anomalies detection from uninterpreted signals of computation graphs
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Richard Murray, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 12/31/2013
* USD 860,000.00

One of the main challenges to designing robots that can operate around humans is
to create systems that can guarantee safety and effectiveness, while being
robust to the nuisances of unstructured environments, from hardware faults to
software issues, erroneous calibration, and less predictable anomalies, such as
tampering and sabotage. However, the fact that the streams of observations and
commands possess coherence properties suggests that many of these disturbances
could be detected and automatically mitigated with general methods that imply
very low design efforts. Currently, robotic systems are developed as a set of
components realizing a directed "computation graph". This project focuses on
theoretical methods, applicable designs, and reference implementation of a
faults/anomalies detection mechanism for low-level robotic sensorimotor signals.
The system, without any prior information about the robot configuration, should
learn a model of the robot and the environment by passive observations of the
signals exposed in the computation graph, and, based on this model, instantiate
faults/anomalies detection components in an augmented computation
graph.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages undergraduate and graduate
students in advanced robotics design and development. It is expected the
research results will have a significant impact on future robotic systems and
machine learning.