* 1208026
* NEESR: Performance Based Seismic Design of Geomembrane Liner Systems for Waste Containment
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Edward Kavazanjian, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2015
* USD 299,998.00

This award will provide engineers with an improved ability to determine whether
or not a modern geomembrane liner waste containment system can maintain its
integrity when subjected to a strong earthquake. Current practice for evaluating
the ability of waste containment systems to withstand earthquake loading employs
an empirical index of performance rather than direct calculation of the loads
(stresses and strains) on the geomembrane liner. This award will use centrifuge
model testing to evaluate input parameters essential to direct calculation of
liner stresses and strains and to validate a numerical model to evaluate these
stresses and strains. Validation of the model will include validation of the
influence of stress (or strain) concentrations due to seams, patches, and anchor
trenches on liner performance. Data from this project will be archived and made
available to the public through the NEES Project Warehouse/data repository
(http://www.nees.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award offers the promise of a
new paradigm for seismic design of waste containment systems, transforming
current engineering practice for geomembrane liner system seismic design from an
empirical process that depends upon an unreliable index of performance to a
performance-based seismic design procedure in which the seismic loads on the
geomembrane are directly evaluated. The project may also have a transformative
impact on landfill liner construction quality assurance (CQA) practices, as
experimental verification of strain concentration factors for seams, patches,
and anchor trenches in geomembranes should lead to new guidelines on where it is
appropriate to cut seam samples for CQA testing (e.g. never at the top of a
slope or near an anchor trench) and perhaps on the frequency of such testing. By
facilitating more rational performance-based seismic design and CQA, the project
should enhance environmental protection and facilitate the development of more
effective design and construction practices for waste containment systems
subject to earthquake loading. This award is part of the National Earthquake
Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP).