* 1208254
* Collaborative Research: Multi-Regional Scale Aircraft Observations of Methane and Carbon Dioxide Isotopic Fluxes in the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* John Langford, Aurora Flight Sciences Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Erica L. Key
* 08/31/2014
* USD 600,050.00

This proposal directly addresses the release of carbon dioxide and methane from
terrestrial melt zones and ocean systems that result from the loss of the Arctic
Ocean ice cover. Airborne measurements of the fluxes of isotopologues of methane
and carbon dioxide will be conducted using a new spectrometer system developed
at Harvard under an NSF MRI initiative. This instrument has sufficient precision
and accuracy to distinguish between thermogenic and biogenic sources of carbon
in the Arctic, as well as measuring N2O and water vapor, as well as other
tracers. NOAA?s Atmospheric Turbulence and Division Division (ATDD) bring their
expertise in field deployments of airborne flux systems as well as a Best Air
Turbulence (BAT) probe to the field mission. The broader impacts of the proposed
activity emerge from the unique measurements and monitoring strategy of this
project to develop a foundation for a national carbon monitoring network, which
will be a key component of any program or international agreement to limit
carbon emissions. The project will fill a technological void and deliver a
system that is versatile by design, allowing for myriad future applications that
are centered on specific carbon-related issues, such as sequestration and forest
chemistry, as well as assessing the overall country-by-country inventory of
carbon.