* 1208225
* Constrained Group Selection and Structure Estimation in Semiparametric Models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Jian Huang, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2015
* USD 159,681.00

This application proposes a class of novel constrained group selection methods
in high-dimensional models when there are natural constraints on the parameters.
The proposed project is expected to stimulate new research directions for
studying several important statistical modeling and analysis problems, which
include structure estimation and variable selection in semiparametric additive
models, varying coefficient models, and survival analysis models in high-
dimensional settings where the number of variables is larger than the sample
size. The proposed project will also yield new methods for integrative analysis
of multiple genomic datasets and genome wide association studies. Theoretical
properties of the proposed methods in high-dimensional settings and
computational algorithms will be developed. Analysis of high-dimensional data
presents new and challenging theoretical and computational questions in
statistics. Standard methods assuming the number of variables is fixed and much
smaller than the sample size are not applicable to high-dimensional models. The
proposed methods are expected to be able to correctly select the important
groups and correctly estimate model structures with high probability in sparse,
high-dimensional settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-dimensional data arise in
many diverse fields of sciences and humanities, including biology, economics,
finance, information technology, and health sciences. In all these fields,
feature selection is a crucial step in the process of knowledge discovery from
data. In genetic and genomic research, with rapid advances in biotechnology,
more and more big data sets are being generated. The identification of
statistically and biologically significant patterns from high-dimensional and
noisy data sets is becoming a major challenge. The development of statistical
methods that can deal with high-dimensional problems in estimating the
relationship between clinical outcomes and genetic data will contribute to
better understanding of the genetic basis of diseases, better diagnoses, and
better survival prediction. The proposed methods will be applied to the analysis
of high-dimensional censored survival data, longitudinal data, genome wide
association studies (GWAS) and integrative analysis of multiple genomic
datasets. Censored and longitudinal data arise in many clinical and biomedical
studies. GWAS and integrative analysis are important methods for identifying
disease susceptibility genes for common and complex diseases. The ultimate goal
of clinical and genetic research is to understand the relationships between risk
factors and phenotypes for developing new approaches to prevention, diagnosis
and treatment of disease. This project aims to translate novel statistical
approaches into new methodologies for analyzing high-dimensional clinical and
genomic data that are important in achieving this goal. The methods and results
from the proposed project will be incorporated into a graduate course on high-
dimensional data analysis. The investigator will broadly disseminate the results
to the scientific community by submitting papers to scientific journals and
making them and the computer programs publicly available on the internet. The
investigator will also present the results in scientific conferences and
workshops.