* 1209382
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Effects of Host Community Structure on Amphibian Disease Risk
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Kelly Zamudio, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2013
* USD 14,995.00

Amphibians are the most threatened group of vertebrate animals, due primarily to
deforestation and a fungal disease that has spread globally and is causing
devastating declines in population sizes that has driven some species to
extinction. To implement effective conservation strategies in the wild, we need
to understand how habitat change and disease threats interact. According to
recent findings, simply protecting natural habitats is not the answer for
amphibian conservation, because the emerging fungal pathogen infects amphibians
in pristine forests more than those living in agricultural and urban areas. This
double threat leaves amphibians little refuge, as most species that suffer from
disease cannot escape infections in disturbed habitats. One hypothesis for this
paradoxical pattern is that higher amphibian numbers and diversity in natural
habitats hold a greater potential for pathogen transmission and spread. This
project will test this hypothesis by examining frog assemblages in both pristine
and modified habitats in Brazil and experimentally infecting individuals from
each assemblage with the fungal pathogen under controlled laboratory conditions.
Frogs from both pristine and disturbed habitats will be monitored for changes in
infection patterns, and those disease dynamics will be correlated with number
and identity of species, density of individuals, and body size. Understanding
how changes in frog assemblages caused by land use change can affect disease
dynamics will provide a more complete picture of the interaction between
deforestation and emerging diseases, the two main factors at the root of the
amphibian decline crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will strengthen
research collaborations with Brazilian scientists studying amphibian species
loss. Results from this work will be useful in developing strategies to conserve
the diversity of amphibian species in the tropics. Brazil has the highest number
of amphibian species anywhere in the world, thus, this project will contribute
to the management of a mega-diverse fauna. This project will provide research
opportunities for undergraduate students to conduct field research and will
contribute to the doctoral research of a graduate student.