* 1209870
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: A Time Scale for Scales: Basal Phylogeny and Divergence Times in Coccoidea (Hemiptera: Insecta)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* David Grimaldi, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,861.00

A Time Scale for Scales: Basal Phylogeny and Divergence Times in Coccoidea
(Hemiptera: Insecta)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Scale insects are plant pests of
considerable significance in agriculture and forestry, causing billions of
dollars in damage annually. For this reason, the taxonomy and identification of
species is quite sophisticated and specialized, but relationships among the
larger lineages are still poorly explored. With this grant, research will be
expanded on the evolutionary relationships among the basal families of scale
insects, using anatomical structures of the adult females and males as well as
DNA sequences. The results will allow informed predictions to be made about
groups whose biology (e.g., plant hosts) is poorly known. Since scale insects
are so diverse in ambers 130 to 20 million years old, they are a model group to
examine how plant-feeding insects have evolved with respect to the flowering
plants (angiosperms). Scales preserved in ambers from around the world will be
studied, and the anatomical data from the fossils in a large data set with the
modern species analyzed. Select amber specimens will be scanned at the Advanced
Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory, to visualize obscured microscopic
structures. The project will allow to determine when the families of scale
insects diverged in geological time, and assess if their evolution coincided
with that of the flowering plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The PI and co-PI are
actively involved with informal science education, and the funded work will be
incorporated into it. The Co-PI has designed Entomology sessions of the
biodiversity course for the NSF-sponsored Science Research Mentoring Program
with which the AMNH Education Department is preparing the production of web
material, and will be available through this online portal. The PI mentors two
high school students in this program, working on amber. The Co-PI will also be
involved in informal public education, including hands-on laboratory experiences
for middle and high school students in the Sackler Educational Laboratory.
Lastly, a product of this research will be an online interactive identification
key available on the co-PI?s research website.