* 1209876
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolution of Avian Photopigments: From Opsin Sequences to Color Vision
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Natasha Bloch, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,999.00

What explains the diversity of color in nature, and both our and other animals?
great appreciation for beauty in color? Now it is possible to advance our
understanding of this through the use of genetic analyses that investigate
differences in the molecules involved in color vision and thus, in how color is
viewed by different species. This project investigates whether different species
of birds perceive color differently, and whether this could explain why
different species of birds have evolved dramatically different plumage colors.
For example, if one bird is red and one is blue, is this associated with
differences in perception of red and of blue? This question is being addressed
by studying the opsins from multiple species of warblers, which vary greatly in
their color patterns. Opsin proteins are the critical light-absorbing molecules
that modulate vision in all vertebrates, including humans. This project combines
sequencing of opsin genes, and recreating opsins proteins in the laboratory,
with computer modeling to find out whether different species of birds perceive
color differently and identify the underlying causes of such
differences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding whether changes in opsins are
responsible for the observed plumage color differences will give us important
insight into the evolutionary processes that gave rise to species
diversification and into the origins of the spectacular diversity of colors we
see in the animal world. Moreover, since opsins are also responsible for vision
in humans, dissecting the molecular bases for changes in vision could help us
understand color-blindness and other color vision disorders.