* 1209531
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolutionary potential in response to climate change in two related species with different dispersal modes
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Jeffrey Levinton, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2015
* USD 14,999.00

The proposed research will investigate how different rates of dispersal in
marine snails can influence their ability to adapt to water temperatures. The
investigators will compare the larval and juvenile traits of two species of
snail (genus Crepidula) under different temperature regimes. One of the species
(C. fornicata) has larvae that live in the water for 2-4 weeks and disperse with
ocean currents; the other (C. convexa) has larvae that disperse by crawling away
as juveniles. Previous research has shown that C. convexa has much lower
dispersal than C. fornicata, and that this lower dispersal may allow the species
to adapt to local water temperatures. The current project will rear larvae and
juveniles of both species at an ambient temperature and a stressful, higher
temperature to investigate the genetic basis of temperature tolerance in these
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important because it will help to
elucidate the links between dispersal mode, gene flow, and extant local
adaptation as related to future adaptation in the face of warming climate, one
of the most pressing questions facing organismal biologists today. &lt;br/&gt;In
addition to being a valuable model system to answer these questions, the issue
of range shifts or expansions in C. fornicata is of management interest. The
species is invasive in Europe and has impacted its invaded ecosystems. These
same impacts may also apply to the native range of C. fornicata as the species
expands its range and abundance northward in response to warming water
temperature.