* 1209928
* Materials World Network: High Temperature Mechanical Behavior of Metal/Ceramic Nanolaminate Composites
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Nikhilesh Chawla, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 345,737.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Natural and man-made layered structures exhibit
extremely high strength, toughness, thermal resistance, and biocompatibility
characteristics. On the microscopic scale, lamellar layered structures are the
basic foundation for the high strength and toughness of steel as a structural
material. Structures in nature, such as mollusk shells, derive their high
strength and toughness from a layered ceramic structure bonded together by an
organic glue. Indeed, the structure of engineering materials often mimics the
structures in nature. Multilayered materials at the nanoscale exhibit exciting
possibilities for extremely high strength, fatigue resistance, thermal
resistance, wear resistance, and biocompatibility. Thus, designing layered
structures at the nanoscale is a particularly attractive strategy for developing
a new generation of multifunctional materials with tremendous possibilities.
Nanolaminate materials have very different properties from traditional bulk
composites, due to their much higher interfacial area and dramatically smaller
length scale. These changes can lead to new types of deformation mechanisms,
which are very different from those observed in bulk systems. Fundamental
research on the mechanical behavior of metal/ceramic multilayers at the
nanoscale is necessary for successful implementation of these materials in
engineering applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This
international project focuses on the high temperature behavior of multilayered
metal/ceramic materials. The collaborative project focuses on studying the
fundamental science related to high temperature behavior and plasticity at small
length scale, particularly under large constraint, load transfer to high
stiffness ceramic layers, and a basic understanding of how nanostructure
influences high temperature deformation. This project involves Prof. Nik Chawla
and his research team at Arizona State University and Dr. Jon Molina-Aldareguia
and his research group at the Madrid Institute for Advanced Studies of Materials
(IMDEA) in the Polytechnic University of Madrid, Spain (where the Spanish effort
is funded by the Spanish National Science Foundation). As well there are strong
linkages to researchers at Los Alamos National Laboratory. Cutting-edge
techniques, such as high temperature nanoindentation, and in situ indentation in
a scanning electron microscope (SEM) will be used. A new generation of graduate
students are being trained through international experiences, and the
development of course material is being shared in Spanish to attract students
underrepresented in science and engineering.