* 1209111
* Statistical Analysis of Incomplete lifetime Data: Theory, Stochastic Models and Empirical Likelihood
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2018
* Paul Smith, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 01/31/2018
* USD 250,000.00

The investigator plans to further the development of the theory and statistical
methods for the analysis of incomplete lifetime data with special focus on
censored data in survival analysis. The proposed research consists of two
interrelated research thrusts: (A) The development of the empirical likelihood
(EL)-based inference procedures. Motivated by the proven advantages of the EL
method, a novel approach is proposed. The PI and her collaborator plan to
develop asymptotically optimal statistical procedures that are computationally
feasible and efficient, and (B) Extension of the Fix-Neyman competing risks
model which focuses on a feature of recurrent events of recovery and relapse of
a disease in the model. For many diseases, such as breast cancer and aplastic
anemia (AA), recovery and relapse are important events affecting a patient's
survival probability. Most of the currently employed competing risks models lack
this feature. The research team plans to develop statistical inference
procedures under the new model for censored data. The extended model can be
applied to other types of recurrent events such as in epidemiology surveys
(current status data) and engineering reliability. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Lifetime or "time-to-event" data, commonly collected in science and
engineering, could be time to loss of immunity, survival time of a cancer
patient after a treatment, time to failure of a bridge and others. Due to
sampling methods, sampling subjects, experimental protocols and limitations of
recording instruments and possibly other reasons, data sets often contain a
significant number of incompletely observed lifetimes. Incomplete data may
include right or left censored, interval censored and truncation data. Without
proper corrections for incompleteness, data analysis and uncertainty measures
would produce biased and unreliable scientific findings. It is therefore of
paramount importance to develop sound statistical methods and theory for the
analyses of incomplete data. Despite significant advances in theory and
applications, burgeoning applications in diverse science fields continues to
present new challenging mathematical problems and computational issues. For
example, the proposed extension would extend the popular Kaplan-Meier estimator
by including recovery and relapse data in the prediction of a patient's survival
probability. It is hoped that better utilization of available data would yield
more accurate prediction of survival probability for some diseases and help to
identify important factors affecting a patient's survival. Developing numerical
solutions will be an integral part of the project. Algorithms will be developed
for data analysis. The success of the project will advance the statistical
theory of incomplete lifetime data and its applications. Novel use of the
empirical likelihood method will result in computationally efficient algorithms
for applications. Research and education for this project are inseparable.
Training of graduate students and recruiting students from under represented
group are planned.