* 1209513
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute for FY 2012 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* John Villavert, Villavert               John
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2013
* USD 6,126.00

This action funds John Villavert of the University of Colorado at Boulder to
conduct a research project, entitled "Mathematical examination of properties of
solutions to important models in science and engineering," during the summer of
2012 at Shanghai Jiao Tong University in Shanghai, China. The host scientist is
Lihe Wang.

The Intellectual Merit of the research project is the development of novel
mathematical tools that enable a deeper understanding of properties of solutions
to physical models - models which are central to many branches of science and
engineering. Some examples of such properties include whether the model of
differential equations has solutions. If so, how many solutions are there, and
do these solutions exhibit the correct physical behavior the model is attempting
to capture? Further, the tools developed here may prove valuable in studying
more general classes of mathematical models. Moreover, this research has far-
reaching impacts not limited only to fundamental theory. For instance, the
successful examination of one of the proposed models, important in fluid flow,
would allow scientists to numerically compute its solutions - solutions which
historically appeared to be nearly impossible to obtain and required vast
computational resources. Tools developed in this research can help solve similar
difficulties in long-standing open problems from other disciplines.

Broader Impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce.