* 1209009
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute for FY 2012 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Lok-kun Tsui, Tsui                    Lok-kun
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2013
* USD 5,836.00

This action funds Lok-kun Tsui of the University of Virginia to conduct a
research project, entitled "Storing sunlight in hydrogen with nanotube solar
cells," during the summer of 2012 at Waseda University in Tokyo, Japan. The host
scientist is Prof. Takayuki Homma.

The Intellectual Merit of the research project lies in a better understanding of
the energy conversion performance in photoelectrochemical solar cells made from
titanium dioxide nanotubes, sensitized to visible light with cuprous oxide and
hematite. Specifically, the research objective of this project is to determine
the correlation between the electronic structure, electrochemical and charge
transport properties of these systems in order to design more efficient devices.
This research has the potentail to advance U.S. energy independence by
developing a way to produce storable solar energy in a scalable manner using
low-cost materials and synthesis techniques. Further, it advances the fuel
production stage needed for a future hydrogen economy. Understanding the
properties of this titanium dioxide nanotube system and its surface modification
can also move forward other technological applications including photocatalysis
and sensors.

The Broader Impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-
hand research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science,
science policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce.