* 1209489
* Workshop Proposal: Master Class Series at the 3rd International Conference on Language Documentation and Conservation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,11/30/2014
* Andrea Berez-Kroeker, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 11/30/2014
* USD 31,954.00

This project supports a series of interdisciplinary Master Classes to be held as
a special nonrepeating component of the 3rd International Conference on Language
Documentation and Conservation (ICLDC), to take place at the University of
Hawai'i at Manoa in early 2013. The theme of the conference is "Sharing Worlds
of Knowledge," which references the need of documentary linguists to be familiar
with many disciplines outside of linguistics, because language encodes knowledge
from all facets of life. The Master Classes will be taught by experts in a range
of fields (e.g. ethnobotany, ethnomusicology, kinship systems), and are designed
to give participants at the ICLDC the opportunity to learn how to document these
topics. This project will bring one plenary speaker to the conference to talk
about interdisciplinary field-based documentary work; it will also sponsor six
graduate students and/or nonacademic language workers to attend the 3rd ICLDC
and Master Class series. The 3rd ICLDC is a much-anticipated conference that
builds on the firm foundation established by the previous two conferences in
2009 and 2011. As evidenced by its growing popularity, the biennial conference
is considered by many to be the flagship meeting of the field of documentary
linguistics. The Master Classes have great potential to enhance the value of
language documentation by giving researchers some basic knowledge of fields
outside of linguistics. Although this is just one series of classes, it builds
on the growing interest in interdisciplinary approaches to language
documentation. Data collected with an eye toward the needs and interests of
other disciplines will be more useful to a wider academic audience in the
future, may foster increased collaboration between documentary linguists and
researchers in other fields, and will help preserve for language communities the
cultural and procedural knowledge that is often lost when a language disappears.