* 1209445
* WSC-Category 2, Collaborative: Climate and human dynamics as amplifiers of natural change: a framework for vulnerability assessment and mitigation planning
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Patrick Belmont, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2017
* USD 469,998.00

1209445&lt;br/&gt;Belmont&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a pressing need to
identify which elements of the coupled natural-human system are most sensitive
to changes in land use and climate in the sense that they are likely to respond
strongly to changes in these factors. Means of identifying such ?hot spots? of
sensitivity to change would allow us to target remediation and other management
measures where they will do the most good. This project will test and explore
the ecologic and management implications of a novel hypothesis termed human-
amplified natural change (HANC), which states that the areas of the landscape
that are most susceptible to human, climatic, and other external changes are
those undergoing the highest natural rates of change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team will develop a theoretical framework for vulnerability assessment
and will test the HANC hypothesis through intensive study of the Minnesota River
Basin (MRB), a 44,000 km2 agriculturally-dominated watershed in the upper
Midwest. The MRB encompasses an extremely broad spectrum of natural and human-
induced rates of change and sensitivity to land-use practices. Of particular
interest is the complex nonlinear coupling between land use and river network
processes, which has already resulted in severely impaired waters for sediment
and nutrients. What will be the future condition of the waters and ecosystem
services in the MRB under changing human actions and climatic conditions? Of the
many potential land and water management options, which are most likely to
produce a sustainable, resilient, and thriving coupled economic-environmental
system? To answer such questions, this study seeks to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1)
determine the extent to which current high rates of sediment production are
concentrated in areas that were undergoing high rates of natural change before
the external changes were imposed; &lt;br/&gt;(2) study how thresholds and
localized features in the system amplify and accelerate change and how such
nonlinear effects can be parameterized in an integrated predictive modeling
framework; &lt;br/&gt;(3) investigate the extent to which the human-amplified
natural changes (HANC) in the geomorphic system contribute to observed
ecological changes in the MRB; and &lt;br/&gt;(4) develop means to include HANC-
based reasoning in decision analysis frameworks, including a suite of methods to
identify sensitive regions, along with spatially targeted monitoring
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Strong relationships
previously developed with State regulatory agencies will ensure that the results
from this project directly influence future land and water policy and management
decisions. The research team will disseminate new knowledge directly to the
public in close collaboration with State agencies via stakeholder meetings,
widely attended regional meetings and informational reports. Further, they will
develop a HANC-based analytical toolbox for evaluating areas prone to rapid
change in the landscape, beginning with Midwestern agricultural landscapes. New
knowledge generated from this work will be used to inform Science Museum
exhibits related to the Anthropocene, develop innovative K-12 curricula in
environmental science and engineering, and disseminate NSF?s Earth Science and
Climate Literacy Principles via teacher training. The project supports three
early-career PIs and training of graduate, undergraduate, and ?synthesis-
postdoctoral? students in an interdisciplinary environment, co-advised by
scientists in hydrology, geomorphology, ecology, biology, engineering, and
economics.