* 1209091
* Second Order Inference for Nonstationary Time Series
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Han Xiao, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2016
* USD 119,074.00

The proposed research is on second order inferences for causal nonstationary
processes. While a causal stationary process can be viewed as generated by
filtering a set of past innovations, one can allow the filter to be time-
changing, and henceforth introduce nonstationarity. Two sets of problems are
considered. First, for linear models with nonstationary errors, the investigator
addresses the estimation of covariance matrices of the least square estimates,
as well as general M-estimates. Second, the PI studies the estimation of time-
varying covariance functions, time-varying spectrum and covariance matrices of
the observed time series. Simultaneous inferences of autocovariance functions
and spectra can be used to study their patterns and trends, and are also of
interests. The study requires several tools to be developed for nonstationary
processes, including empirical processes, Gaussian approximations, strong
invariance principles and large deviations for quadratic
forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stationarity has played an important role in
classical time series analysis, which basically says that the overall structure
does not change over time. However, in many scientific fields, including
economics, engineering, environmental science, finance, and neuroscience etc, it
is not realistic to believe the observed time series are stationary. Results
from the proposed research will be useful in understanding the nature of the
data from various disciplines, making forecasts and
conclusions.&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, the second order inferences in the proposal
are general and fundamental, and will facilitate further statistical analysis of
nonstationary time series.