* 1209467
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute for FY 2012 in Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* ian rowen, Rowen                   Ian            G
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2013
* USD 5,000.00

This action funds Ian Rowen of the University of Colorado to conduct a research
project, entitled "Chinese Tourists in Taiwan: Tourism and State
Territoriality," during the summer of 2012 at Academia Sinica in Taipei, Taiwan.
The host scientists are Michael Hsiao and Mau-Kuei Chang.

The Intellectual Merit of the research project is its contribution to
understanding of new developments in cross-Strait relations, which are of major
geopolitical importance due to the US' strategic relationships with Taiwan and
China. Examining Chinese tourism in Taiwan also sheds light on the political and
cultural implications of the rapid development of China's outbound tourist
market, soon to be the world's largest, with over 100 million annual visits
overseas projected by 2019. This project's theoretical framework brings tourism
into broader debates about state territory and spatial practice. Additionally,
this project's theoretical framework relates tourism studies to broader
geographical debates about state power and spatial practice.

Broader Impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce.