* 1209607
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Predation and Disease:  Examining Patterns of Predator Diversity and Parasite Infection in Nature
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Pieter Johnson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 08/31/2013
* USD 14,744.00

While often studied in isolation, host-parasite interactions are typically
embedded within complex communities in which parasite transmission is dependent
not just on the host species, but non-host species such as predators. Recent
research has focused on the ability of predators to limit the exposure of hosts
to their pathogens by controlling population density of hosts and vectors. An
additional mechanism by which predators could lower the risk of disease is by
directly consuming parasite free-living infective stages. Preliminary evidence
suggests that this mechanism may be common in aquatic ecosystems where various
predator species consume free-living stages of parasites, including
macroparasites such as trematodes. The central goal of this project is to
determine how assemblages of predators affect parasitic infection of amphibians
in nature, and whether loss of predator species would cause significant changes
to disease dynamics. This research extends initial laboratory findings by
testing hypotheses of predation on parasites in the field through extensive
surveys of aquatic diversity and precise examination of host infection and
disease on the landscape level. This research combines mathematical modeling,
laboratory experiments, and field surveys linking observations of natural
patterns to functional mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since trematodes are
common pathogens of humans, domestic animals, and wildlife this study will
advance understanding of how loss of biodiversity in general and predators in
particular may be a factor in the recent emergence of some diseases. Development
of the transmission models, evaluations of aquatic predator community structure
in the field, and calculations of disease risk will be of practical application
to management of wildlife and human diseases. This project will provide
extensive outreach through after school programs for a local elementary school
having many students from groups underrepresented in science, and through
environmental science programs conducted by Boulder County 4-H. Undergraduate
and high school students will be involved in the research and receive mentoring
on science careers.