* 1209814
* Dissertation Research: Extracellular enzyme activity in large rivers and its relationship to dissolved organic matter quality and inorganic nutrient uptake
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Todd Royer, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 14,406.00

Rivers provide fundamental ecosystem services to human societies and the
environment, from delivery and purification of water supplies to eco-tourism.
Successful environmental policies and effective management of freshwater
resources require detailed and mechanistic knowledge of the biogeochemical
processes occurring in rivers. However, understanding of the biogeochemistry of
large rivers is far from complete, and there is a paucity of research on
ecological processes in large rivers. Dissolved organic matter is a fundamental
component of streams and rivers. In addition to being a source of nutrients for
microorganisms, dissolved organic matter can influence acidity, light
penetration and the concentration of oxygen and trace metals. The goal of this
project is to fill knowledge gaps regarding the biogeochemistry of dissolved
organic matter in large rivers, and the interactions between dissolved organic
matter and microbial processes such as nutrient uptake and extracellular enzyme
activity. The research will be conducted in seven large rivers in the western
and midwestern United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation
improvement project will contribute to a better understanding of large river
ecology and river management in the U.S. The results will be presented at an
international scientific meeting and published in peer-reviewed journal
articles. An undergraduate student will work as a research assistant on the
project and by doing so will gain valuable experience and training. Both the PI
and co-PI will use the project as a demonstration or case study in the courses
they teach at the graduate and undergraduate levels. Lastly, the co-PI will
present results from this study at the Indiana University Women in Science
Conference as a means of engaging undergraduate women who are interested in
research but unsure about pursuing a career in science.