* 1209441
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Metabolic Bet Hedging as an Explanation for Maintenance of Diverse Tree-Ectomycorrhizal Mutualisms
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2014
* Tadashi Fukami, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 03/31/2014
* USD 15,000.00

Many plants rely on mutually-beneficial interactions with below-ground fungi
called mycorrhizae that gather nutrients, supply water, and defend against pests
in exchange for energy provided by the plant. An individual plant may host
dozens of different species of mycorrhizae simultaneously, including species
that appear to be of little to no benefit, or may be harmful. This project
proposes the idea of metabolic bet-hedging to account for the diverse array of
mycorrhizae maintained by individual trees. Because trees experience marked
seasonal and interannual environmental variation, their nutrient requirements
also vary over time, potentially altering the relative value of each fungal
partner. As human investors maintain a portfolio of stocks to compensate for
economic variation, trees may maintain a range of ectomycorrhizae to respond to
changing environments. This project tests the metabolic bet hedging hypothesis
using a combination of laboratory experiments and mathematical models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this study will be of direct value to the
management of Douglas fir, the tree species targeted in this study, which is
both a commercially important forestry species and an aggressive invader in some
foreign locales. Both undergraduate and high school students will participate in
the project, receiving valuable training in the scientific method.