* 1209563
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute for FY 2012 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Christopher Hakkenberg, Hakkenberg              Christopher
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2013
* USD 6,112.00

This action funds Christopher Hakkenberg of the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill to conduct a research project, entitled "Filling in the Gaps:
Restoring Forest Ecosystems in SW China" during the summer of 2012 at Kunming
Institute of Botany in Yunnan, China. The host scientist is Dr. Xu Jianchu.

Through a combination of afforestation and reforestation programs China has
increased its forest coverage; two of the efforts are the Sloping Land
Conversion Program (SLCP) and the Natural Forest Protection Program (NFPP).
While the new forests emerging in China's heavily human-impacted landscapes may
not match the original old-growth forests in structure and community diversity,
plantation reforestation holds the potential to restore some vital ecosystem
functions to degraded lands where persistent ecological barriers to succession
might otherwise preclude native species' seedling recruitment. Because of their
sacred status among local populations and their general inaccessibility to
timber operations, remnant "near-natural" forest patches persist in montane
northwestern Yunnan that are well suited to ecological restoration via natural
regeneration. Reforestation campaigns like the SLCP and NFPP hold the potential
to connect these disparate forest patches, thus enhancing landscape connectivity
and biodiversity.

This research is testing if these reforestation projects lead to different
outcomes in the rate of tree species accumulation as well as the nature of
forest composition. It compares processes of forest community assembly on
degraded sites and analyzes how plots' spatial relationship from source "forest
islands" compare with plot reforestation methods as a determinant of community
composition, species abundance and diversity.

Broader Impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce.