* 1209573
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Analyzing trait-dependent diversification in lanternfishes (Scopelomorpha; Myctophidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Melanie Stiassny, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 06/30/2014
* USD 15,000.00

This project represents the first quantitative study of the effects that
different forms of a sexually dimorphic bioluminescent trait have on patterns of
species diversity in lanternfishes (family Myctophidae), one of the most common
and widely distributed deep-sea vertebrate groups. Analysis will be conducted in
three stages. First, an evolutionary tree of over 130 lanternfish species will
be constructed, using both mitochondrial and nuclear protein-coding DNA
sequences. Second, data on the innervation of the bioluminescent trait will be
gathered using a combination of traditional and novel imaging techniques to more
accurately determine the number and structure of traits. Third, the different
traits will be mapped onto the evolutionary tree. Patterns of dimorphism will
then be statistically compared with patterns of monomorphism to assess the
effect of dimorphic bioluminescent traits on diversification in
lanternfishes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The deep sea is both the largest and least
well-known region on Earth, and bioluminescence is one of the most abundant
traits across the tree of life. Despite these facts, no studies have yet
quantitatively analyzed the effect of differences in bioluminescent structures
on patterns of species diversity in deep-sea organisms. Lanternfishes present an
ideal model group for enhancing our understanding of evolution in this poorly
understood realm.