* 1209385
* Dissertation Research: The Effects of Phenotypic Variation on Food Web Architecture and Ecosystem Fluxes:  A Dual Tracer Isotope Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Nelson Hairston, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,652.00

The primary goal of this study is to determine how variation within a single
species can influence the transfer of energy and materials in stream food webs.
The proposed research will use a model system for evolutionary studies, the
Trinidadian guppy (Poecilia reticulata), to determine how two phenotypes of a
single species can influence ecosystem processes in streams. Streams on the
island of Trinidad occur in parallel watersheds that have similar environmental
gradients with locally adapted populations of guppies. Two phenotypes have been
established in previous studies: guppies from streams with predators, and
guppies from streams without predators. These two guppy phenotypes are likely to
influence the ecosystem in unique ways because of differences in how they feed
and what they eat. This study uses a replicated experiment to examine how both
guppy phenotype and resource availability influence ecosystems.

A better understanding of how within-species variation affects ecological
processes will provide additional insight into interactions between ecological
and evolutionary processes, which may be widespread and significant. Many people
are familiar with guppies because of their prominent role in the aquarium trade,
making them an accessible system to communicate scientific research about
evolutionary ecology. This work will also inform studies of how land use change
alters stream ecosystems.