* 1209899
* CRPA: How do We Learn the Fate of Tropical Forests under Climate Change? -- A Multimedia Exhibition of Photographic Art Portraying Scientists and Students at Work in Amazonia
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Joost van Haren, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 01/31/2016
* USD 149,797.00

This CRPA project is about research on climate change impacts in the Amazonian
rain forest and about motivating youth to consider science as a career
objective. The project is an exhibit in Biosphere 2 in Arizona wherein a rain
forest is maintained and will be used to augment the exhibit of large photos of
scientists doing research. Particular attention will be paid to female
scientists to motivate young girls. Biosphere 2 and the Girl Scout Council of
Southern Arizona will collaborate to attract girls through free admission days
to Biosphere 2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These large photos will be equipped with
sound and video so that as a visitor approaches the photo, the sounds of the
forest as well as the researcher(s) will be heard. At this point the researcher,
in the photograph, will begin a monologue with the visitor explaining what
scientists are investigating and who the other workers are. In this monologue,
the researcher will explain what they are doing specifically, why they are
investigating this subject, and what they plan to derive as a scientific result.
The exhibit will consist of fifty very large photographs (3x5 feet) with sound
access via smart phones and headsets. In addition, there will be hands on
equipment and docents for questions and discussion. The venue receives about
100,000 visitors per year consisting mainly of families, tourists, and
clubs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this exhibit, the researchers intend to
motivate youth to develop interests in STEM topics. Girls are the main target
audience. For families and tourists, the exhibit communicates the message of how
science is being used to determine the effect of climate change on rain forests
and how that would affect other aspects of weather and the global environment.