* 1209387
* Geometry and Topology in the Presence of Lower Curvature Bounds
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Karsten Grove, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2016
* USD 320,273.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1209387, Principal Investigator: Karsten Grove

The principal investigator plans to continue his work on global problems in
differential geometry and related areas. Special emphasis will be devoted to the
pursuit of global Riemannian geometry via additional structures. This includes
but is not limited to structures arising from the presence of symmetries, and to
structures arising from taking external or internal limits. Our efforts
concerning investigations of relations between curvature, symmetry and topology
is guided by the so-called symmetry program initiated by the investigator and
set forth by the aim: "Classify or describe the structure of manifolds with
positive or nonnegative curvature and large isometry groups". This area has
experienced significant advances in various directions during the past two
decades with contributions from many people, resulting in a number of
classification type theorems, the discovery of new structures and numerous
examples in non-negative curvature and one in the illusive case of positive
curvature. Most recently rigidity phenomena providing a link to Tits geometry of
buildings has emerged. Here topology of buildings is introduced via the
Hausdorff topology of so-called chamber systems. The main focus of the project
will be to further develop this connection to buildings, but will also include
investigations of structures arising from the collapse of manifolds under a
lower curvature bound, and recent connections between comparison geometry and a
new applied area concerned with the "processing of manifold-valued data". The
latter also deals with averages via non-linear "center of mass" and taking
internal limits.

The project deals with a vast and flexible extension of the classical rigid and
maximally symmetric euclidean, spherical and hyperbolic geometries, as well as
of the theory of surfaces. Finding and exhibiting relations between geometry and
topology is at the heart of the subject. Here geometry refers to those
properties of a space that are invariant under distance preserving
transformations (called symmetries here), whereas topology refers to the more
flexible properties of a space that are invariant under transformations such as
stretching, bending and deforming. Curvature governs the local behavior of
geodesics, i.e., of the "straight lines" in the space. By comparison, the angle
sum of a geodesic triangle in a positively curved space is bigger than 180
degrees, which is the angle sum of a triangle in the flat Euclidean plane. This
general type of geometry plays a vital role in much of mathematics, physics and
more recently in applications to signal processing and more. Most of the
proposed activity falls under the umbrella of the "symmetry program" designed by
the investigator. The main specific goals within the next few years are on the
one hand to find additional new examples of positively and nonnegatively curved
manifolds, and at the opposite extreme to show that the so-called symmetric
spaces indeed are rigid objects in a natural sense. The latter is based on a
recently discovered link to a very different area, namely Tits geometry of
buildings, an area that has had profound and diverse applications within
mathematics. Other important goals include developing new directions in geometry
motivated by the emerging field of processing of manifold-valued data to, e.g.,
computer vision, medical imagining, sensor networks, and statistical analysis of
shapes.