* 1209244
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute for FY 2012 in Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Yvonne Kung, Kung                    Yvonne         F
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2013
* USD 836.00

This action funds Yvonne Kung of Stanford University to conduct a research
project, entitled "Using computer simulations to develop more efficient
materials for power lines," during the summer of 2012 at the National Taiwan
University in Taipei, Taiwan. The host scientist is Ying-Jer Kao.

The Intellectual Merit of the research project is increasing our understanding
of materials with novel and potentially useful electronic properties, especially
high-temperature superconductors, using computer simulations. The research
investigates strong electron-phonon coupling in strongly correlated electron
systems by extending the tensor product state (TPS) method to fermion systems.
This additional computational technique allows the development of an overarching
theory for strongly correlated materials. An expected longterm outcome is to
further understanding of high-temperature superconductors, which would
potentially lead to decreasing power loss in electrical wires and revolutionize
the power grid.

The Broader Impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow with a
first-hand research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science,
science policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce.