* 1209770
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute for FY 2012 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* George Kachergis, Kachergis               George
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2013
* USD 5,836.00

This action funds George Kachergis of Indiana University to conduct a research
project, entitled "Mechanisms of language learning," during the summer of 2012
at Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology in Nomi, Ishikawa
Prefecture, Japan. The host scientist is Dr. Takashi Hashimoto.

The Intellectual Merit of the research project is new understandings of the
memory and learning mechanisms that allow infants to learn their first language.
Most infants produce their first words as one-year-olds and have a vocabulary of
more than 60,000 words by the end of high school. This research is developing
mathematical models of how people learn from which it may be possible to
identify deficits that interfere with language learning in some and find ways to
better structure the learning environment to aid in learning first languages and
beyond. The models are not limited to language learning because they are built
upon basic mechanisms of learning and memory and can be applied to education in
many domains, from memorizing anatomy to learning molecule names and structures.
This type of hierarchical model can also be used to identify individual
differences and may suggest ways of structuring training to keep learners from
falling behind and to keep them challenged.

The Broader Impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-
hand research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science,
science policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce.