* 1209468
* Materials World Network: Understanding the Design and Characterization of Air-Stable N-Type Charge Transfer Dopants for Organic Electronics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Zhenan Bao, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 07/31/2015
* USD 435,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Charge transfer doping is crucial in enabling highly
efficient organic light emitting diodes and organic solar cells, and is needed
for controlling the electrical characteristics of organic field effect
transistors. Whereas the development of p-type dopants is well advanced, there
is still a lack of effective air-stable solution processabile n-type dopants,
due to limited knowledge on the detailed doping mechanisms. To address this gap,
this Materials World Network project, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program and the Office of Special Programs, Division of Materials
Research, aims at a) understanding the design rules for air-stable n-dopants
based on a promising class of dopants with
(1,3-dimethyl-2,3-dihydro-1H-benzoimidazol-2-yl)phenyl (DMBI) as the model
system and b) understanding the detailed doping mechanisms of n-type doping. The
three groups involved in the project have a unique combination of complementary
expertise. The Bao group will synthesize DMBI dopants with systematically varied
energy levels and substituents for better miscibility with the matrix to aid the
understanding of doping mechanisms. The chemical process of doping will be
investigated with UV-vis-NIR and electron paramagnetic resonance. The morphology
of doped layers will be studied by atomic force microscopy, various X-ray
techniques and nanoSIMS. The Leo group in Germany will study the physical
mechanisms of doping by impedance spectroscopy, ultraviolet photoelectron
spectroscopy, the Seebeck measurement, and modeling of the charge transport
characteristic by a master equation model. The air-stability will be tested and
the dopants will be used in state-of-the art organic devices such as light
emitting diodes, solar cells, or transistors. Finally, the Cuniberti group in
Germany will study the doping effect on a single molecular level by high
resolution scanning tunneling microscopy and will model the doping process by ab
initio calculations based on density functional theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;Charge transfer doping
is crucial in enabling highly efficient displays, solid-state lighting, organic
solar cells, and is needed for controlling the electrical characteristics of
organic field effect transistors. Whereas the development of p-type dopants is
well advanced, there is still a lack of effective air-stable solution
processabile n-type dopants, due to limited knowledge on the detailed doping
mechanisms. This Materials World Network project will advance the understanding
of the chemistry and physics of doping through an international co-operation
across the disciplines of chemistry/ chemical engineering, fundamental physics
and theory. These findings will lead to better understanding of design rules for
stable and efficient n-dopants and more efficient devices. This project will
train students and postdocs with a solid fundamental understanding as well as a
global experience. This project will help to foster economic growth by
furthering the field of organic electronics and the associated industry. This
project will train students with exposure to interdisciplinary research and
diverse cultures. Bao will work closely with Stanford NSF centers and Office of
Science Outreach to reach out to a broad population ranging from K-12, community
college, undergraduate, and graduate students, as well as prepare the teachers
of tomorrow for new areas of science and technology.