* 1209353
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute for FY 2012 in Korea
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Albert Medina, Medina                  Albert
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2013
* USD 5,836.00

This action funds Albert Medina of University of California, Los Angeles to
conduct a research project, entitled "Investigating flight enhancement in
flexible flapping wings," during the summer of 2012 at Seoul National University
in Seoul, Gwanak, Korea. The host scientist is Professor Haecheon Choi.

Flapping wing flight has garnered much attention in the past decade driven by
our desire to understand capabilities observed in nature, such as in airborne
insects and to develop agile small-scale aerial vehicles with similar
capabilities. Nature has demonstrated the breadth of maneuverability achievable
with flapping wings. A wing of an insect undergoes significant bending and
twisting as it flaps. However, the aerodynamic role of this elastic deformation
is still poorly understood. In order to illuminate this role, this study focuses
on the mechanics of a three-dimensional flexible flapping wing and uses
numerical simulations to examine the effect of orientations of flexion lines in
a model wing, over a broad range of flapping conditions.

Broader Impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce.