* 1209031
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Consequences of Indirect Defensive Traits on Microbial Diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Marjorie Weber, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2014
* USD 14,932.00

Plants have evolved many interesting ways to defend themselves against their
enemies, pathogens (generally microbes such as fungus) and herbivores (insects,
for example). One approach plants use for defense is to attract species that
suppress pathogens or herbivores -- enemies of their enemies -- by offering food
or shelter. This research explores the effectiveness of providing food and
shelter through experiments that focus on mites that eat harmful fungi on
leaves. The effectiveness of providing food will be explored by experiments with
extrafloral nectaries, small glands on leaves that secrete sugar and attract
mites and ants. The effectiveness of providing shelter will be explored by
experiments with leaf domatia, tiny structures on the undersides of leaves that
house fungus-eating mites. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The traits studied in this
work, extrafloral nectarines and domatia, are very widespread: they are present
on many common trees and popular ornamental shrubs, as well as on crop plants
such as cotton, coffee and grape. Additionally, the interactions between these
traits, mites and fungi are used in agriculture as a way to decrease plant
pathogen damage without the use of harmful fungicides. Thus, understanding their
evolution and ecology can inform how we manage species interactions in our local
ecosystems as well as in our crops and urban landscapes. Undergraduate students
will be involved in this project and mentored in research. Likewise, a program
is in place to communicate the work to middle school students.