* 1209429
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Social Control of Kisspeptin Signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Caroline Hu, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2013
* USD 14,994.00

Animals use signals from the environment to initiate reproductive behavior and
physiology at the appropriate time. In many species, information from an
individual's social environment is especially important for reproduction.
However, the molecules that mediate this interaction between the environment and
the brain are largely unknown. This project is the first to address whether
kisspeptin, a molecule important in regulating puberty, is also involved in
social regulation of adult behavior and physiology. Because the receptor for
kisspeptin is found widely throughout the brain, previous studies predicted that
kisspeptin has a role in behavior in addition to its established role in
puberty. This research will use a fish species in which social cues control
dramatic plasticity in adult male social behavior and physiology. This species
is well suited for studying behavior because it lives in complex communities
where the males frequently engage in social interactions, such as defending
territory and courting prospective mates. The project will integrate multiple
techniques to determine the function of kisspeptin. First, genomic analyses will
be used to identify the gene for kisspeptin in this species. Next, the
researchers will use molecular techniques to visualize the neurons producing
kisspeptin and whether the activity or shape of these neurons change in response
to social cues. Finally, the researchers will test if kisspeptin treatment
affects a male's aggressive or reproductive behavior and whether kisspeptin
interacts with testosterone, a circulating hormone known to influence aggression
in vertebrates. This project will expand our knowledge of the neural circuitry
mediating brain and environment interaction. It will also provide insight into
the evolution of genes responsible for social behavior. Furthermore, this
project will provide a valuable platform for engaging two undergraduate students
and students from the local community in learning about neuroscience.