* 1209979
* The XENON1T Dark Matter Project: A Project Proposal from the US Institutions of the XENON Collaboration
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2012,02/29/2020
* Elena Aprile, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 02/29/2020
* USD 7,812,136.00

This research project addresses the question of the nature of galactic dark
matter with a search for Weakly Interacting Massive Particles (WIMPs), using
two-phase liquid xenon (LXe) Time Projection Chambers (LXeTPCs) as part of the
XENON phased program. XENON100, building upon the success of the XENON10
prototype, represents the current state-of-the-art in WIMP search detectors.
With a realistic discovery potential, XENON100 has already reached a world-
leading sensitivity, and continues to accrue data at the Laboratori Nazionali
del Gran Sasso (LNGS) in Italy towards its ultimate sensitivity reach. To fully
probe a particularly favorable region of electroweak physics for WIMP dark
matter in search of a first robust and statistically significant discovery, the
next phase of the XENON program will be a detector at the ton scale - XENON1T.
The worldwide race towards direct dark matter detection has been dramatically
accelerated by the remarkable progress and evolution of LXeTPCs. They have
shifted the scale of target mass from a few to tens of kilograms whilst
simultaneously reducing both electronic and nuclear recoil backgrounds to
extremely low levels. The XENON collaboration has demonstrated the effective
scaling of LXeTPCs with phased detectors of increasing sensitivity of at least
an order of magnitude, and is ready to move to the ton scale.

This award will provide funding to the US groups for the construction of the
XENON1T detector, cryogenics infrastructure and calibration systems. This
experiment is based on a TPC with 2.2 ton of LXe viewed by low radioactivity
photomultiplier tubes. By exploiting the excellent self-shielding and 3D
position resolution of a LXeTPC, by selecting existing low radioactivity
detector materials and by placing the detector in a large active water shield
and Cherenkov muon veto, the overall event rate within the fiducial target of
1.1 ton is estimated to be over a factor of 100 lower than the background
measured in XENON100. This rate translates to less than one event per ton per
year in the WIMP search region - an unprecedented low background level for a
dark matter experiment.

Broader Impact: The XENON scientific goal to detect the missing mass in the
Universe has all the ingredients to captivate the interests and imagination of
students and the general public alike. The technological advances of this
project can impact society in a number of ways: liquid xenon imaging detectors
and related technologies find applications in several fields outside particle
astrophysics, including homeland security and medical imaging research.