* 1209666
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute for FY 2012 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Jason Narad, Narad                   Jason          R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2013
* USD 5,000.00

This action funds Jason Narad of the University of Massachusetts Amherst to
conduct a research project entitled "Improving relation extraction through
marginalization of hidden syntactic structure," during the summer of 2012 at the
Nara Institute of Science and Technology in Ikoma, Nara, Japan. The host
scientist is Professor Yuji Matsumoto.

The Intellectual Merit of the research project is to provide a general framework
for performing syntax-dependent natural language processing (NLP) tasks in
resource-poor languages. This research focuswa on relation extraction, a
subfield of NLP, which aims to uncover and categorize the relationships between
entities (people, places, organizations) from unstructured text. The most
successful approaches to this problem rely on syntactic annotation which is
unavailable for many languages and costly to produce. The research uses an
alternative approach which alleviates this requirement by instead learning a
syntax-like scaffolding as a set of latent variables in a graphical model.

Broader Impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce.