* 1209714
* SoCS: Collaborative Research: A Human Computational Approach for Improving Data Quality in Citizen Science Projects
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Weng-Keen Wong, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2016
* USD 174,635.00

A unique interdisciplinary team of computer scientists, information scientists,
ornithologists, project managers, and programmers will develop a novel network
between machine learning methods and human observational capacity to explore the
synergies between mechanical computation and human computation. This is called a
Human/Computer Learning Network, and while the focus is to improve data quality
in broad-scale citizen-science projects, the network has the potential for wide
applicability in a variety of complex problem domains. The core of this network
is an active learning feedback loop between machines and humans that
dramatically improves the quality of both, and thereby continually improves the
effectiveness of the network as a whole. The Human/Computer Learning Network
will leverage the contributions of broad recruitment of human observers and
process their contributed data with artificial intelligence algorithms leading
to a total computational power far exceeding the sum of their individual parts.
This work will use the highly successful eBird citizen-science project as a
testbed to develop the Human/Computer Learning Network. eBird engages a global
network of volunteers who submit tens of millions of bird observations annually
to a central database. This research addresses three fundamental data quality
challenges in citizen-science. These are: 1) reducing errors in identification
or classification of objects; 2) identifying and quantifying the differences
between individual observers; 3) reducing the spatial bias prevalent in many
citizen-science projects. To address these challenges, the project will build on
advances in artificial intelligence that now provide the opportunity to study
systems through the generation of models that can account for enormous
complexity. Preliminary work on observer classification will be extended by
developing new multi-label machine learning classification algorithms that
provide better ecological interpretations and more accurate predictions. In
addition, the research will develop new active learning algorithms by
constructing sampling paths that will optimize volunteer survey efforts to
maximize overall spatial coverage, and incentivize participation via
crowdsourcing techniques. Finally, it will study how participants can improve
the quality of their observations based on the feedback and information provided
by the artificial intelligence.

Broad-scale citizen-science projects can recruit extensive networks of
volunteers, who act as intelligent and trainable sensors in the environment to
gather observations. Artificial intelligence processes can dramatically improve
the quality of the observational data that volunteers can provide by filtering
inputs based on observers' expertise, a judgment that is based on aggregated
historical data. By guiding the observers with immediate feedback on observation
accuracy and customization of observation worksheets, the artificial
intelligence processes contribute to advancing expertise of the observers, while
simultaneously improving the quality of the training data on which the
artificial intelligence processes make their decisions. The results of the
project will have significant benefit for all citizen science and broader impact
in an emerging world of ubiquitous computing in which human-machine partnerships
will become increasingly common.