* 1209262
* Materials World Network: Dual Composite Ceramics for Improved Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Gregory Hilmas, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 395,320.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project is a collaboration between two of the
leading research groups in the area of ultra-high temperature ceramics, namely
the Institute for the Science and Technology for Ceramics (ISTEC) in Faenza,
Italy and the Missouri University of Science and Technology in Rolla, MO. The
team at ISTEC includes Dr. Frederic Monteverde and Dr. Diletta Sciti who are
funded separately by the Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR) in Italy. The
focus of the combined effort is on fundamental aspects of processing and
microstructure of boride-based ceramics to improve their mechanical properties
at elevated temperature. Boride ceramics, such as zirconium diboride, are
currently capable of withstanding sustained mechanical loads over a range of
temperatures but fail catastrophically under extreme loads and under the extreme
thermomechanical conditions for which they are being researched and developed.
Applications include thermal protection systems for hypersonic flight,
containment materials and fuel forms for nuclear reactors, high-speed cutting
tools for machining, and ultra-high temperature refractories for metal
production. The focal point of this project is the development of a dual
composite architecture designed to create a new paradigm of structural ceramics
with superior mechanical properties at elevated temperatures and in extreme
environments. The ability to utilize dual composite ceramics in commercial
applications, in extreme environments, will provide improvements in both energy
efficiency and sustainability of future systems such as hypersonic aircraft and
molten metal containment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Utilizing the
combined expertise of the research group at ISTEC in diboride-silicide ceramics
and the processing and properties of hierarchical ceramic composites expertise
of the research group at Missouri S&amp;T, the goal of the project is the
development of a new paradigm of dual composite ceramics with improved elevated
temperature mechanical properties. Zirconium diboride that is liquid phase
sintered with molybdenum disilicide is being used as a base composition for the
dual composite ceramics, although the concept is broadly applicable to any
thermodynamically compatible material system. The role of controlling the
structure and microstructure of ceramics at multiple length scales (i.e., a dual
composite architecture) on the elevated temperature mechanical behavior of
boride-based ceramics is being investigated using experimental studies, physics-
based models, and analytical characterization techniques. The project is timely
based on the global need to develop new ceramic materials for applications in
extreme environments. Furthermore, the outcome of the research has the potential
to transform state of the art boride ceramics into ceramics capable of extending
the lifetime and use temperature of ceramics for applications in extreme
environments, including hypersonic flight vehicles, nuclear reactors, molten
metal and glass containment vessels, and others. Finally, ceramic materials for
extreme environments is an area of research and development that is highly
specialized and in dire need of more trained scientists and engineers to lead
future research efforts. The project is directly impacting this area of the
ceramic field by facilitating the exchange of young, underrepresented
researchers from both institutions and by directly training a graduate student
and two undergraduate students in the processing, testing, and characterization
of ceramics for use in extreme environments.