* 1209338
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Pathogen transmission in wild and domestic ungulates:   Quantifying risk and identifying transmission routes among cattle and wildlife in central Kenya
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Lynne Isbell, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2014
* USD 15,000.00

Wildlife diseases are a recognized conservation threat and public health
concern, yet there is remarkably little information on how diseases spread
through wildlife populations. In this study, microbial genetics and network
analysis are integrated to assess routes of (I) intraspecific pathogen
transmission in reticulated giraffe, and (II) interspecific transmission between
wild and domestic herbivores (black rhinoceros, Grevy's zebra, giraffe, impala,
buffalo, and cattle) in Kenya. Our understanding of the dynamics of pathogen
transmission is limited because it is difficult to assess who transmitted to
whom. This project uses Escherichia coli as a proxy for pathogen transmission.
Transmission between two individuals can be inferred if they share genetically
similar subtypes of E. coli. Inferred transmission will be used to construct a
transmission network for wildlife and livestock in Kenya. The first component of
this project investigates how the spatial and social organization of the giraffe
population influences transmission dynamics. The second component quantifies the
extent and directionality of interspecific transmission and identifies species
that contribute disproportionately to pathogen spread, termed "super-spreaders."
Two of the species included in this study, the Grevy?s zebra and black
rhinoceros, are endangered and vulnerable to disease-related population
declines, which gives this study immediate conservation relevance. Broader
impacts. Although not usually pathogenic, E. coli transmission routes
demonstrate where contact is sufficient for transmission to occur. Knowledge of
these routes can be incorporated into disease control strategies. Targeted
vaccination of super-spreaders is theoretically more effective at limiting
disease than conventional vaccination strategies, but there are no existing
methods to identify super-spreaders in wild populations. A major outcome of this
project will be to develop new tools for identifying super-spreaders and tracing
transmission routes in wildlife. This is a novel approach and will be broadly
applicable in improving our ability to predict the impacts of disease.