* 1209371
* Luminescence as a Structural Probe of Ultra-Small Rare Earth Oxide Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Lidia Smentek, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 12/31/2013
* USD 495,000.00

James Dickerson at Vanderbilt University is supported by the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program for research focusing on the concurrent
experimental and theoretical analysis of ultra-small rare earth-based
nanoparticles of potentially high luminescence efficiency. This investigation
will explore the synthesis, characterization, and theoretical modeling of these
nanoparticles to assess the correlation among nanoparticle size, environmental
conditions (symmetry, crystalline structure, surfactant properties, defects,
etc.), and luminescence characteristics. By studying theoretically and
experimentally the luminescence properties of these nanophosphors, such as doped
gadolinium sesquioxide, it is possible to better understand how surfactant
molecules, crystal distortions, and other nanoscale structural and electronic
effects influence various spectroscopic processes originating from rare earth
ions. The compounds chosen for these investigations [monodisperse, sub-3.0 nm
europium (Eu2O3), terbium (Tb2O3), and doped gadolinium (Gd2O3:RE3+; RE = Eu,
Tb) sesquioxide nanoparticles] have been selected due to their well-known, bulk
phase luminescence characteristics, their simple crystallinity (bcc), and he
unique expertise of this research group in the synthesis, the theoretical
assessment, and the interpretation of their properties. The investigation of
these nanocrystalline properties can be exploited in phosphorescent device
applications ranging from robust video displays to bio-imaging reagents and
infrared telecommunications materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award focuses
on the concurrent experimental and theoretical analysis of the high-efficiency
light emission characteristics of extremely small, nanoscale materials comprised
of rare earth elements. This investigation will explore the production,
analysis, and theoretical study of the properties of these nanoparticles to
assess the relationship among their size, their intrinsic features, like
symmetry and morphology, and their light emission characteristics. By studying
theoretically and experimentally these materials, a better understand will be
obtained of how to optimize their properties for use in phosphorescent device
applications ranging from robust, ultra-high definition video displays to next-
generation, high-acuity medical imaging reagents, and high-speed
telecommunications materials. Diverse, underrepresented graduate and
undergraduate students will participate in this project thanks to existing
programs at Vanderbilt University, such as the Fisk-Vanderbilt Masters-to-PhD
Bridge Program.