* 1209018
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: An integrative assessment of body size and growth patterns in therocephalian synapsids before and after the end-Permian extinction
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Christian Sidor, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,365.00

This award supports two years of doctoral research to complete an investigation
of body size and life history (growth and reproduction) tactics in the therapsid
ancestors of mammals before and after the end-Permian extinction (ca. 252
million years ago), a period of intense ecosystem instability in which more than
90% of animal species on Earth became extinct. Based on a large sample of
mammal-like therapsid fossils from the Karoo Basin of South Africa, we will
integrate hard-tissue histology (bone tissue growth) and phylogenetic
comparative methods to assess for the first time whether body size reductions
and changes in vascular growth patterns recorded in the bones of therapsids were
driven by the end-Permian extinction. In doing so, we address how increased
environmental stress and instability may influence life history evolution in
major vertebrate groups on a macroevolutionary scale. This study will also shed
light on the origins of novel life history strategies, such as rapid,
determinate (mammal-like) growth in our own mammalian lineage.&lt;br/&gt;The
funding will assist in the maintenance of an active histological facility and
analytical resources to support student projects and lab-based course materials,
offering opportunities for professional development of underprivileged future
scientists and providing new teaching resources to our institution. Data will be
archived on a freely-accessible online database of histology images and similar
electronic data repositories (e.g., Paleobiology Database). Additionally, work
with South African institutions will strengthen international collaborations and
raise awareness of natural history, evolution, and extinction within a newly
industrialized country, and will help inform decisions on protecting extant
biodiversity by forecasting long term biotic responses to future ecosystem
perturbations.&lt;br/&gt;