* 1209019
* Increasing the Recruitment, Retention, and Advancement of Women in STEM at Indiana's Community College System (ivy WiSTEM)
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Joyce Wilkerson, Ivy Tech Community College of Indiana
* Continuing Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 09/30/2015
* USD 157,945.00

Ivy Tech, Indiana's state-wide system of community colleges, proposes to conduct
a statewide investigation of differences in the hiring and advancement of STEM
women in both full-time and adjunct positions. They have four basic goals
including: the collection and processing of institutional data on recruitment,
retention, and advancement of women in STEM; review available sources and models
for institutional transformation; garner institutional support for
transformation; and develop a comprehensive transformation plan. Some of the
strategies they will use to accomplish their goals are surveys, focus groups,
guest speakers, and visits to other ADVANCE institutions. Information about
women in STEM at community colleges is lacking in the literature and as the
largest community college system in the country, this proposal presents a unique
opportunity to collect a large amount of information about this understudied
population. As designed, the potential for model building and significant data
collection are outstanding. The enormous role that community colleges play in
the production of STEM professionals, including eventual PhD recipients and URM
STEM professionals is well documented. Understanding the hiring, retention, and
promotion STEM women faculty in this setting would contribute greatly to the
literature base.