* 1209280
* TC: Small: Mobile Phone Password Managers: An Evaluation and a Re-Design based on Human-Perceptible Communication
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2011,08/31/2016
* Nitesh Saxena, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2016
* USD 453,433.00

Textual passwords and personal identification numbers (PINs) are the most
dominant means of authentication used currently; and this trend is very likely
to continue in the future. However, passwords are either difficult to use (if
they are long and randomly generated), or insecure (if users are given the
choice of their own passwords). Password Managers are one promising approach
aimed to improve the usability and security of passwords, by having a computing
device, rather than the user herself, store (and optionally, generate)
passwords, and then later deliver or recall them to the user whenever access is
needed. A number of password management schemes have been proposed and are
employed currently by many affected users.

This project concentrates on password management using mobile devices (e.g.,
cell phones), whose ubiquity makes them an appealing authentication aid. It
embarks upon two research directions vis-a-vis such phone managers. First, the
project aims at a systematic and formal evaluation, via usability studies and
surveys, of currently deployed phone managers. Second, it proposes a redesign
that exploits the many different capabilities and characteristics of modern
phones (such as on-board sensors and computational resources), in order to
address several of the drawbacks with current phone managers. Specifically, a
general-purpose password management approach -- called proxy-based
authentication -- is introduced. As the name suggests, this approach uses the
phone as an authentication proxy between the user and the device to be
authenticated to. The project explores how proxy-based authentication can be
used to strongly authenticate to: (1) critical online services -- that continue
using passwords or PINs -- without incorporating any service-specific
modifications, (2) local devices (such as desktops, laptops, ATMs), and (3)
ubiquitous but constrained devices (such as personal RFID tags) for user-
controlled privacy and enhanced security.

The technical merit of this project lies in two aspects. First, it will arrive
at a better understanding of current phone managers in terms of usability,
efficiency, and security. The goal is to gain insights into users' mental models
when using these password managers. Second, the project will pursue the
realization of usable proxy-based authentication primitives. To this end, this
work is able to simply reuse wealth of existing research on usable user-phone
authentication. Instead, the main thrust is on exploring the design and
evaluation of usable authentication methods between the phone and the service
that ultimately requires authentication. In particular, for phone-service
authentication, the project investigates novel short-range human-perceptible
(HP) communication that is commonly and cheaply available, fast, robust, least
intrusive, and low-power. Notably, the research investigates how to use HP
communication to create authenticated channels, and authenticated and
eavesdropping resilient channels. Based on the principle of extrinsically
motivated design, the project also explores playful HP channels. These channels
make the task of manual transmission a fun and entertaining activity for the
users.

The anticipated impacts of the project include: (1) enhanced interaction among
several disciplines including security and cryptography, computer and electrical
engineering, networking, and usability and HCI; (2) increased awareness among
students and users regarding security practices vis-a-vis one of the most
important security problems (authentication); (3) integration of PI's research
with educational activities, enabling students taking part in the project to
acquire currently uncommon skills at the cusp of Human-Computer Interaction and
Trustworthy Computing; (4) emphasis on technology transfer by working with
manufacturers and industrial consortia. Another long-term impact of this work is
the development of security technologies that can eventually be put to use by
general population, i.e., are usable in the true sense. Furthermore, the work is
expected to be instrumental in stimulating research on usable security
technologies for the blind or visually impaired users who are usually at a high
risk for various security vulnerabilities and attacks, perhaps more so in the
context of authentication.