* 1209747
* Dissertation Research:   Adaptive behavioral and physiological changes among populations undergoing range expansion
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Lynn Martin, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 08/31/2014
* USD 14,924.00

Non-native species cause major ecological and economic damage in their
introduced range; it is important to identify predictors of invasiveness to
prevent future invasions. This information might also prove to be important is
assessing the vulnerability of native species to environmental change. One of
the most recent introduction events, the house sparrow (Passer domesticus) to
Kenya, is still expanding beyond the site of initial introduction. Kenyan house
sparrows do not have high genetic diversity, however still exhibit extensive
behavioral and physiological variation; interestingly, the observed variation is
correlated with the estimated age of the population. House sparrows closest to
the edge of the range are more exploratory and release more stress hormones
(glucocorticoids) in response to stressors than those closer to the site of
initial introduction. However, what these trait differences mean in terms of
fitness along the range expansion is unknown; further, how these differences
arise given the lack of genetic diversity is also unknown. The goal of the
present research is to determine A) if increased exploration and stress hormones
grant a fitness advantage at the range edge, but a disadvantage in more familiar
habitats; and B) whether these differences arise due to differences in maternal
care during offspring development. To test these questions, observation of
natural parental care as well as manipulattion of a mother's ability to
provision during the nestling period in nestbox colonies will be carried out in
Kenya. The PI predicts that increased exploration and stress hormones increase
fitness at the edge of a range, but decrease it at the site of introduction.
Further, it is also expected that food supplementation will generate offspring
most like those naturally occurring at the site of introduction and a reduction
of provisioning will produce offspring similar to those at the range edge. The
proposed study will strengthen international collaborations and provide research
opportunities for underrepresented minority STEM undergraduates.