* 1209332
* Materials World Network: Structural Design and Micromechanical Properties of Mechanotransducing Biological Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Vladimir Tsukruk, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 02/29/2016
* USD 390,000.00

TECHICAL SUMMARY This Materials World Network project focuses on the
understanding of principles found in natural vibrational receptors and on the
mechanism of mechanical signal detection with the spider slit biosensory system
at the material level. The investigation of the direct spatial correlation among
cuticule morphology, hierarchical structural organization and spatial
distribution of micromechanical properties in spider stress-sensing slit-
sensilla as studied with a combination of microbeam small angle X-ray
synchrotron scattering, dynamic nanoindentation, and surface force spectroscopy
will be a crucial point of this highly cross-disciplinary biomaterial project.
The PIs will explore the time-dependent micromechanical properties of these
mechano-receptors embedded in the spider exoskeleton with high spatial
resolution and relate the findings to the function of these organs as sensitive
and selective vibration filters. The PIs consider the micromechanical properties
of the cuticle, which are dependent on the protein fiber arrangement and
orientation as key parameters for the mechanical response during slit
compression and the efficient transmittance of external mechanical stimuli.
Ultimately, this knowledge can be utilized in the future design and development
of bio-inspired mechanoresponsive and adaptive nanostructured materials.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY The Materials World Network project focuses on deeper
understanding of biological vibrational receptors found in large spiders from
prospective of their morphology and physical mechanical properties. Ultimately,
this knowledge can be utilized in the future biomimetic development of
responsive and adaptive synthetic materials with tailored vibrational and
elastic properties as smart mechanical filters, anti-vibrational pads, soft
robotic arms, and pressure-sensitive glues. The broader impact of this project
is anticipated through the enhanced training of graduate and undergraduate
students with an emphasis on their early involvement in interdisciplinary
research and invaluable international research experience which is facilitated
by an intensive collaboration with researchers from Germany and Austria. To
further enhance this education, the lead researcher will further develop an
undergraduate course on advanced soft nanomaterials.

This project is supported by the Biomaterials program and the Office of Special
Programs in the Division of Materials Research.