* 1209152
* Bayesian Learning with Structured Sparsity
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Feng Liang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2015
* USD 135,181.00

A common premise held in high-dimensional data analysis is that only a small
fraction of the covariates/variables is relevant. This is termed as the sparsity
assumption meaning that the unknown parameter, which needs to be inferred from
the data, is sparse. In many real world applications, there is in addition some
side information on the structure dependence among elements of this high-
dimensional parameter. For example, they may be grouped, ordered, or linked on a
graph. Consequently such structure constraints should be incorporated into the
ordinary sparsity assumption, which is what we call the structured sparsity. The
scientific foci of this proposal are to develop novel Bayesian theory,
methodology and computational tools to adaptively utilize structure information
into statistical inference, such as variable selection, estimation, and
dimension reduction.

Many problems in modern statistics can be formulated as recovering some unknown
high-dimensional parameter from the noisy data. In some real world applications,
besides the observed data, there is a kind of side information termed as
"structured sparsity" on the unknown parameter. The ultimate goal of this
project is to develop novel theory, methodology and algorithms to adaptively
utilize such side information for statistical inference. The statistical and
computational challenges addressed in this project are a response to practical
problems arising from the Principle Investigator's collaborative research on
neuroimaging analysis, binoinformatics, and marketing science. The proposed
methodological development and statistics research will result in useful methods
for broader applications.