* 1209178
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Iron availability and dynamics of an emerging infectious disease: Can a micronutrient cause macro-level outcomes?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* James Collins, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

The element iron plays a key role in the cellular chemistry of nearly all life
forms. Surprisingly, while iron is the fourth most abundant element on Earth, it
often limits growth and reproduction of organisms because it is insoluble in
water. Parasites face a special challenge in acquiring iron because hosts
actively sequester it. To obtain iron, therefore, parasites must take it from
host tissues by overcoming an array of host defenses. Changes in host iron
levels alter the dynamics of this struggle; for example, there is a tendency for
elevated host iron concentration to cause increased parasite virulence across a
variety of infectious diseases, including human diseases. To understand iron?s
role in the dynamics of an emerging amphibian disease, chytridiomycosis, the
proposed study will test experimentally the biological effects of host iron
bioaccumulation on the likelihood of acquiring and spreading an infectious
disease. The project is a novel analysis of a potentially broad mechanism
influencing the spread of disease in populations of diverse
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this research could explain the
recent emergence of a suite of wildlife diseases, if iron is, as suggested,
increasing in aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems globally. Throughout the study
non-scientists will participate in research and the process of discovery.
Researchers will engage elementary school students and adults through
innovative, university-sponsored outreach programs such as: "Ask a Biologist", a
question and answer resource for K-12 students and teachers; "Graduate Partners
in Science Education", an after school science program for 7th and 8th graders;
and "SHADES", a mentoring program for underrepresented minorities seeking a
degree in science, technology, engineering, or math). These activities will
engage the public in scientific inquiry and enrich public education, fostering
an appreciation of science and conservation.