* 1209943
* Dissertation Research: The influence of development configuration on thermal pollution in urban streams
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Kayleigh Somers, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2013
* USD 14,902.00

Streams in urban watersheds are typically warmer at low flows and can experience
higher temperatures during storm flows when run-off passes over hot paved
surfaces. It's known that high temperatures can stress in-stream organisms,
however our understanding of the relationship between development and altered
stream temperature remains imprecise. Water temperature will be monitored at
multiple locations to distinguish the importance of the spatial configuration of
development, contrasting above-ground connectivity (e.g., impervious patch size,
shape, location, shading) and below-ground connectivity (e.g., stormwater
infrastructure, especially pipes). This will improve our understanding of the
impact of urban development on heat pulses in streams, and more generally on
stream ecosystems. Because these metrics will be linked more explicitly to
hydrologic behaviors than many development proxies that are now commonly used,
this research will help to better understand how urban watersheds function and
how policies can ameliorate negative effects of urbanization on stream
ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborators in this research will include
faculty and graduate student researchers at Duke University, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, and North Carolina State University, the Triangle J
Council of Governments, and watershed managers working for Chapel Hill, Durham,
Carrboro, and Raleigh. A local eighth grade class will be involved through the
use of an outdoor classroom and the presentation of results during class times
and members of Girl Scout Troop 514 will participate in fieldwork and a day of
learning about thermal pollution through hands-on activities.