* 1209811
* East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute for FY 2012 in Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Anatoly Zlotnik, Zlotnik                 Anatoly
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2013
* USD 5,836.00

NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute for FY 2012 in Australia NSF proposal
number OISE-1209811 PI Name: Anatoly V. Zlotnik

This action funds Anatoly Zlotnik of Washington University in St. Louis to
conduct a research project in computer science, entitled "Control of Large-scale
Or Uncertain Dynamical Systems (CLOUDS)" during the summer of 2012 at Australian
National University in Canberra, Australian Capital Territory, Australia. The
host scientist is Matthew R. James.

The Intellectual Merit of this work stems from the need to investigate
techniques for controlling large-scale dynamical systems subject to uncertainty.
Novel computational methods that enable applications in quantum control are
being developed. As engineered systems rapidly grow in complexity, the task of
modeling, controlling, and optimizing their behavior becomes increasingly
challenging. This motivates research at the interface between control,
optimization, and computation. The ability to guide many structurally similar
dynamical systems between states of interest, or calibrate a complex dynamical
structure to a desired behavior, is fundamental to the development of new
quantum technologies. The discovery and optimal design of controls that are
robust to variation or uncertainty in system parameters is paramount, and the
analytical description and practical synthesis of such controls are challenging.
The proposed research develops new methods for control design and synthesis that
solve optimal control problems arising in the study of such complex systems. The
Broader Impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S., an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location, and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. In addition to enabling the solution of a wide class of
complex control problems, additional impacts are expected in a variety of
fields, e.g., emerging applications in neuroscience, magnetic resonance
spectroscopy and imaging, and power infrastructure management.