* 1209137
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phylogeny and evolution of the Brassica crops and wild relatives (tribe Brassiceae, Brassicaceae): morphological diversification and homoplasy
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Joseph Pires, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2013
* USD 14,999.00

Humans have used Brassicas for thousands of years as a source of food, energy
and medical cures. Plant architecture, leaf form, and flower and fruit structure
have evolved independently and multiple times in wild and domesticated
Brassicas. Little is known about how these important and diverse groups of
plants are related to each other. Integrating the knowledge about genetic
relationships with morphological data will help to decipher the dynamics of
evolution and plant domestication. The research goals for this study are to:
&lt;br/&gt;(1) Understand the evolutionary relationships among Brassica crops
and wild relatives&lt;br/&gt;(2) Examine the evolution of
morphology&lt;br/&gt;(3) Relate morphological evolution with gene molecular
variation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed methods offer new and inexpensive
ways to sequence multiple genes at once while simultaneously providing an
innovative way to understand plant development. Graduate and undergraduates
students will be trained on the methods developed here, including an online
resource for the scientific community. An ?evo-devo? lab that takes advantage of
college freshman?s familiarity with the grocery store Brassica oleracea
(cabbage, broccoli, cauliflower, kale, etc.) will be implemented. Outreach to
the public through the Columbia Center of Urban Agriculture (CCAU) is planned.