* 1209626
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute for FY 2012 in Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Amy Jordan, Jordan                  Amy            J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2013
* USD 5,836.00

This action funds Amy Jordan of University of Washington to conduct a research
project, entitled "Identifying starch residues on pots from early Colonial
plantation sites in the Banda Islands, Maluku Province, Indonesia" during the
summer of 2012 at University of New South Wales in Syndey, Australia. The host
scientist is Judith Field.

The Intellectual Merit of the research includes using an underutilized research
technique on artifacts from a little-studied area and time period. The Banda
Islands were the location of early experiments in colonialism by European powers
and research into various aspects of European occupation can provide information
for cross cultural studies of the different responses to colonialism. A starch
grain analysis of food residue on ceramic sherds from colonial plantations in
the Banda Islands gives direct evidence of dietary choices in this time period,
a period of intense social change. This evidence is then used in conjunction
with historical records to determine if ethnic background may have influenced
food choice during the colonial period. Using this underutilized analytical
technique to investigate colonial era archaeological remains will add to the
growing body of Neolithic and pre-colonial archaeology conducted in the Banda
Islands.

Broader Impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce.