* 1209283
* Collaborative Research:  GSE/RES: Contextualizing Computing Education: The Role of Interdisciplinary, Collab. Research Models in Undergrad. Women's Ed. &amp; Vocational Trajectorie
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2011,09/30/2016
* Karen Kim, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 09/30/2016
* USD 236,946.00

Intellectual Merit: California State University Long Beach and the University of
California Los Angeles are studying interdisciplinary collaborative research
models (ICRM) and the impact of ICRM experiences on undergraduate women in
computer science and engineering (CSE). The central objective of the study is to
investigate how ICRM experiences in CSE departments shape undergraduate women's
educational and vocational trajectories (persistence in major, graduation,
intention to pursue graduate degrees and/or careers in computing) to generate
data relevant for improving CSE curricula/programs. The theoretical approach
incorporates the intersection of personal and organizational variables:
organizational culture theory allows for close analysis of the departmental
cultures in which students experience ICRM, and vocational choice theory
includes background and societal impact and allows for individual agency in
career decisions. The study will include six pre-selected case study
institutions and incorporates a multi-phased approach in which the cases and
research subjects are studied in-depth over three years involving in-person
observations and interviews with students, faculty and academic
leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: ICRM activities are increasing in
colleges and universities, and understanding their impact is important for
enhancing the enrollment, persistence, and graduation of women CSE majors who
pursue computing professions. The results of this study, disseminated through
multiple venues to both practitioners and researchers, will provide an
understanding of how ICRM activities may positively impact women's educational
and vocational trajectories in computing fields. Moreover, the study has the
potential to build networks of practitioners and researchers who have an
interest in improving the experiences and retention of women in CSE departments
and professions.