* 1209920
* Search for Neutrinoless Double Beta Decay with NEMO-3 and SuperNEMO Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2012,01/31/2017
* Karol Lang, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 01/31/2017
* USD 1,251,000.00

Neutrino oscillations not only demonstrate that neutrinos have mass but also
imply the existence of new symmetries beyond the Standard Model. Natural
conjectures suggest that deeper understanding of neutrinos may provide a glimpse
onto phenomena at a Planck-scale energy level, could broaden our knowledge of
the fundamental forces, could shed light onto the initial creation of leptons
and baryons, and can help to improve our understanding of the early evolution of
the Universe. These observations motivate further studies of the properties of
neutrinos including investigating if they are Majorana- or Dirac-type. Majorana-
type neutrinos lead to a neutrinoless double beta decay -- the second-order weak
nuclear process for which an initial state nucleus with atomic weight and number
(A, Z) is transformed into a nucleus with (A, Z + 2) with the emission of only
two electrons. The two electrons in the final state carry a total energy equal
to the energy of the nuclear transition. This seemingly simple principle
provides the main observable for detecting neutrinoless double beta decay and
poses an experimental challenge in searches for such
transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide funding to continue
this group's participation in the NEMO-3 data analysis and in the construction
of the first SuperNEMO module (the 'Demonstrator'). The NEMO-3 data, collected
at the Modane Underground Laboratory under the French-Italian Alps between 2003
and 2011, will be fully analyzed over the next couple of years. For SuperNEMO,
the next three years will be a critical period for completing and commissioning
the Demonstrator. This group has two new important commitments: to provide the
high voltage system for all Demonstrator photomultipliers, and to coordinate the
radio-purification of 82-Selenium and production of isotopic
foils.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Proving or disproving that neutrinos
are Majorana-type may shed light onto the early stages of the evolution of the
Universe. This experiment will advance knowledge about some of the rarest
phenomena in Nature. On the technical side, the group is developing a unique low
background counting technique which may be applied outside of physics and be of
general benefit to society. They plan to build on the UT campus an exhibit
gallery illustrating the discovery, the underlying physics, and applications of
natural radioactivity, cosmic rays, and related subatomic phenomena. It would
'tell a story' that would educate, entertain, fascinate to seek further
information, and perhaps steer students or general audience towards the
sciences.