* 1209789
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute for FY 2012 in New Zealand
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Mallory Messersmith, Messersmith             Mallory        K
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2013
* USD 5,836.00

This action funds Mallory Kate Messersmith of the University of Alabama at
Birmingham to conduct a research project, entitled "Utilizing Aerial Imagery to
Locate Archaeological Sites in New Zealand and Determine their Functions,"
during the summer of 2012 at the University of Otago in Dunedin, Otago, New
Zealand. The host scientist is Dr. Mark McCoy.

The Intellectual Merit of the research project lies in the use of remote sensing
techniques such as LiDAR analysis to locate and analyze prehistoric earthworks
in New Zealand. While remote sensing has been utilized in some forms for
decades, it is only with recent advances in resolution and techniques that its
use has become widespread in the archaeological community. This project utilizes
aerial-based LiDAR imagery to identify, categorize, and analyze earthworks and
their surrounding landscapes in order to contribute to the broader investigation
of the function of earthworks in prehistoric New Zealand.

The Broader Impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-
hand research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science,
science policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce.