* 1209135
* Materials World Network:  Targeting New Complex Itinerant Magnets Using Experiment and Theory
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Gordon Miller, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 07/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This Materials World Network project,supported by the Solid-
State and Materials Chemistry program and the Office of Special Programs in the
Division of Materials Research, combines synthesis, diffraction, magnetization
measurements with first principles electronic structure theory to design and
understand new intermetallic ferromagnets and antiferromagnets. Experimental
activity will focus on complex 4d and 5d metal-boride frameworks with magnetic
3d elements, e.g., Cr-Ni, inserted in voids to create magnetic structures with
low-dimensional character. The metal-boride framework is a structurally strong,
electronically robust, and provides a mechanism for magnetic exchange between
adjacent magnetic metal atoms via the spins on the conduction electrons.
Previous support focused on structures with four-fold symmetry; new discoveries
expand our studies to six-fold and three-fold symmetry, in which frustration
effects can influence magnetic behavior. Specifically, atomic and magnetic
structures will be determined by X-ray and neutron diffraction as well as
magnetization experiments. Electronic structure theory will probe the energetics
of various atomic and magnetic structures by evaluating orbital and exchange
interactions to establish chemical rules and to calculate transition
temperatures for ferromagnetic or antiferromagnetic behavior. Theoretical
results will provide feedback for subsequent synthetic targets with predicted
magnetic behavior. Theory will also investigate the magnetic structures and
characteristics of the simpler MM'P and MM'As (M, M' = V-Cu), which also show
tetragonal and trigonal symmetries. This work will establish the generality of
the theoretical approach. At present, no general chemical rules exist to target
compounds with permanent magnetic behaviour. The successful outcome will
establish the evolution of magnetic behavior within a single structural family
to identify trends in magnetic behavior as various chemical and physical
parameters change in systematic ways.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY This scientific effort combines experiment and theory to
design and prepare new magnets belonging to a recently discovered family of
metal-rich compounds. The complexity of these compounds allows chemical tuning,
that can be accomplished by synthesis and can be studied by quantum chemistry.
From this systematic study of a chemical family of compounds, a new set of rules
will emerge for targeting metallic, permanent magnets, which have numerous
technological applications. The real challenge will be to predict, via theory,
the temperature range at which such targeted materials will show permanent
magnetic behavior. The scientific effort will provide students a truly
interdisciplinary problem, by combining chemistry and physics with experiment
and theory. The student participants will clearly learn how different scientific
subjects and approaches impact other scientific areas. The student participants
from Aachen, Germany and Ames, Iowa will have opportunities for exchange, and
they will learn both experimental and theoretical components of research in
solid-state chemistry. In summary, this effort represents a strong, synergistic
coupling of experiment and theory that will identify and characterize new
magnetic materials, with the broader goal of establishing predictive rules for
building newer magnets.