* 1209570
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  The effect of development on evolution of a reproductive trait in Drosophila
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Cassandra Extavour, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2014
* USD 14,957.00

The morphological differences within and between species are largely the result
of differences in development. It is poorly understood how the development of an
organ can impact the resulting adult morphology and how this might constrain or
enhance evolution. This dissertation research will investigate the developmental
basis of evolutionary change in ovarian morphology in Drosophilid flies. In
these flies, as in all insects, the ovary is divided into substructures called
ovarioles that act as assembly lines for egg production. The number of ovarioles
has a large impact on reproductive capacity, as flies with more ovarioles can
lay more eggs. Ovariole number can evolve rapidly among closely related species
and is sometimes correlated with the specific environment (niche) where larvae
feed and grow. The PIs will investigate ovary development of species with
diverse ovariole numbers to understand (1) how different developmental changes
alter ovariole number, and (2) how niche-specialization influences ovariole
number evolution.

This project will combine lab and field work to provide insights into how the
development of the ovary influences its evolutionary trajectory. In addition,
this research will provide training for undergraduate students, including
members of underrepresented minorities. Hawaiian Drosophilids will also be used
to educate elementary school children at a local afterschool art program, where
students will learn about the function of different morphological features
through drawing.