* 1209404
* Weather Ready Nation Workshop: A Vital Conversation; Norman, Oklahoma; December 13-15, 2011
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2012
* Karyn Sawyer, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 11/30/2012
* USD 25,000.00

The Weather Ready Nation Workshop is a 3-day workshop to be held in Norman, OK
December 13-15, 2011.

Intellectual merit This effort is pertinent to maximization of two-way learning
and knowledge sharing that is cross-disciplinary across the weather enterprise
and stakeholder community. This includes input from the emergency management
community, educators, health and safety experts, engineers, physical and social
scientists, planners and responders, government agencies and officials at the
Federal, state and local levels.

Broader impacts The workshop will promote science to meet the needs of society
and our nation for predicting, mitigating, and preventing severe storm and
tornado hazards. The expected outcomes are: 1) Identifying, prioritizing, and
setting in motion actions to improve the nation's resiliency against tornadoes
and other severe weather 2) Identifying advancements in longer term outlooks and
forecasts and their links to preparedness 3) Identifying advancements in short-
term forecasts, watches and warnings and their links to responses 4) Outlining
and initiating end-to-end pilot projects within the stakeholder communities to
improve the nation's resiliency to tornadoes and other severe weather. Ensuring
these activities are mapped into the existing approved National Weather Service
pilot projects. 5) Identifying scientific and technological opportunities and
promoting innovation to advance the end-to-end process from observations and
severe storm detection, to storm scale predictive modeling, to collaborative
interactions with users in preparedness, the provisions of warnings and
forecasts, and response and recovery.

UCAR's (University Corporation For Atmospheric Research) Joint Office for
Science Support (JOSS) will use funding provided by the National Science
Foundation for support of the workshop to provide full travel support for
approximately 15 attendees.