* 1209734
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute for FY 2012 in Taiwan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* zachary haber, haber                   zachary        b
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2013
* USD 5,836.00

This action funds Zachary B. Haber of the University of Nevada, Reno to conduct
a research project, entitled "Development of prefabricated bridge columns with
innovative structural design and connections," during the summer of 2012 at The
National Center for Research on Earthquake Engineering (NCREE) in Taipei,
Taiwan. The host scientists are Prof. Kuo-Chun Chang of National Taiwan
University and Prof. Yu-Chen Ou of National Taiwan University of Science and
Technology.

The Intellectual Merit of the research project is to develop novel prefabricated
concrete bridge columns that can be rapidly assembled and utilize innovative
structural details. These new elements are being developed by integrating
technologies developed and tested independently and brought together in this
project. There are a number of advantages to the new design, including rapid
replacement of of bridges during construction, repair, and replacement after
severe natural disasters such as earthquakes, landslides, flooding, and
hurricanes.

The Broader Impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-
hand research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science,
science policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce.