* 1209321
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Effects of suburbanization on multispecies plant-animal interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2012,09/30/2013
* Adrian Carper, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Peter Alpert
* 09/30/2013
* USD 13,560.00

Urban areas within the United States have rapidly expanded over the past 50
years, increasing the extent of suburban development. Such change in land use
has been proposed as a dominant factor in the decline of native bee pollinators,
raising concern over the integrity of pollination services in suburban areas.
However, many factors likely determine how suburbanization affects bees and the
plants that depend on them for pollination. The goal of this study is to
determine how suburbanization changes interactions between plants, their bee
pollinators, and other insects that consume flowers. Previous research has
documented that suburban forests actually harbor more bees than natural forests,
but that plants growing in suburban forests are also more likely to have flowers
damaged by floral herbivores, which could make plants less attractive to bee
pollinators. This research will determine 1) how damage to flowers affects
pollination of native plants, and 2) how this relationship varies between
suburban and natural forests. This research is novel because few studies have
addressed how suburbanization affects pollination indirectly through changes in
interactions between beneficial bees and detrimental flower feeding insects.

Pollination is of great ecological and economic importance ? pollinators are
essential for the reproduction of most flowering plants, and the value of
pollination for global food production is estimated to exceed $200 billion
annually. In addition, growing concern over declines in native pollinators and
the sustainability of their pollination services underscores the need for
research on factors driving changes in plant-pollinator interactions. The
results of this study will provide ecological insight into how human development
affects pollination and could produce recommendations for the conservation of
pollination services in developing and developed areas. In addition, this
research fosters public interest in and awareness of the importance of
pollination through interactions with public and private land owners,
cooperation with suburban home owners associations, and communication with
individual homeowners. As public interest and involvement are integral to the
dissemination of scientific research, an informational pamphlet, including the
findings from this and previous research, will be developed and distributed to
all cooperating landowners, homeowners, and public agencies.