* 1209084
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Mitigating with macrophytes:  How plants buffer aquatic communities from anthropogenic perturbations
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Rick Relyea, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2013
* USD 14,994.00

In contemporary ecology, it is becoming increasingly important to consider the
effects of human activities on the environment. However, an equally important,
but often overlooked, challenge is to consider how ecological interactions may
ameliorate these human impacts. At the University of Pittsburgh, we have
developed a unique and innovative research program that addresses these
contemporary challenges by investigating the interactive effects of
anthropogenic perturbations and ecological interactions. Specifically, we are
examining the extent to which aquatic plants can mitigate the environmental
consequences of anthropogenic stressors that make their way into freshwater
ecosystems. While our prior work has shown that aquatic plants dramatically
reduce the lethal effects of stressors to ecologically important aquatic
species, we still have a poor understanding of whether this phenomenon
translates up to complex communities. To take this critical next step, we will
examine whether, and to what extent, aquatic plants can mitigate the effects of
single exposures to high concentrations of stressors versus repeated exposures
to lower concentrations in complex aquatic food webs. This research will advance
our understanding of the effects that anthropogenic perturbations are having in
biological communities, but also of how common components of most freshwater
communities can alter, and potentially reduce, those effects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to conducting this research and disseminating
it within the scientific community, we also engage in a number of activities to
promote environmental awareness with the public. For example, we frequently work
with K-12 students, where we discuss our research and the importance of the
research to conservation. Further, we run annual teacher workshops at the
University of Pittsburgh's biological field station, the Pymatuning Laboratory
of Ecology, where middle and high school teachers learn how to conduct and
integrate scientific experiments into classroom learning experiences for their
students. We hope that our studies and efforts to provide students with
scientific experiences early in their careers will lead to the development of
innovative new strategies for conserving the environment in the future.