* 1209153
* Analysis and Applications of Two Partial Differential Equations Modeling Geophysical Fluids
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Jiahong Wu, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2016
* USD 194,634.00

This award will support research that addresses fundamental issues as well as
practical applications of two well-known partial differential equations modeling
geophysical fluids: the surface quasi-geostrophic (SQG) equation and the two-
dimensional (2D) Boussinesq equation. The SQG equation has been very useful in
modeling large-scale motions of atmosphere and oceans such as the frontogenesis,
the formation of sharp fronts between masses of hot and cold air. The Boussinesq
equation has also been successful in modeling many geophysical flows such as
atmospheric fronts and ocean circulations. In addition, the Boussinesq equation
is also at the center of turbulence theories concerning turbulent thermal
convection. Mathematically, the SQG equation and the 2D Boussinesq equation
serve as lower dimensional models of the three-dimensional (3D) hydrodynamics
equations. In fact, they both retain the key features of the 3D Navier-Stokes
and the 3D Euler equations such as the vortex stretching mechanism. The proposed
study on these 2D models may shed light on the mystery surrounding the 3D
equations. This project focuses on the fundamental issue of whether physically
relevant solutions to these equations are globally regular for all time or they
develop singularities. The objective here is to introduce new ideas and develop
effective techniques to solve the outstanding open global regularity problem on
the supercritical SQG equation and on the Boussinesq equation with partial or no
dissipation. Extensive large numerical simulations will be performed to provide
insight to the underlying dynamics and novel estimates via dedicated tools from
harmonic analysis and differential equations will be derived to gauge the large-
time behavior of their solutions. The award will support Ph.D. students in
mathematics at Oklahoma State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partial
differential equations are fundamental tools in understanding many fluid
phenomena ranging from small scale blood flows to large-scale geophysical flows
and have played pivotal roles in many practical applications involving fluid
flows. Outstandingly among them are the Navier-Stokes equations, which are
widely used for describing phenomena that are as varied as lubrication in
machine equipment, airflow around a wind turbine, oceanic flows, and large scale
atmospheric flows that are responsible for cold fronts and the jet stream. The
study and use of the full Navier-Stokes equation is notoriously difficult and
there are still fundamental open questions associated with them. Researchers
have therefore developed several simplified versions of these equations that
still retain some of their fundamental properties. These partial differential
equations have been at the center of numerous analytical, experimental and
numerical investigations. One of the most prominent problems concerning these
equations is whether all of their classical solutions are global in time. An
affirmative answer would suggest that they may be valid even in extremal flow
situations and that it makes sense to attempt to solve them with computational
methods, while a negative answer will point to possible limitations of their use
and to inherent difficulties when a numerical solution is attempted. This
problem can be extremely challenging and remains open in many important cases.
The main goal of this project is to create new strategies and develop effective
techniques to further advance the research on and improve our understanding of
this difficult problem. The emphasis will be on unconventional approaches that
combine methods and tools from different mathematical disciplines such as fluid
mechanics, harmonic analysis and numerical simulations. The project will
integrate research with education, promoting teaching and training of students.
Four Ph.D. students will work with the PI on various aspects of the problems
that will be tackled with this award and will be trained in the use of a wide
variety of mathematical techniques. In addition, the PI will organize several
specialized scientific conferences and conference sessions during the award
period, which will involve and support junior mathematicians as well as
researchers from under-represented groups.