* 1209661
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Climate change and biome range shifts at high elevations
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Kevin Ford, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2014
* USD 14,824.00

Ecologists have long recognized that climate variables (such as temperature or
snowfall) play a key role in determining the geographic ranges of species and
types of communities. Thus, as our planet becomes warmer due to climate change,
these ranges are expected to shift toward the poles and uphill. However, a
complicating factor is that non-climatic variables (such as soil quality) also
influence biological ranges and how rapidly organisms can respond to climate
change. The goal of this research is to understand the importance of both
climatic and non-climatic constraints on the future distribution of the highly
diverse mountain meadow community at Mount Rainier National Park. Warming is
predicted to result in an upward movement of these meadows, but two factors
could constrain the rate at which this occurs. First, meadow plants may not be
able to disperse seeds into newly suitable habitat at the rate it becomes
available through warming ("dispersal limitation"). Second, seedlings may not be
able to establish in the rocky and infertile soils present at higher elevations
("establishment limitation"). To develop a better understanding of how these
meadows will respond to climate change the researchers will: 1) use climate data
and statistical models to predict where meadows will occur in the future given
climate change and assuming no non-climatic limitations; 2) quantify dispersal
limitations by monitoring the distance that seeds are moved from parent plants;
and 3) quantify establishment limitations by comparing plant performance in
fertile versus infertile soils at Mount Rainier.

Climate change will likely cause a reshuffling of species and communities around
the world, transforming the ecosystems humans depend on. This study will improve
our scientific understanding of how mountain meadows will respond to climate
change, a critical step in preparing for and alleviating the negative effects of
climate change. Because the researchers share results with Park managers at
Mount Rainier, this research will directly inform local management decisions.
Moreover, the researchers regularly communicate their results with K-12
students, undergraduates, and Park visitors.