* 1209216
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute for FY 2012 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Benjamin Walker, Walker                  Benjamin       A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2013
* USD 5,836.00

This action funds Benjamin Walker from The University of Missouri, Kansas City
to conduct a research project, entitled "A new method for computing the excited
state electronic structure of solids," during the summer of 2012 at Kwansei
Gakuin University (KGU) in Sanda, Hyogo Prefecture, Japan. The host scientist is
Prof. Kazuyoshi Ogasawara of the KGU chemistry department.

The electronic structure of a solid determines its basic material properties.
For materials such as lighting phosphors and laser host crystals it is important
to understand the electronic structure that results when an electron is excited
by interaction with light. In such an event it will gain energy and occupy an
excited state, but it will still be bound to the material because of the
remaining attraction to the atomic nuclei. The complexity of the many
interacting electrons makes it difficult to calculate these levels precisely for
realistic models of materials that include dopants and vacancies. The
intellectual goal of this project is to develop one particular component of a
tool to compute these states for complex systems that would otherwise be
untreatable.

Broader Impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce.