* 1209022
* Statistical Inferences, Computing, and Applications of Semiparametric Accelerated Failure Time Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Jun Yan, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2016
* USD 129,999.00

Accelerated failure time (AFT) models are much less utilized in practice than
relative risk models because of difficulty in inference and limited availability
in standard software. The investigators develop 1) generalized estimating
equations (GEE) for multivariate AFT models with application to adolescent
depression, 2) induced smoothing rank-based approach and least squares approach
for AFT models with covariates missing by design, 3) regularized estimation for
AFT models with high dimensional covariates, and 4) an open source, high-
quality, and user-friendly software implementation for inferences with AFT
models. The GEE approach is incorporated into an iterative procedure to estimate
the regression coefficients in multivariate AFT models, initializing from a
consistent and asymptotically normal estimator obtained with induced smoothing.
Inferences with covariates missing by design proceed with appropriately
constructed selection weights for estimating functions. Regularized estimation
is done by minimizing an objective function, where three novel choices of risk
functions are combined with a variety of penalty functions, including nonconvex
ones such as minimax concave penalty. Software implementation will be made
available as R packages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methodological development on AFT
models is far behind that on relative risk models due to computational and
inferential challenges. The investigators shorten the gap with a comprehensive
collection of methodologies and software implementation for AFT models in
practical settings that are frequently encountered in biomedical,
epidemiological, and social science studies. The methodologies and software
implementation are expected to have an influential impact on the practice of
failure time modeling. The open source implementation provides a realistic
alternative to the relative risk model for censored data regression.
Applications of the methods to ongoing collaborative projects that motivated the
proposed research have cross-boundary effects. A bivariate AFT model for the
duration of depression and the duration of major stressors offers a novel
perspective to gain insight into onset and maintenance of depressive episodes.
The project is naturally integrated with education through
undergraduate/graduate student thesis advising, graduate level courses, and
short courses at conferences in both the statistics community and the psychology
community. The publicly available software makes the cutting-edge statistical
methodology accessible to those who need them in scientific discoveries.