* 1209536
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolutionary Genomics of piRNA-Mediated Transposon Silencing in Drosophila
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Daniel Garrigan, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2015
* USD 14,998.00

The goal of this research is to understand how ongoing conflict between selfish
DNA ?parasites? and control by their host may result in reproductive isolation
between species. Transposable elements (TEs) are short fragments of DNA that
have the ability to insert, and perpetuate themselves, throughout a host genome.
TE insertions can be deleterious for the host when they disrupt the function of
the host genes. Small-RNA molecules called piRNAs have recently been shown to be
an important way for the host to control the proliferation of TEs during the
formation of egg and sperm cells. This research will characterize the rate of
joint evolution of piRNAs and TEs in three closely-related species species of
fruit flies. The project aims to: (1) determine the sequence of piRNAs in these
species, (2) measure TE diversity, and (3) identify the rapidly evolving
proteins that are known to be important for the piRNA suppression
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several human genetic diseases, including cancer
are associated with TE mobilization. Understanding the evolution of piRNA-
mediated TE defense may aid in the effective treatment for human genetic
diseases. Additionally, this research will provide training opportunities for
undergraduate and high school students in the emerging areas of genomics and
bioinformatics.