* 1209118
* Collaborative Research: Statistical Modeling and Inference for High-dimensional Multi-Subject Neuroimaging Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* James Coan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2015
* USD 101,600.00

This project consists of two components, each motivated by the inference problem
for functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data. In the first part, within
the framework of generalized functional linear model (GFLM), a flexible semi-
parametric model for neural hemodynamic response in the form of slope functions
is introduced. To accommodate the variation of brain activity across different
regions, stimulus types, and subjects, the new approach assumes the slope
functions share the same but unknown functional shape for a given region and
stimulus, while having subject-specific height, time to peak, and width. Several
fast algorithms based on B-spline smoothing are proposed to estimate the model
parameters for whole-brain analysis. The second part of the research focuses on
building a novel Bayesian variable selection framework to study the relationship
between individual traits and brain activity. The spline estimates of the brain
hemodynamic responses from the first part are taken as predictors in a
regression model where the response is the individual traits. Two types of
priors are introduced jointly to achieve simultaneous variable selection and
clustering.

FMRI is one of the most effective neuroimaging technologies for understanding
brain activity. In recent years, fMRI data collected from complex studies with
multiple subjects have been widely used in psychological and medical research.
This project will provide tools for modeling, analysis and computation for this
type of fMRI data. Project findings will advance basic understanding of the
inter-relations between nature and nurture in shaping individual differences in
brain function and behavior, and suggest new directions for interdisciplinary
research that combines statistics, neuroscience and psychology. The open source
R/Matlab software developed from the research will provide valuable data
analysis and educational tools for the scientific community.