* 1209753
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   The genetic and neurobiological mechanisms of species-specific burrowing behavior in deer mice
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Hopi Hoekstra, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2014
* USD 14,998.00

The primary objective of this project is to understand the genetic and
neurobiological mechanisms that give rise to natural variation in behavior. The
research will focus on difference in burrowing behavior between two closely
related species of North American mice (genus Peromyscus): oldfield mice
consistently excavate long, multi-tunnel burrows, while a sister species, the
deer mouse, builds short burrows with a single tunnel. This species-specific
difference in burrow structure is heritable, and genes potentially involved in
regulating in burrow architecture have been identified. This study proposes to
manipulate gene expression in each species to determine how genes act in the
brain to create behavioral difference leading to different burrow structures. A
QTL has been isolated containing eight genes, including a gene, muscarinic
acetylcholine receptor M5 (Chrm5), that has been associated with burrowing,
likely acting in the reward system in the brain through dopamine release. Thus,
increased digging could be caused by increasing the reward for digging.

This study has three aims: 1. To characterize expression levels of 7 additional
genes in the QTL using quantitative RT-PCR; 2. To chararacterize the tissue-
specific distribution of Chrm5 in brains of both species and hybrids using
staining techniques; and 3. To introduce oldfield mouse Chrm5 into deer mouse
brain using viral-vector-mediated gene transfer and to assay behaviors in the
resulting mice. It is hypothesized that increasing Chrm5 expression level in the
deer mouse should increase burrowing behavior.

By studying the precise mechanisms that produce behavioral changes between
species, it should be possible to learn how behavior evolves as well as gain a
better understanding of how the brain works. The outcomes of this research will
improve our overall understanding of behavioral diversity in animals, and will
be used to create educational materials for the Harvard Museum of Natural
History. Finally, since Chrm5 is also implicated in nicotine use, studies of
this receptor could potentially be applied to the general study of addiction.