* 1209172
* Digging into Human Rights Violations:  Anaphora Resolution and Emergent Witnesses
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Benjamin Miller, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 12/31/2014
* USD 174,999.00

Digging into Human Rights Violations will develop methods and tools for
discovering and visualizing the stories of hidden victims and unidentified
perpetrators in collections of human rights violations reports and witness
statements. This research in natural language processing is necessary because,
a) collections documenting human rights violations frequently number many tens
of thousands to tens of millions of documents, a scale that conceals victim,
violation, and violator; b) many victim?s stories are only present as fragments
in the reports and accounts of observers and survivors; and c) current tools
excel at searching, not reading. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's
computational reader, developed using collections compiled for various Truth and
Reconciliation and Historical Clarification Committees, will consist of an
engine for reconstructing stories from fragments scattered across a collection,
and an interface for navigating those compiled stories and the documents from
which they come. Although developed for use by investigators and prosecutors of
human rights violations, this novel tool will expand the possibilities of text
mining and will be generally useful for scholars, researchers, and practitioners
with a need to track entities, events, and patterns across large document
collections. The key development is to further work on anaphora resolution
(where anaphora is the existence of an expression referring to another --
usually a pronoun to its antecedent). In some cases identifying anaphora
relatively straightforward, but in many cases it presents a significant
challenge to traditional natural language processing methods. This project will
involve a combination of natural language processing and qualitative language
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's broader impacts lie in its clear
potential to inform scholars and government officials working on issues of human
rights and in truth and reconciliation contexts. Further, the project includes
significant student training, including training in interdisciplinary research
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant was made as part of the Digging Into
Data Challenge, an international competition designed to foster research
collaboration across countries and to encourage innovative approaches to
analyzing large data sets in the social sciences and humanities. The US based
researchers will collaborate with scholars in Canada to achieve the goals of
this project.