* 1209486
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute for FY 2012 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Kirstin Morton, Morton                  Kirstin        C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2013
* USD 5,836.00

This action funds Kirstin C. Morton of Indiana University to conduct a research
project, entitled "Correlation of electrical properties and physical structure
of small, photoconductive wires," during the summer of 2012 at the National
Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST) in Tsukuba,
Ibaraki, Japan. The host scientist is Dr. Hideo Tokuhisa.

The Intellectual Merit of the research project is to measure the local charge-
carrier mobility of photoconductive, pi-conjugated organic microwires with
conductive-atomic force microscopy. Photoconductive organic materials have
gained attention in recent years for applications in photodectors, photovoltaics
and sensors; and nanostructured one-dimensional (1D) organic morphologies are
considered an essential component for the miniaturization of optoelectronic
devices. This research promises insight into the photoconductive properties of
synthesized microwires and to correlate structure with long-range charge carrier
mobility. It furthers two long-term aims: to correlate physical properties of
one-dimensional self-assembled organic polymers with molecular design and to
further realization of a photoconductive gel.

The Broader Impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a
first-hand research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science,
science policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce.