* 1209359
* Integrated Social History Environment for Research (ISHER)-Digging into Social Unrest
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Dan Roth, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 12/31/2014
* USD 125,000.00

Social historians and researchers in social sciences rely to a great extent on
text data for their research. Currently these data sources are increasingly
available in electronic form. The Digging into Social Unrest project aims to
develop software tools for automated analysis of news archives. The project will
help researchers discover information and obtain answers to questions that now
take large, if not unrealistic amounts of human effort to answer. The aim is to
develop text mining tools which will provide social historians and scientists
the means to detect, associate, and visualize the events and the underlying
trends, people, and organizations related to social unrest.

This work is based on the notion that conditions leading to social unrest can be
identified and extracted from news archives, which may include reports about
events of varying degrees of organization and violence --ranging from social
movement meetings, to protests, strikes, demonstrations, and riots. Careful
study of these sources can be used to extract indicators analysts can use to
predict societal instability trends and events.

The Digging into Social Unrest project will develop a text-mining based search
system that improves entity and event extraction by building upon tools and
services previously developed by members of this team. The tool, called ISHER
(for Integrated Social History Environment for Research) will be a fully open
source framework and will be designed with the intent of working on any digital
text repository. Specifically, the tool will allow rich semantic metadata
extraction for collection indexing, clustering, and classification.

The primary broader impact of this project is that it will develop a tool that
can be used by a wide array of disciplines in the social sciences and
humanities. In addition, the research will add to the body of knowledge on
social unrest and is highly likely to spur research on comparable data archives
by researchers in other fields.

This grant was made as part of the Digging Into Data Challenge, an international
competition designed to foster research collaboration across countries and to
encourage innovative approaches to analyzing large data sets in the social
sciences and humanities. In addition to the US research team, this project
includes researchers from the Netherlands and the United Kingdom.