* 1209007
* Collaborative Research:  Estimation, Inference, and Computation for Finite Nonparametric Mixtures
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* David Hunter, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2015
* USD 23,463.00

This project aims to develop theory and methods for estimation of the functional
components and weights in the nonparametric multivariate finite mixtures. These
mixtures only assume that the components are drawn from some family of
multivariate density functions without any parametric specification. The
investigators, who are already active in this emerging area of research, adapt a
number of estimation methods that are known from finite parametric mixture
theory to the nonparametric context. The PI and the co-PI propose a number of
practically feasible and fast algorithms that can be used to compute the
resulting estimators in practice. Finally, both investigators show how to obtain
large-sample asymptotic results for the proposed estimators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finite nonparametric mixtures of distributions can provide
answers to many practically important questions. As an example, they can be used
to help a physician in establishing the definitive diagnosis in case of a
complex medical condition with a number of possible diagnoses. An example of
such a situation is a patient with a possible heart attack where other
differential diagnoses are also possible. Developmental psychology provides
another useful example. Indeed, study of cognitive development in children, in
particular identification of strategies used by children to accomplish various
tasks, can also be modeled easily using these mixtures. This has important
implication for developmental psychology, providing answers to many difficult
questions faced by child psychologists while helping children mature and develop
in an optimal way. The PI and the co-PI propose a number of efficient algorithms
to estimate these mixtures and accomplish the practical tasks mentioned above.
These algorithms will be publicly available and easy to use as part of the R
software package called mixtools.