* 1209255
* Materials World Network: Quantum Phenomena in Atomic Hydrogen Stabilized in Solid Molecular Hydrogen
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* David Lee, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This Materials World Network project will be focus
on two main thrusts: (i) further studies of H atoms in molecular H2 films as
well as D atoms in D2 films at lower temperatures, and (ii) extension of the
work on impurity-helium condensate samples to lower temperatures and higher
concentrations. Techniques will be modified to attain higher concentrations of H
and D atoms in an attempt to observe Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC) of H in H2
and Pauli paramagnetism in D and D2 films. The mm wave studies of H atoms at T
&lt; 1 K in thin and thick films of molecular H2 will be continued, with
emphasis on careful temperature dependence measurements of the magnetization for
samples prepared under different conditions in order to identify the cause of
the non-Boltzmann behavior of the populations of the two lowest hyperfine states
previously observed below 1 K. In addition a quartz microbalance will be
utilized to test for superfluid behavior at low temperatures, a manifestation of
BEC. A search will be made for changes in the Raman Spectrum associated with
BEC. The ongoing research will include further studies of impurity-helium
condensates containing hydrogen atoms, deuterium atoms or mixtures of H and D
atoms in and on clusters of Kr and other noble gases. X band pulsed and CW ESR
will be employed to study the magnetic relaxation behavior and the distribution
of H and D atoms in and around the nanoclusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Confirmation of the occurrence of Bose-Einstein
condensation for H atoms moving through a solid molecular hydrogen crystal would
be an important example of Bose-Einstein condensation in a periodic structure.
Furthermore, mixed samples of H and D atoms contained in molecular matrices are
excellent systems for the study of low temperature chemical reactions through
the process of exchange quantum tunneling. Studies of impurity- helium
condensates composed of assemblages of nanoclusters tie in nicely with studies
of other forms of soft condensed matter. The impurity-helium condensates provide
a means of storing large amounts of chemical energy which is released when the
atoms combine to form molecules. This Materials World Network project clearly
crosses the boundary between physics and chemistry and may provide valuable
clues for practical energy storage systems. Further advances in millimeter wave
technology being developed for ultralow temperature magnetic resonance will be
useful in many other areas of science. The collaborative programs will benefit
greatly from extended visits of graduate students, post docs and senior
researchers between the partner laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is supported by the Condensed Matter Physics program and the Office of Special
Programs in the Division of Materials Research.