* 1209335
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Modeling Bird and Bat Mediated Pest Control Services Across Costa Rican Countryside
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Elizabeth Hadly, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2014
* USD 15,000.00

Across the world, agricultural production is rapidly expanding. Besides
encroaching into forests, industrial agriculture transforms traditional farms of
several crops and interspersed trees into vast fields of a single type of crop.
Wildlife often persists in the traditional, low-intensity landscapes, but
disappears in intensive plantations. Many of these species serve a pivotal role
in agricultural ecosystems by consuming damaging insect pests. Coffee is the
second most traded commodity after oil, and a small beetle, the coffee berry
borer (Hypothenemus hampei), is its most damaging pest. This project
investigates whether the loss of native trees and small forest patches,
traditionally interspersed throughout Costa Rican coffee plantations, affects
the control of coffee berry borer by bats and birds. The project utilizes novel
molecular methods to detect the coffee berry borer in bat and bird fecal samples
collected from Costa Rica coffee plantations. After identifying which bird and
bat species eat the berry borer, a pest-control model will be developed to
identify the sites and conditions (e.g. amount of nearby tree cover) under which
farmers would expect to benefit most from bat- and bird-mediated pest control.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How pest control changes with changing agricultural
practices remains unclear, and forecasting future pest regulation is not
currently possible. This research seeks to address these shortcomings by
developing a model that predicts the consequences of agricultural expansion and
intensification for pest control. This model will be integrated eventually into
a modeling platform: Integrated Valuation of Ecosystem Services and Tradeoffs
(InVEST). InVEST will assist conservation organizations, land managers,
governments, and corporations in evaluating "ecosystem services" -- the benefits
that humans derive from ecosystems, into resource decisions. Thus, results from
this project have potential to be incorporated into practical decisions
relatively quickly. To build to this point, findings will be communicated
broadly, in scientific journals and academic forums, as well as through public
media. Additionally, the project will involve undergraduate students and local
field assistants, who will become involved in multiple aspects of research,
including co-authorship and oral presentations.