* 1209744
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The food matrix mediates carotenoid tradeoffs in a reverse-dimorphic cichlid
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Ethan Clotfelter, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Tamra Mendelson
* 08/31/2014
* USD 14,798.00

Most red, orange and yellow coloration in vertebrate animals is the result of
carotenoid pigments. Vertebrates cannot synthesize carotenoids and instead must
obtain them from their diet, but carotenoids also play important roles in
reducing oxidative stress and supporting the immune system. The carotenoid
trade-off hypothesis predicts that when dietary carotenoids are limited, animals
must sacrifice coloration or immunity. Many published studies of the carotenoid
trade-off hypothesis cite the assumption that dietary carotenoids are limiting,
but this statement is largely untested. Likewise, little is known about
carotenoid trade-offs in females of species with reversed sexual dichromatism,
i.e. species in which females are more brightly colored than males. Females have
an additional competing need for carotenoids, namely that the pigments can be
incorporated into egg yolk and passed on to their offspring. This proposal seeks
to use a combination of laboratory and field studies to understand the complex
relationship between carotenoid absorption, sexual coloration, and somatic
maintenance in pigmented females by developing a statistical model to predict
carotenoid availability and allocation in the wild. The proposed study will
address these questions using the convict cichlid (Amatitlania nigrofasciata), a
well-studied Central American fish in which females have carotenoid-based
ventral coloration. The proposed study would use field work to design a
simultaneous equations model on which to base future laboratory studies of the
interaction between environmental carotenoid availability and the food matrix in
carotenoid-pigmented species. Development of a statistical model for carotenoid
absorption will allow other researchers to place their work on the carotenoid
trade-off hypothesis into a theoretical context, in addition to having
implications for fish health in ornamental and food fish farming, both multi-
million dollar industries in the United States.