* 1209578
* Materials World Network: Properties of Electrostatically Doped Oxide Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Allen Goldman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 480,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Materials World Network project
will synthesize, characterize and study experimentally, properties of high
temperature superconductors such as the cuprates, whose carrier concentrations
will be electrostatic altered in field effect transistor geometries employing an
electronic double layer transistor (EDLT) technique that uses ionic liquids as
gate dielectrics. In effect electrostatic doping would replace chemical doping.
Since carrier concentration is a control parameter that governs the properties
of these systems, this approach will facilitate the investigation of systems
through continuous and reversible changes of carrier concentration. The program
includes studies of X-ray scattering and superfluid density to supplement the
usual measurements of electrical transport and magneto-transport. Electronic
double layer transistors contain a gate electrode, a layer into which charge can
be accumulated or depleted, source and drain electrodes, as well as electrodes
for measuring longitudinal and transverse voltages. Ionic liquids are molten
salts consisting of large ions such that their Coulomb interaction is
sufficiently small to make them room temperature liquids. Upon applying a gate
voltage, ions move to the surface of the layer to be doped, forming an electric
double layer such that with the charge induced, acts as a capacitor of nanoscale
thickness. The charge accumulation or depletion layers formed using EDLTs may be
the order of just a few unit cells in thickness and will contain high electric
fields and electric field gradients. The doped layer may be a two-dimensional
rather than a three-dimensional superconductor. It is thus not a given that
electrostatic doping is completely equivalent to chemical doping to the same
charge level. On the other hand, when the microscopic process of electric field
doping becomes well understood, considerable insight into the rich physics of
the cuprates may be gained. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This Materials World Network project will employ ionic liquid
field effect transistor configurations to electrostatically alter charge carrier
densities, and study the resultant changes in the physical properties of high
temperature superconductors. The usual approach to this is to prepare samples
with different chemical compositions. This new approach eliminates the need to
do this, speeding the rate of exploration. Ionic liquids, which are molten salts
at room temperature, replace the gate insulator in the field effect transistor
configuration. Their use can facilitate charge transfers more than 100 times
greater than achievable with conventional insulators, because of the formation
of an electronic double layer, which is in effect a capacitor with a nanometer
scale gap. The broader impacts of the proposed program include training of
graduate students in a traditional physics Ph.D. program and providing a venue
for useful and positive research experiences for undergraduates from both
Minnesota and elsewhere. In addition, this international effort will allow for
strong interaction of personnel from the US and Spain, which will broaden the
experience of young scientists in the global scientific community. Finally, the
work described in this proposal may have an impact on the search for new
superconductors, which is one of the grand challenges of contemporary condensed
matter and materials physics. It could demonstrate that electrostatic doping is
a viable alternative to traditional chemical doping in this quest.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Condensed Matter Physics
program and the Office of Special Programs, Division of Materials Research.