* 1209917
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Niche Evolution in Gadine Fishes
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Edward Wiley, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* joseph miller
* 08/31/2014
* USD 14,753.00

The aim of this study is to develop a better understanding of the complex
processes by which fish in the subfamily Gadinae respond to changes in their
environment. Gadinae is a group of marine fish that includes several species of
economic importance (e.g. Alaska pollock, Atlantic cod, Pacific cod). Species in
this group have already displayed some evidence of geographic range alteration
as a result of climate change. By integrating information on the genetic
relationships among gadine fishes, their distributions, and climate data, this
study will reconstruct the evolution of suitable habitat characteristics for the
group. Understanding how suitable habitats for these species have evolved is key
to predicting their fate when faced with climate change. This information, in
turn, is applicable to the development of natural resource management policies
for adaptation and mitigation of climate change effects on economically
important fisheries.

This project will also fund two undergraduate research assistants, training them
in geographic information systems analysis techniques. The skills they develop
in the course of this research are applicable not only to scientific research
and resource management, but to developing public health, conservation, and
climate change management and mitigation strategies.