* 1209684
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute for FY 2012 in Singapore
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Amy Klegarth, Klegarth                Amy            R
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2013
* USD 6,071.00

This action funds Amy Klegarth of the University of Notre Dame to conduct a
research project, entitled "Genetic relationships and ranging patterns of urban
monkeys," during the Summer of 2012 at Nanyang Technological University in
Singapore. The host scientist is Dr. Michael Gumert.

The Intellectual Merit of the research project includes the first effort to
track long-tailed macaques with satellite collars and compare their population
genetic structure on varied temporal and spatial scales. The multi-pronged
approach is novel within the field and has broader implications for disease
ecology and complements ongoing research examining the population genetic
structure of gastrointestinal parasites harbored by the macaques. Modeling is
being used to assess the impact of parasite transmission and provide powerful
predictions for identifying potential transmission routes.

Broader Impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce.

Additionally, the research is being reported in a blog and the Fellow leads
guided tours educating visitors about wildlife tracking. Research results are
being presented to the National Parks Board (NPB) to encourage proactive
protocols for dealing with human-macaque conflict and for identifying problem
areas where education, outreach programs, and population control programs can
focus on mitigating human-macaque conflict at their interface.