* 1209287
* Dissertation Research:   Do Venation Networks Match Plant Form, Function, and Evolution to Climate?
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Brian Enquist, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 08/31/2015
* USD 14,955.00

This Dissertation Improvement Grant award will provide funds to develop
quantitative linkages between plant form, function and climate. Leaf venation is
highly correlated with key climate variables, such as mean annual temperature,
atmospheric CO2 and aridity. Climate is a key determinant of plant form and
function, but a strong mechanistic linkage between these factors remains
lacking. Identifying this mechanism will improve scaling-up of individual plant
measurements to climate variation, and scaling-down of climate models to their
impact on local ecosystems. A quantitative model will be developed and
parameterized. The model will be tested on community weighted leaf venation
measurements gathered along two elevational gradients, one in Costa Rica and one
in Colorado. Preliminary results suggest strong correlations between vein
density and growing season mean temperature along these gradients. The model and
analyses will elucidate a mechanistic basis for predicting how variation in
climate affects living systems. The analysis will be expanded by applying these
quantitative methods to venation patterns in fossil leaves from well-described
paleo-communities. Historically, leaf margins from fossil leaves have been used
to link morphology to past climate. The research proposes to substantiate that
leaf venation provides an accurate mechanism to reconstruct paleo-climate than
leaf margins. An innovative approach to broader impacts is proposed by using
crowd sourcing approaches to analyze leaf venation. A web portal to enable
citizen-science participation in data analysis, and will provide lesson plans
for teachers to integrate climate and leaves into their classrooms. These
lessons will be developed and tested through a partnership with Miles
Exploratory Learning Center (Tucson) and disseminated to hundreds of teachers
through an existing relationship with the University of Arizona's College of
Science K-12 outreach programs.