* 1209779
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Life History Tradeoffs and the Costs of Reproduction of Female Arizona Bark Scorpions (Centruroides sculpturatus)
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Javier Rodriguez, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* emilia martins
* 08/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

This project will consider the effects of reproductive behaviors, such as egg
production and parental care, on survival and future reproduction. Reproducing
females face a trade-off because current reproductive efforts can reduce
survival and hence future reproductive output. Using an invertebrate model
(Arizona bark scorpions), the investigators will use behavioral and
physiological studies to understand the adverse effects of current reproduction
on female survival and future reproduction. They expect to find that female
Arizona bark scorpions will act in ways that enhance the health of their
offspring regardless of any negative impacts on their own survival. This
investigation addresses a basic question in animal life histories and
reproductive behavior. The findings of this project will be applicable to a wide
range of scientific fields, including animal behavior, reproductive biology,
physiology, evolutionary biology . This study also provides opportunities to
train undergraduate students in field biology. These students often include
members of groups traditionally underrepresented in science. The investigators
will produce a television episode about their research and give talks at
elementary, middle, and high schools. These outreach activities will expose
young students to animal biology and scientific research.