* 1209688
* Dissertation Research:   Species Distributions and Population Structure of Escarpia Cold Seep Vestimentiferans
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Stephen Schaeffer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2014
* USD 15,000.00

Deep-sea hydrocarbon cold seeps are unlike most environments on Earth, as life
there is not reliant on the sun for energy. Despite the lack of sunlight, cold
seeps support a diverse collection of organisms that rely on the seepage of oil
and gas from the sea floor. Tubeworms are a group of animals that are important
for these habitats as they form bushes that provide food, living space and
protection for a variety of other animals. Due to their dependence on
irregularly occurring seepage, tubeworm communities can be separated by hundreds
of kilometers. Currently, there is little information available about how
tubeworms are transported to inhabit these patchy environments. The proposed
research will identify different tubeworm species as well as determine how
transport and colonization of tubeworms connects the various cold seep sites in
the Gulf of Mexico, West Angolan Basin (West Africa) and the eastern Pacific off
of California. This research uses genetic tools and environmental data to
improve human understanding of how unique cold seep communities are established
and maintained.

Cold seep organisms use oil and gas as energy sources, illustrating that life
can thrive even under the most extreme conditions. This work will determine how
natural and anthropogenic factors impact these specialized ecosystems. Given
that the future of deep-sea habitats remains uncertain, it is critical to
increase knowledge of these organisms, as they are vital to the foundation of
these remarkable habitats.