* 1209191
* Estimation of Functionals of High Dimensional Covariance Matrices
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Huibin Zhou, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 01/31/2016
* USD 299,999.00

In a wide range of applications involving covariance, people are interested in
certain aspects, i.e., functionals, of the covariance structure. Despite recent
progress on methodological work on covariance matrices estimation, there has
been remarkably little fundamental theoretical and methodological studies on
optimal estimation of functionals of high dimensional covariance matrices. The
goal of this proposal is to develop a coherent theory to unveil the precision to
which covariance matrix functionals can be estimated, to develop general
methodologies for optimal estimation of functionals of covariance matrices, to
establish the asymptotic equivalence between covariance matrices estimation and
Gaussian sequence models, and to address applications that arise in finance,
bioinformatics, genomics, and meteorology etc. The research presented in this
proposal will significantly advance the theoretical understanding of estimating
functionals of large scale covariance matrices. In particular, the asymptotic
equivalence theory to be developed will help build a close and inspiring
connection between matrices estimation and classical Gaussian sequence models
which had been well studied in the past thirty years, and help carry over
results and methodologies developed in Gaussian sequence models to matrices
estimation. The proposed optimal estimation procedures for those fundamentally
important statistics methodologies, for example, principal components analysis,
graphical model, and linear and quadratic discriminant analysis, will provide
more accurate estimation and prediction rules in a wide range of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the emergence of high dimensional data
from modern technologies, estimating large scale covariance matrices and their
functionals is becoming a crucial problem in many fields including climate
studies, genomics and proteomics, functional magnetic resonance imaging,
portfolio allocation and risk management. The traditional sample covariance
matrix estimator has been used frequently in practice when analyzing high
dimensional data, which may result in poor performance and invalid conclusions.
To overcome the difficulty associated with the high dimensionality, regularized
methods have been developed in recent years. A central role of covariance matrix
in statistical analysis and its wide range of important statistical applications
ensure that the progress the investigator and his colleagues make towards their
proposed objectives will have a great impact in the broad scientific community
which includes astronomy, bioinformatics, finance, genomics, meteorology and
clinical research. Research results from this proposal will be disseminated
through research articles, workshops and seminar series to researchers in other
disciplines. The project will integrate research and education by teaching
monograph courses and organizing workshops and seminars to help graduate
students and postdocs, particularly minority, women, and domestic students and
young researchers, work on this topic.