* 1209846
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute for FY 2012 in Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Karan Odom, Odom                    Karan          J
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2013
* USD 836.00

This action funds Karan Jessica Odom of University of Maryland, Baltimore County
to conduct a research project, entitled "Reconstructing the evolutionary history
of female song in birds: did the ancestral female songbird sing?" during the
summer of 2012 at the Australian National University in Canberra, Australia. The
host scientist is Dr. Naomi E. Langmore.

The Intellectual Merit of the research project is to determine the evolutionary
history of female song in songbirds. Songbirds are heavily studied for their
complex, learned songs; however, the majority of research focuses mostly on
males from temperate regions. Yet, in the tropics where the majority of bird
species are found, females of many species sing. The approach is to use
ancestral state reconstruction to reconstruct the history of female song in
songbirds to determine whether female song evolved along with male song.

Broader Impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce.