* 1209232
* Advanced Statistical Methods and Computation for Emerging Challenges in Astrophysics and Astronomy.
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Yaming Yu, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2015
* USD 236,000.00

The California-Boston AstroStatistics Collaboration is developing model-based
strategies for statistical inference in astronomy and astrophysics. They
specifically design highly structured models to account for particular
complexities in the sources and data generation mechanisms with the goal of
answering specific scientific questions as to the underlying astronomical and
physical processes. This strategy requires state-of-the-art statistical
inference, sophisticated scientific computing, and careful model-checking
procedures. They will employ, extend and publicize inferential and efficient
computational methods under highly-structured models that involve multi-scale
structure and/or multiple levels of latent variables and incomplete data. Such
models are ideally suited to account for the many physical and instrumental
filters of the data generation mechanisms in astrophysics. The collaboration
specifically aims to develop a mixture of parametrized and flexible multi-scale
models that can be combined with complex computer-models to describe spectral,
spatial, and timing data, either marginally or jointly. In astronomy, for
example, the analyses of data from the same observation, but in different
regimes (images, spectra, and time series) are typically conducted separately.
This simplifies analysis, but sacrifices information, for example as to how a
spectrum varies over time or across an image. The Collaboration proposes to
develop coherent methods for multi-regime data including the joint use of high
throughput spatio-spectral data to isolate and identify complex solar features
and the analysis of systematic temporal variance in spectra from stellar
coronae. They also propose to embed complex computer models into highly
structured models, a strategy which allows the combination of multiple computer
models along with physics-based parametric and/or flexible multi-scale models to
derive comprehensive methods that address complexities in both the astronomical
sources and the instrumentation. Building such highly structured models requires
subtle tradeoffs between complexity and practicality and fitting them poses
significant computational challenges. This proposal includes a suite of research
projects that aim to produce efficient tailored Monte Carlo methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dramatic advances in space-based instrumentation over the
past decade have led to the deployment of a new generation of telescopes with
unprecedented capabilities. Such instruments are often tailored to meet specific
scientific goals and are increasing both the quality and the quantity of data
available to astronomers. Massive new surveys are resulting in enormous new
catalogs containing terabytes of data, in high resolution spectrography,
imaging, and time-series across the electromagnetic spectrum, and in ultra high
resolution imaging of explosive dynamic processes in the solar atmosphere.
Scientists wish to draw conclusions as to the physical environment and structure
of astronomical source, the processes and laws which govern the birth and death
of planets, stars, and galaxies, and ultimately the structure and evolution of
the universe. This combination of complex instrumentation and complex science
leads to massive data analytic and data-mining challenges for astronomers. The
California-Boston AstroStatistics Collaboration plans to tackle these challenges
using principled statistical methods derived from carefully designed
astronomical and mathematical models. As the Collaboration develops methods and
distributes free software, it will also educate the astronomical community as to
the benefit of sophisticated statistical methods. It is expected that a
fundamental impact of the proposed research will be more general acceptance and
use of appropriate methods among astronomers. The Collaboration not only aims to
develop new methods for astronomy but plans to use these problems as
springboards in the development of new general statistical methods, especially
in signal processing, multilevel modeling, computer modeling, and computational
statistics. The collaboration will use the statistical challenges posed in
astronomy as a testing ground for new sophisticated inferential and
computational techniques that will help solve complex data analytic challenges
throughout the natural, social, medical, and engineering sciences.