* 1209996
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute for FY 2012 in Korea
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Oyindamola Oluwatimi, Oluwatimi               Oyindamola
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2013
* USD 5,836.00

This action funds Oyindamola David Oluwatimi of Purdue University to conduct a
research project, entitled "Testing mobile devices for security flaws," during
the summer of 2012 at Soonchunhyang University in South Korea. The host
scientist is Dr. Kangbin Yim.

The Intellectual Merit of the research project lies in a software environment
for the assessment of cyber-attack vulnerabilities of the Android mobile
platform. This environment enables a systematic approach for exposing the
intrinsic vulnerabilities of the Android operating system. The vulnerability
assessment of smartphones promises to point out distinct flaws in software and
hardware designs on these devices. KNowing the flaws makes it possible for
developers, manufacturers, and the research community to find solutions to solve
existing problems, as well as providing preventive measures for future attacks.

The Broader Impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-
hand research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science,
science policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce.