* 1209424
* Collaborative Research - Materials World Network:  Protein Phase Behavior - Experiments and Simulations
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Abraham Lenhoff, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2016
* USD 225,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this collaborative Materials World
Network project involving faculty at Brandeis University, the University of
Delaware, and the University of Cambridge in the United Kingdom is to relate the
molecular structure of proteins to their interaction energies and phase
behavior. The research teams will undertake an integrated program of experiment
on purified proteins and simulations based on realistic model representations
that will allow direct comparisons. They will construct two classes of molecular
models of proteins, one based on atomistic structural information for
quantitative comparison with experiment and the other guided by such information
but providing a minimal model to elucidate generic properties of the equilibrium
phase diagrams and phase separation kinetics of protein solutions. The energy
and free energy landscapes will be simulated, compared with each other and with
measurements of phase behavior and of osmotic second virial coefficients.
Measurements and simulations of nucleation rates will be interpreted in the
context of the classical nucleation model, while measurements and simulations of
the growth of individual precritical nuclei will test the assumptions of that
model. Kinetically arrested states, such as non-equilibrium gels and
precipitates, will be studied by experiment and simulation. Protocols for the
temporal processing of protein solutions will be developed in simulations and
experiment in order to navigate around the arrested states that intervene
between the liquid and crystal phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;In biology, the question of which molecular properties lead
some proteins to associate and which prevent the same proteins from aggregating
in the concentrated intracellular environment remains largely unanswered because
of the complexity of the biological milieu. From the perspective of self-
assembly of biomaterials, the relationship between protein-protein interactions
and phase behavior is fundamental. If the materials community is going to
engineer proteins for applications, this problem must be directly confronted.
The goal of this collaborative Materials World Network project is to relate the
molecular structure of proteins to their interaction energies and phase
behavior. The broader impact will be to improve the success rate of protein
crystallization for structural biology, to control protein aggregation for
pharmaceutical applications and to develop novel condensed phases of proteins
for applications of drug delivery, problems of significant scientific and
industrial importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the
Biomaterials program and the Office of Special Programs, Division of Materials
Research.