* 1209078
* Mining Microdata: Economic Opportunity and Spatial Mobility in Britain, Canada and the United States, 1850-1911
* SBE,SMA
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Evan Roberts, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 01/31/2016
* USD 124,997.00

Abstract: Since at least the nineteenth century Americans and Canadians have
believed that their countries offer citizens better opportunities to get ahead
in life than in Europe. Knowing how economic opportunities have changed over
several generations is important for understanding social and economic change.
Did economic opportunity change when there was less land available for farming
in the West? How did changing patterns of internal and international migration
affect opportunity? &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A multi-disciplinary group of
researchers from Britain, Canada and the United States will measure changes in
economic opportunity in the late nineteenth century and early twentieth century
in a project called "Mining Microdata." The researchers in the project are from
the Universities of Minnesota, Alberta, Guelph, Montr√©al, Essex and Leicester.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project uses census records from the 1850s, 1880s,
and 1910s in Britain, Canada and the United States. In all three countries the
census forms that families filled out were saved for future generations, without
which this research cold not be done. Comparing the three countries offers a lot
of possibilities for understanding economic opportunity. While each country was
unique, each shared some similarities with one of the other countries, allowing
the researchers to work out how changes such as industrialization, political
structures, westward migration, and the growth of large cities affected people?s
lives.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Starting with census records from the 1850s and
1880s the researchers will select a sample of boys living with their fathers,
and then try to find the boys thirty years later in the censuses from the 1880s
and 1910s when the boys are approximately the same age as their fathers were
thirty years earlier. The researchers will measure economic opportunity by
comparing the occupations of fathers and sons thirty years apart for two
generations of men. They will compare economic opportunity between the different
countries, and how economic opportunities changed between these two
generations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts this project will
provide further information on the impact of economic opportunity and spatial
mobility on social structure in Europe and North America. This research,
therefore, is not only important to economic/ social historians and social
scientists, but to policy makers and government officials as well. In addition,
the project has sound plans for training graduate students and new
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant was made as part of the Digging
Into Data Challenge, an international competition designed to foster research
collaboration across countries and to encourage innovative approaches to
analyzing large data sets in the social sciences and humanities. In addition to
the US research team, this project includes researchers from Canada and the
United Kingdom.