* 1209547
* Materials World Network: Visible Light Nanocomposite Photocatalysts
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Matthew Goeckner, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 06/30/2016
* USD 385,761.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;A new class of visible-light nanocomposite
photocatalysts will be developed. These photocatalysts are composed of metal
oxide and metal nanoparticles embedded in a polymer film, and have tuneable
properties. This work will lead to new advances in the areas of great economic
and societal importance, including the removal of outdoor pollutants,
improvement of indoor air quality, wastewater treatment, and decontamination of
chemical warfare agents on equipment, including vehicles and clothing. The
development of these materials also has applications in other technologies
including sensing, optoelectronics, drug delivery and biotechnology. The project
is a collaboration with Damien Lenoble, Centre de Researche Gabriel Lippmann,
Luxembourg (funded by Fonds National de la Recherche) and provides the
foundation for a cutting-edge international research collaboration between the
University of Texas at Dallas and the Centre de Researche Gabriel Lippmann. The
project advances the education and training of graduate and undergraduate
students, and post-doctoral scholars by integrating them into an international
research team, and providing them with skills valuable in many technologically
important industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION &lt;br/&gt;A
new class of visible-light nanocomposite photocatalysts is being developed by
layering metal oxide, titanium dioxide and zinc oxide, metal nanoparticles in a
plasma polymer matrix. These photocatalysts have many advantages over currently
available titanium dioxide photocatalysts. They are flexible, can be employed to
conformally coat a variety of surfaces, including clothing and vehicles, and can
be used in continuous flow systems. The use of metal nanoparticles also
introduces new synergistic reaction pathways, making this new class of materials
more catalytically active than traditional photocatalysts. These photocatalysts
provide a simple, robust method for the removal of outdoor pollutants,
improvement of indoor air quality, wastewater treatment, and decontamination of
chemical warfare agents on equipment, including vehicles and clothing. The
development of inorganic-organic nanocomposite materials with tunable properties
also has applications in other technologies including sensing, optoelectronics,
drug delivery and biotechnology. To accomplish these goals, the project brings
together international experts in plasma deposition (Goeckner), the formation of
3D inorganic-organic and materials characterization (Walker), the formation of
inorganic nanostructures (Lenoble) and photocatalysis (Lenoble and Walker). This
work provides a foundation for a comprehensive international collaboration
between the University of Texas at Dallas and the Centre de Researche Gabriel
Lippmann, Luxembourg focused on the development of inorganic-organic
nanocomposites. The program advances the training and education of graduate and
undergraduate students, and post-doctoral scholars by giving them experience in
different scientific cultures and providing them with skills valuable in many
technologically important industries.