* 1209528
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute for FY 2012 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Fenyang Stewart, Stewart                 Fenyang        A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2013
* USD 5,836.00

This action funds Fenyang Stewart of North Carolina A&T State University to
conduct a research project, entitled "Developing computer programs that make
human-like decisions to improve transportation systems," during the summer of
2012 at Beijing Jiaotong University in Beijing, China. The host scientist is Dr.
Wenchuan Cai.

The Intellectual Merit of the research project is employing methods that use
fuzzy logic to control transportation systems. Fuzzy Logic is a form of decision
making that uses subjective language to describe and control systems. Fuzzy
Logic can model non-linear systems that are mathematically difficult or
impossible to model. Fuzzy logic is being applied to the control of high-speed
trains, which is the preferred method of long-distance travel in China. This
research has applications in the control of unmanned ground vehicles, unmanned
aerial vehicles, and nanosatellite swarms.

The Broader Impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-
hand research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science,
science policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce.