* 1209115
* Creating Opportunity Networks for Engagement and Collective Transformation:  Increasing the Representation and Advancement of Women Faculty @ RIT
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Carol Marchetti, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2018
* USD 3,324,439.00

The Rochester Institute of Technology ADVANCE Institutional Transformation grant
seeks to improve conditions for women STEM faculty with a particular emphasis on
women of color and women who are deaf and hard of hearing. Utilizing the
theoretical foundation of Social Networking Behaviors, they have organized their
initiatives in areas consistent with their theory. The first area, Structural,
will include the analysis, modification, and clarification of policy and
practice such that there is policy alignment and awareness throughout the
system. The second area, Human Resources, will include professional development
strategies, targeted mentoring, including mentoring specifically designed to
address the unique concerns of women who are members of underrepresented groups
(e.g., women of color, women who are deaf and hard or hearing), and work/life
balance initiatives. The third area, Political/Strategic, will include
purposeful methods to engage campus leaders in the process of institutional
transformation including integration of proposed initiatives into existing
campus structures and selective data-driven outreach to leader groups. The final
area, Symbolic, will include broad within campus dissemination of the activities
and outcomes of the initiatives as well as deliberate, high-level, and public
endorsements of the ADVANCE initiatives and goals. Evaluation is thoughtfully
intertwined throughout the programming allowing a robust test of the usefulness
of this approach to institutional transformation. Their initiatives are also
firmly rooted in their understanding of their particular institutional context
which was revealed, in part, through the use of NSF ADVANCE Catalyst funds. All
indications suggest that the institution is poised for the kinds of
transformations sought through this grant including; strong letters of support
from the administration, specific intentions to address gender equity in their
most recent strategic plan, and clear integration of proposal initiatives into
the existing university structures. The strength of the PI team, rigor of their
social science project and well-conceived evaluation plan make the broad
dissemination of their results highly probable increasing the broader impacts of
the grant.