* 1209069
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Mating Conflict and Its Resolution in a Female-Specific Color Polymorphic Damselfly
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Mingzi Xu, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tamra Mendelson
* 07/31/2014
* USD 9,180.00

In nature, the relationship between the two genders is often far from
harmonious. For example, because sperm are generally cheaper to produce than
eggs, males tend to want to mate more often than females do, resulting in sexual
conflict over mating decisions. To date, considerable research has documented
how male sexual harassment negatively affects female fitness. However, we know
very little about how anti-harassment traits of female affect male fitness. The
dissertation research investigates the role of males in sexual conflict in a
damselfly whose males are bright blue, but whose females may be either a male-
like blue (i.e. a male "mimic") or female-specific green. The proposed
experiment measures the cost of males making mating mistakes in the presence of
blue females. This study will be among the first attempts to measure the fitness
effect of female traits on males in a natural habitat. The Co-PI also proposes
to build a computer model for the economy (i.e., costs and benefits) of male
mating harassment, and hence, addresses the fundamental, yet neglected question
of when is it economically optimal for a male to harass a female. This model
generalizes the findings from this dissertation research to a more general
context, and its predictions are applicable to a broader range of animals. The
dissertation research has provided fieldwork experience for STEM undergraduate
students. The research will be presented and involve non-STEM students through
lectures designed for English Composition students. The Co-PI also plans to
develop a ballet to demonstrate science behind her dissertation research in a
layman-friendly form. The making of this ballet will be an exploration of using
art as an alternative tool in science education, and in outreach activities for
K-12 students.