* 1210336
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Sodium availability and the structure of brown food webs
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Natalie Clay, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2013
* USD 14,903.00

Sodium (Na) is an essential nutrient relatively unimportant for plants but
critical for animal neural function, reproduction and development. However,
environmental Na-availability decreases as the distance from an ocean increases.
Na is constantly lost through excretion and must constantly be consumed to
maintain a Na-balance. Organisms feeding low in food chains, such as herbivores,
obtain little Na from their diet whereas predators consume salty diets of prey.
As such, strict herbivores often suffer in Na-poor, landlocked environments (ca.
80% of earth's surface). Since Na concentration in living tissue increases from
plants to predators, animals themselves are an abundant source of Na in any
environment. The proposed fieldwork tests the hypothesis that omnivores
(organisms that consume both plants and animals) maintain a Na-balance by
consuming proportionally more animals when Na is rare. This study tests this
hypothesis by sampling ants at paired coastal-inland (Na-rich vs. Na-poor) sites
from Georgia to Maine, USA. Ants are ideal to assess species- and location-
specific food chain position because they are ubiquitous and mainly omnivorous.
The lab component of this study further tests this hypothesis through direct
experimentation. Here, ant colonies will be fed diets only differing in Na
content to determine the extent to which Na-hunger and predation can be induced.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project may generate a new source of
theory governing the diets of omnivorous species. This study will facilitate the
professional development of an undergraduate through supervised field research
and training in scientific communication. The participating undergraduate will
help conduct the experiment, learn to manage data and identify ca. 100 species
of ants. Additionally, the undergraduate assistant will have the opportunity to
communicate the results of this study through presentations at local and
national meetings and earn co-authorship on publications. Finally, the proposed
study will generate geographically explicit data for ant species over ca. 15
degrees in latitude along Eastern North America. Vouchers from this study will
be deposited in the Sam Noble Museum of Natural History (Norman, OK) and
author's collections and thus available for future research.