* 1210416
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Roles of host hybridization and symbiont admixture in adaptation and diversification
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Benjamin Fitzpatrick, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2014
* USD 14,900.00

The red flour beetle is a widespread pest. Understanding how it can adapt to
infest new products is economically important and addresses general questions
about adaptation and diversification. In initial dissertation work, the Co-PI
found that flour beetles adapt to soy flour within eleven generations and
hybridization between beetle populations increases adaptation. While increased
adaptation in hybrids can be caused by recombination of parental genomes (the
standard explanation), increased performance might also be caused by
recombination of symbiotic bacteria from parental populations. This proposition
will be tested by comparing symbiotic bacteria of soy-adapted and wheat-adapted
beetles. Bacteria will be identified by high-throughput DNA technology.
Antibiotics will be used to remove symbiotic bacteria to determine whether
bacteria are responsible for differences in performance.

This project will produce data relevant to agriculture, conservation, and
education. Results will be invaluable to policy makers in the growing organic
agriculture industry when making decisions about storage of imported food
products when fumigation is not an option. Similarly, results will be of service
to conservation organizations interested in preventing invasions by exotic
species or facilitating reintroduction of endangered species to altered
environments. The PI and Co-PI mentor undergraduate students by involving them
in data collection and analysis, and this funding will support development of a
beetle module in the VolsTeach program at the University of Tennessee.