* 1210728
* Dissertation Research: Is organic matter chemistry or temperature a stronger driver of microbial community structure in permafrost soil?
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Kenneth Reardon, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 04/30/2015
* USD 14,997.00

On earth, carbon cycles through many reservoirs including the atmosphere,
plants, soils, rivers, and the ocean. Permafrost (permanently frozen soil)
contains almost as much carbon as is stored in plant biomass globally, and is
therefore an important carbon reservoir. Climate warming in the Arctic has
caused degradation and thaw of permafrost in some locations. The carbon in
permafrost is stored in the form of organic materials that are less decomposed
than in soils from warmer climates, because decomposition has been stalled under
frozen conditions. If these soils thaw, this carbon may be decomposed by
microorganisms and released to the atmosphere during their respiration. This
would add much more carbon dioxide, as well as methane, to the atmosphere and
lead to a positive feedback, where increased carbon concentrations in the air
cause increased warming, which causes the release of more permafrost carbon into
the atmosphere.

The amount of carbon dioxide and methane that is released to the atmosphere upon
permafrost thaw will be a function, in part, of which particular microbial
species are present. Metabolic patterns vary among the microbes, and as a
consequence so do the quantities and composition of the possible respiratory
products, mainly carbon dioxide and methane. Thus, it is important to study the
occurance of various microbes and their functioning so that we can predict how
they may respond to permafrost thaw. This project will examine how the species
of microbes in permafrost are assembled. This has not been studied in the past
because these soils are often deep and of course hard, making them difficult to
penetrate and sample. Also, recent advances in DNA sequencing methods now allow
researchers to ask new questions that were not possible even a few years ago.
The results from this project will advance understanding of how changes in the
temperature of permafrost soils affects microbes and the carbon cycle.
Undergraduate students will participate in the project and be mentored in
research skills and laboratory practices. Finally, the results will be made
available through publications and more directly to a public audience on the web
and in through live presentations.