* 1210064
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute for FY 2012 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Christopher Paget, Paget                   Christopher    C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2013
* USD 5,836.00

This action funds Christopher Paget of the University of South Carolina to
conduct a research project, entitled "A comparison of microbial degradation and
plant uptake in removing aquatic pharmaceutical contaminants," during the summer
of 2012 at the University of Tokushima in Tokushima, Tokushima Prefecture,
Japan. The host scientist is Dr. Hiroshi Yamamoto.

The Intellectual Merit of the research project includes addressing limited
knowledge from recent research, particularly in regards to the behavior of
microbial biofilms in aquatic bioremediation, and how this compares to
phytoremediation by active plant uptake using common duckweed. Despite a lack of
established toxicity thresholds of aquatic pharmaceutical contaminants, concerns
exist about long-term effects. There is limited knowledge about how
biodegradation may affect removal of a wide range of compounds, how it works
together with phytoremediation, and how these processes may work to more
efficiently remove contaminants than conventional wastewater treatment. To
address this, this project uses several classes of pharmaceuticals to compare
how phytoremediation and biodegradation work separately and in succession.
Additionally, studies have addressed the need for low-cost, low-impact,
sustainable methods, and these processes will play a role in these alternative
technologies.

The Broader Impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-
hand research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science,
science policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce.