* 1210417
* Materials World Network (MWN): Chemistry of Porous Silicon Nanoparticles for Photodynamic Therapy
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Michael Sailor, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 03/31/2016
* USD 420,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will combine the U.S.
counterpart's expertise in silicon nanotechnology with the French counterpart's
expertise in mesoporous drug delivery materials, photophysics, photodynamic
therapeutic agents, and clinical photodynamic therapy on prostate cancer to
develop photoactive anti-cancer materials based on biodegradable porous silicon
nanoparticles. A main goal is to provide higher yields of singlet oxygen and/or
reactive oxygen species to induce irreversible cell damage in the vicinity of
cancer cells for more effective photodynamic therapy (PDT). The NSF-funded U.S.
counterpart will focus on fundamental materials science issues: synthesis of
porous Si nanoparticles with improved synthetic yields and PDT quantum yields,
and development of optimal surface chemistries for PDT, biocompatibility, and
targeting. The French funded counterpart lab will focus on the biological
applications: targeting of nanoparticles inside cancer cells and one- and two-
photon PDT in cancer cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Photodynamic therapy (PDT), a treatment that combines the use
of a sensitizing agent and light to kill cancer cells, has been in clinical use
for over a decade. Despite the advantages of the therapy itself,
photosensitizers in use today display toxic or other side effects that limit
their use. The goal of the collaborative project is to combine the advantages of
nanotechnology with photodynamic therapeutic agents to develop more effective
anti-cancer materials and it will focus on biodegradable porous silicon
nanoparticles The team from the U.S. includes graduate students, undergraduate
students, and high school students. The effort will involve visits by U.S. and
French students to the counterpart laboratories for month-long research
experiences. The educational outreach activities will include a "Summer School
for Silicon Nanotechnology," in which ten U.S. high school students will be
hosted in the UCSD lab for one month every summer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the Biomaterials program and the Office of Special
Programs, Division of Materials Research.