* 1210382
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   The role of neural androgens in the behavioral regulation of life-history transitions
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Matthew Grober, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 08/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

What effects do steroids like androgens have on the behavior and reproductive
success of organisms? Traditionally, gonads are assumed to be the source of
circulating androgens, thereby regulating behavior. Often, however, behavioral
changes in response to the environment can be rapid and thus precede changes in
circulating androgens. This raises the question as to whether brain-derived
androgens are important in regulating behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
particularly fascinating phenomenon is seen in Bluebanded Gobies (Lythrypnus
dalli), coral-dwelling fish that inhabit waters off the coast of Santa Catalina
Island. These fish exhibit a haremic social structure, in which one large male
dominates a group of females. If the male leaves the group, the most dominant
female dramatically increases her aggressive and territorial behavior, and
transforms into the male. The male provides paternal care by fanning eggs and
defending them against predators. This research will address the role of brain
androgens in regulating two life-history stages: reproductive transformation and
male parenting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advanced resources will facilitate an
integrative, organism-level approach, including biochemistry, androgen implants,
brain pharmacological injections, and hormone measurements, all used within the
context of in-depth behavioral observations of wild-caught fish in a semi-
natural laboratory setting. Findings are expected to reveal that the brain
(rather than gonads) is the predominant source of elevated androgens for the
regulation of stereotyped behavioral patterns during life-history
transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of these experiments will lay a
foundation for understanding social behavior as well as cellular and molecular
mechanisms driven by steroids. This work will involve the participation of
undergraduate minority students who will learn valuable lab techniques and
critical thinking skills. Through education outreach activities, findings of
this research will be shared in association with the Center for Behavioral
Neuroscience, Wrigley Institute for Environmental Studies and the Georgia
Aquarium.