* 1210609
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Community trait responses to environmental variation: assessing the roles of species turnover, genetic differentiation, and phenotypic plasticity
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Mark Ritchie, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 12/31/2014
* USD 13,769.00

Climate change and other anthropogenic influences are causing dramatic
alterations in the structure and composition of plant communities worldwide.
Predicting these changes is a critical challenge for ecologists. How plants
respond to changing environmental conditions depends on their ecological
features or traits, such as leaf and stem characteristics and height. Changes in
the environment may favor plants with different traits than the ones currently
present in a given site, and plant communities may respond to these changes in
multiple ways. First, there may be increasing presence and relative abundance of
species with traits adapted to the new conditions (species turnover). Second,
species already present in the site may adapt through genetic changes in their
traits (evolution). Third, individuals may be able to adjust their traits in
order to fit the new environment (phenotypic plasticity). The goal of this
research is to disentangle the roles of species turnover, evolution, and
phenotypic plasticity in community responses to environmental change, using old-
field plant communities of eastern North America as a study system. The
investigators will combine field surveys of old-field communities from southern
Ontario to northern Florida with transplant experiments to determine how plant
traits respond to variation in climate and soils. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
knowledge gained through this research will improve our ability to predict
changes in biodiversity and ecosystem functioning in response to future climate
change, issues of profound importance to society. The project will generate
valuable data for climate-vegetation models, which will be shared with research
groups worldwide via online databases. The project will also facilitate
collaborations with scientists and land managers at research stations and nature
preserves across eastern North America and provide ecological data that will
inform conservation, education, and future research at these sites. The
accessibility of old-field ecosystems will provide excellent opportunities to
link research with education. The investigators will lead local middle school
students on nature walks through research sites, introducing them to the
biodiversity of old-field communities while teaching ecosystem concepts. The
study will also allow undergraduate students to participate in research in the
field, lab, and greenhouse and develop independent thesis projects.