* 1210720
* Dissertation Research: The El Nino Southern Oscillation and Glacial Juniperus Physiology
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Joy Ward, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2014
* USD 11,740.00

The El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) is a climatic pattern resulting from
changes in air pressure and sea surface temperatures in the tropical Pacific
Ocean. Though the ENSO climate pattern directly affects only the tropics,
indirect effects on temperature and precipitation are experienced throughout the
globe. Significant progress has been made in understanding current ENSO
activity, but the behavior and effects of ENSO under altered environmental
conditions (both past and future) are not known. In southern California, El Niño
conditions produce a warmer and wetter growing season, resulting in increased
growth of juniper trees and altered chemical make up of wood deposited in annual
rings. This study will analyze the width and chemical signature of rings from
juniper trees preserved in the La Brea tar pits to determine the strength and
frequency of El Niño years throughout the last 50,000 years. Additionally,
growth patterns of glacial-aged and modern trees in El Niño and non-El Niño
years will be analyzed to assess how these climatic patterns affected tree
growth.

By extending understanding of the frequency, strength, and effects of ENSO
events over a much longer time period this study will provide an improved
context for understanding ecological responses to climatic fluctuations. This
project will be integrated into an existing collaboration between Kansas
University and nearby Johnson County Community College (JCCC). Project funding
provides research experience for a JCCC student, including sample collection,
preparation, data analysis and dissemination. The student will also present the
research at a professional conference, which will provide ample opportunities
for networking and exposure to opportunities in science research and education.