* 1210057
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Understanding thermal adaptation to climate change using a globally invasive species
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,11/30/2013
* Carolyn Tepolt, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 11/30/2013
* USD 14,946.00

Animals adapt to their environments through several processes that act on
different time scales, from rapid changes within an individual to longer-term
evolution across entire populations. This project investigates the mechanisms
behind adaptation to temperature in a widespread invasive species, the European
green crab. Green crab populations across Europe, where the species is native,
will be studied for the limits of their temperature tolerance, and to determine
the genes and pathways involved in this tolerance. These results will be
compared with data already collected in the invasive range to determine whether
populations from different environments and histories respond to temperature
differently, and to examine whether they use the same genes in the same ways to
deal with temperature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Invasive species have to adapt to
novel environments quickly, and offer a wonderful opportunity to examine the
pace and mechanisms of rapid adaptation. The way that animals adapt in nature
over short time scales is not well-understood, but is particularly important in
predicting and planning for their response to rapid environmental shifts.
Understanding how green crabs adapt to novel temperatures will be useful in
understanding how many species will react to climate change. In addition, this
project will foster collaboration with European researchers, and will provide
opportunities for public outreach in the field.