* 1210401
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Systematics and Evolution of Neotropical Bell-Flowers (Lobelioideae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Charles Davis, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

The Andean mountain chains of South American are home to one-sixth of the
world?s plant species, more than any other biodiversity hotspot. The 600 species
of Neotropical bell-flower in the genera Centropogon, Burmeistera, and
Siphocampylus represent a small fraction of this overwhelming diversity. The
first goal of this project is to use DNA sequence data from both the chloroplast
and nuclear genomes to reconstruct the evolutionary history of this plant group.
This phylogeny will then be used to understand the evolution of Neotropical
bell-flowers with respect to their ecological associates. First, patterns of
morphological evolution involved in shifts between hummingbird and long-tongue
bat pollination syndromes will be documented. Second, a phylogeny generated for
flower mites collected from bell-flowers will be compared to the plant phylogeny
to test for signals of co-diversification between host and
parasite.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will facilitate international
collaboration via the participation of Latin American botanists and
institutions.This project will also aid in the growth of physical museum
collections, both in the US and abroad. A website that will make high-resolution
digital images of the plants and the few currently published keys of groups
within the clade readily available will be developed. Finally, the results of
this project will be presented in publications and public and scientific talks
in both English and Spanish. The inclusion of attractive plants and pollination
by charismatic vertebrates, hummingbirds and bats, makes this research
particularly attractive as model to teach K-12 students about evolution.