* 1210953
* Dissertation Research: The effect of human management and soil properties on heavy metal content of Los Angeles Community Garden soils
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* George Jenerette, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,980.00

Community gardens are hotspots of interactions between humans and the
environment. Little is known about biogeochemical cycles or metal accumulation
in these constructed ecosystems, both of which can impact the health of crops
and the people who consume them. These knowledge gaps will be addressed by
investigating the impact of management, land use legacy, and neighborhood on
soil and crop metal availability in Los Angeles community gardens. Soils will be
collected in 12 gardens from cultivated, uncultivated, and surrounding locations
and analyzed for pH and concentrations of nutrients, organic matter, and 29
metals. Leafy and root vegetable samples will be collected from each garden and
tested for metal concentrations to determine bioavailability and human exposure
risk. Gardeners will also be interviewed about their management activities. A
multiple regression framework will be used to determine if gardening practices
or neighborhood characteristics (e.g., freeway proximity, previous land use) can
be used to predict soil metal concentrations and bioavailability at gardener,
garden, and regional scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data pertaining to management
influence on metal availability will be of use to garden managers and city
planning departments. The metal content of urban soils and crops in Los Angeles
has important human health implications. Reports on metal content of garden
soils and crops, as well as educational materials on soil testing, will be
presented to garden managers, participants, and supporting non-profit agencies.
These activities will provide access to scientific resources for minority
populations.