* 1210890
* Resolving AGN accretion and feedback in cool core clusters with parsec-scale simulations
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Greg Bryan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2015
* USD 303,054.00

This project is a systematic investigation of cooling gas and active galactic
nucleus (AGN) feedback in cool core clusters, using adaptive mesh refinement
simulations to resolve all cooling instabilities down to nearly the parsec
scale. The first phase will focus only on radiative cooling, temporarily
neglecting feedback in order to determine how gas cools in a cooling core. It
will consider the effect of magnetic fields and anisotropic heat conduction, and
evaluate the influence of gas temperature and potential well depth on the
cooling catastrophe. The second phase will include AGN feedback, resolving down
as far as the sphere of influence of the central supermassive black hole, in
order to focus on different models for implementing jet-driven feedback.
Detailed predictions of the X-ray, optical and radio emission properties of the
cool core will serve as the diagnostics for testing the models.

The research activities used to achieve the goals of this project will all
involve training and public outreach, including a number of projects suitable
for undergraduate students. The team has a good track record in these areas, and
all members will continue to be involved in local activities, including a
partnership with the American Museum of Natural History to generate high-quality
visualizations. The adaptive mesh simulation code used in this study, called
Enzo, is widely used by many researchers world-wide, and some effort will be
invested to make it more complete, accurate and easy-to-use. The PI will hold
regular (virtual) developer meetings to help to guide code development.