* 1210802
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The impact of novel sound on native acoustic communities
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Susan Parks, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,886.00

Natural environments throughout the world are experiencing increasing levels of
unnatural noise. Many animals rely on sound to communicate. Unnatural noise can
interfere with communication and therefore lead to reduced survival and
reproduction. Studies of ecological impacts of increased noise on animals
typically focus on noise from human activities, such as from transportation.
Non-native animals may also be a source of noise as some invasive species
produce loud sounds to attract mates and defend territories. These sounds may
occur at certain sound frequencies or times, making it difficult for native
animals to communicate. As a result, native and non-native animals may compete
for the ability to send and receive signals, just as they compete for food and
shelter, but this is poorly understood. The proposed research will use the
invasion of Cuban treefrogs in Florida to understand how noisy invaders can
impact native frog communication. By characterizing the calls of native frogs
from invaded and uninvaded locations, and their responses to broadcasted Cuban
treefrog sounds, this research will test whether noise produced by invasive
species impacts the calling behavior of native frogs in the short- and long-
term. This project will enhance our understanding of the ecological impact of
unnatural noise, and identify the importance of acoustic competition for
structuring animal communities.

Invasive species are one of the leading causes of global biodiversity loss and
cost billions of dollars each year in the United States alone. Cuban treefrogs
destroy electrical equipment, invade homes, and cause skin irritations in
humans. They are also likely to affect native frogs by competing with them for
available resources. Native frogs play an important role in the ecosystem, eat
pest insects that damage crops, and are used by humans for food, bait, and pets.
Identifying the impact of Cuban treefrogs on native frogs will help prioritize
management efforts to protect these important animals. The findings of this
research will be shared with Florida residents, and school-aged children in
central Pennsylvania, through presentations and interactive displays.
Additionally, Penn State University undergraduate students from groups poorly
represented in science will be involved in the research and outreach components
of the proposed work.