* 1210379
* Material World Network: Dynamics in Polymer Nanocomposites Containing Hard, Soft and Mobile Nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Karen Winey, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2016
* USD 520,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticles can impart polymers with unique
mechanical and functional properties while also having dramatic effects on how
nanoparticles and polymers move. Unlike traditional polymer composites,
nanocomposites contain nanoscale particles that are smaller than the radius of
gyration of the polymers and this presents a variety of new underlying questions
in polymer physics. The dynamics of nanoparticles and polymers are fundamentally
important to the processability, dispersion and properties of polymer
nanocomposites. Recent reports have found a variety of unexpected, and even
inconsistent, results about dynamics in polymer nanocomposites as measured by
rheology, neutron scattering methods, and polymer melt diffusion. This Materials
World Network project will provide fundamental understanding of dynamics in the
presence of spherical nanoparticles (3-100 nm) using complementary experimental
and simulation tools. Three research aims correspond to three classes of
nanoparticles: hard nanoparticles with just surface functionalization, soft
nanoparticles with grafted polymer chains, and mobile nanoparticles. This US and
United Kingdom team has expertise spanning polymer science, including
nanoparticle functionalization, synthesizing grafted nanoparticles,
nanocomposite fabrication and morphology characterization, polymer diffusion
studies, neutron scattering, self-consistent field calculations, and simulations
by molecular dynamics and dissipative particle dynamics. The team will
participate in monthly teleconferences and exchange visits to both institutions
by the PI, CoPIs, and their students, as well as joint trips to neutron
scattering facilities in Europe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticles can impart polymers with unique mechanical and
functional properties, while also having dramatic effects on how nanoparticles
and polymers move in polymer nanocomposites. Brownian motion describes the
random motion of gases that is dominated by collisions between gas molecules.
Polymer molecules can be thousands of times larger much gas molecules and when
surrounded by and entangled with other polymers they typically move by the
reptation mechanism, a snake-like motion that involves moving along the contour
of the polymer. This widely accepted mechanism is insufficient to describe the
dynamics in polymer nanocomposites. The motions of nanoparticles and polymers
are fundamentally important to the processability, dispersion and properties of
polymer nanocomposites. This Materials World Network (MWN) project seeks to
provide a fundamental understanding of how nanoparticles and polymers move using
complementary experimental and simulation methods. Given the growing industrial
importance of polymer nanocomposites, the MWN team will develop a short course
to present the fundamentals and the latest research in this rapidly expanding
field. The MWN team will have regular scientific exchanges with industrial
scientists. The US and United Kingdom researchers all routinely have
undergraduates performing research in their groups and this will extend to this
project. Finally, the three senior personnel are active in improving the status
of women in science and engineering and this international collaboration will
enable information exchanges regarding best practices pertaining to identifying,
recruiting, developing and retaining women students and faculty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Polymers Program and the
Office of Special Programs in the Division of Materials Research.