* 1210173
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute for FY 2012 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Haley Ohms, Ohms                    Haley          A
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2013
* USD 5,836.00

This action funds Haley Amanda Ohms of Oregon State University to conduct a
research project, entitled "Temperature effects on body size and maturation
timing in a freshwater fish," during the summer of 2012 at Hokkaido University
in Sapporo Japan. The host scientists are Dr. Seigo Higashi and Dr. Itsuro
Koizumi.

The Intellectual Merit of the research project is the advancement of the
understanding of how fish may respond to increased ambient water temperatures,
due to climate or other change. Body size at maturation and timing of maturation
are key components of an individual's reproductive output and ultimately control
population-level responses to change. The research focuses on temperature and
maturation relationships between ten populations of Dolly Varden charr that live
in the Sorachi River located on Hokkaido Japan. The Sorachi River contains
tributaries with distinct thermal regimes and provides a unique opportunity to
investigate temperature influences on size and timing of maturity in distinct,
but closely related populations.

The Broader Impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-
hand research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science,
science policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce.