* 1210404
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Revealing the Floristic and Biogeographic Composition of Paleocene to Miocene Neotropical Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Steven Manchester, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 07/31/2014
* USD 14,991.00

What kinds of plants inhabited South America right after the extinction of the
dinosaurs? What plants colonized the emergent islands in Central America ~40
million years ago? How did the rise of the Andes affect South American forests?
These are some of the questions that have continued unanswered for many decades.
Investigating well-preserved fossil fruits from Colombia, Perú, and Panama,
through successive stages between ~60 and ~19 million years ago, will reveal the
evolution of those ancient forests and their responses to past climatic and
geographic changes. The newly recovered fossils and detailed comparative
analyses with extant plants will provide new insights into the evolution of
ancient forests in Latin America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will promote
international collaboration and recruitment of other undergraduate and graduate
students, developing of cyber-exhibits on the importance of fossil plants, and
publishing of results in scientific and non-scientific journals. South and
Central American rainforests have the highest plant diversity of any region in
the world today. This phenomenal diversity cannot be fully understood without
the deep-time perspective that the fossil record offers. Researchers working on
the region (genetic, ecological, paleoclimatic and geological studies) will
benefit from the regional and broad age spectrum of this paleobotanical study.