* 1210900
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Impacts of metabolic differences on cytonuclear coevolution
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Rachel Mueller, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2014
* USD 15,000.00

Organisms harvest organic fuel to produce cellular energy through the metabolic
pathway known as oxidative phosphorylation. This critical process is carried out
along a chain of interacting proteins that are encoded by two separate genomes,
mitochondrial and nuclear, that must cooperate to maintain functional integrity.
Levels of energy demand directly impact the molecular evolution of these
metabolic genes. In birds, the high energy demand associated with flight has
been correlated with molecular patterns that reflect conserved protein function.
There exists a wide range of metabolic demands across animals, but the impact of
such differences on protein evolution remains largely unexplored. Salamanders
provide a unique opportunity to examine the impacts of metabolic demand on
molecular evolution due to their extremely low metabolic requirements, which
allow them to tolerate higher levels of protein variation than most other
vertebrates. This study will analyze patterns of molecular evolution to
determine what aspects of protein structure must be maintained to retain
functional integrity of metabolic genes. This goal will be met by sequencing
large portions of the highly variable mitochondrial and nuclear genomes of
several salamander species. &lt;br/&gt; This study will yield a comprehensive
analysis of the forces shaping the molecular evolution of the core proteins
underlying aerobic metabolism. These results will provide an understanding of
the molecular underpinnings of energy demand, which may aid in understanding the
origin of genetic diseases associated with mitochondrial mutations. Two
undergraduates and one graduate student will be trained in genomics and
bioinformatics through this research.