* 1210024
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute for FY 2012 in New Zealand
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Stephen Budy, Budy                    Stephen        M
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2013
* USD 6,126.00

This action funds Stephen Budy of the University of Arizona to conduct a
research project, entitled "Structure and Mechanical Properties of Fluorinated
and Non-fluorinated High Performance Polymers," during the summer of 2012 at the
University of Auckland in Auckland, New Zealand. The host scientist is Prof.
Jianyong Jin.

The Intellectual Merit of the research project is the investigation of the
structure and mechanical properties of fluorinated and non-fluorinated
polyphenylene using meta- and para-isomer monomers in order to tailor the
mechanical properties (rigid-rod versus random coil, modulus, strength,
toughness, and strain). The comparison of these polyphenylene materials allows,
for the first time, structural and mechanical characterization which can be
compared to other known polymers, e.g., Kevler® and Nomex®, and various
biopolymers, including muscle fiber, spider silk, deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA),
and collagen. Polyphenylenes, the parent polymers to those under study, are used
as high temperature lubricants, hydraulic fluids, heat-transfer agents, and
coolants for nuclear reactors. The fluorine-containing polymers have been used
in the personal care, automotive, aerospace, energy, biomedical,
telecommunication, and military market. This research promises new tailorable
architectures and new configurations of the meta-to-para ratio conformation to
allow for more sophisticated processing. Potential new uses include asymmetric
membranes for gas separations, tailored protective coatings, proton exchange
membranes (PEM) for fuel cell applications, n-type semiconductors for organic
light emitting diodes (LED), and field effect transistors (FET).

Broader Impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce.