* 1210388
* Materials World Network: Tailoring Electrocatalytic Materials by Controlled Surface Exsolution
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Raymond Gorte, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Solid oxide fuel cells (SOFC) are highly efficient
devices for the conversion of the chemical energy stored in a range of fuels
directly into electrical energy. Their inherent high efficiency results in less
fossil fuel consumption and green house gas emissions compared to other energy
conversion technologies. This Materials World Network project focuses on the
development of a novel class of materials for use in the electrodes in SOFC that
will increase both their efficiency and long-term durability, which will in turn
help to hasten their commercialization. The specific materials that are being
investigated, transition metal doped titanates and vanadates, undergo structural
transformations upon exposure to reducing conditions that result in the
precipitation of catalytically active metal nanoparticles on their surfaces.
These metal nanoparticles catalyze the chemical reactions that take place in the
fuel cell electrodes, thereby improving the device performance. The mechanism of
this process is being determined and this insight will be used to design
electrode compositions and microstructures with optimal properties. Researchers
at the University of Pennsylvania in the US and the University of St. Andrews in
the United Kingdom will collaborate on the project. This collaboration will
include student exchanges at both graduate and undergraduate levels that will
enhance the students' education and better prepare them to be the technological
leaders of the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Solid oxide fuel
cells (SOFC) have potential as highly efficient devices for the conversion of
the chemical energy stored in a range of fuels directly into electrical energy.
Electrocatalytic materials that are stable under SOFC operating conditions are
needed, however, for this potential to be realized. In this Materials World
Networ project, exsolution/dissolution of catalytically active transition metals
out of and into an electronically conducting host oxide is being investigated as
a means to tailor the catalytic properties of SOFC anodes and to regenerate
activity that is lost due to sintering or adsorption of poisons. The specific
materials systems under investigation include transition metal doped conducting
titanates and vanadates which have the perovskite structure. The mechanism of
the exsolution of transition metals, such as Ni, Pt, or Pd, from these host
oxides under reducing conditions, its dependence on the oxide composition and
defect chemistry, and the relationships between microstructure and
electrochemical performance is being determined. The interaction of the exsolved
metal nanoparticles with the oxide surface will also be characterized and the
insight obtained in these studies will be used to design materials systems for
which the exsolved metal nanoparticles are highly stable and resistant to
coarsening via Ostwald ripening. The use of dissolution/exsolution cycles as an
in situ means to regenerate catalytic activity in working SOFCs will also be
investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Ceramics
Program and Office of Special Programs, Division of Materials Research.