* 1210752
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The evolution of selenium hyperaccumulation in Stanleya (Brassicaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Mark Simmons, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 04/30/2014
* USD 14,930.00

Selenium is atomically similar to sulfur and because of this relationship it can
replace sulfur in proteins. Accidental incorporation of selenium can cause
disease and even death in humans, livestock and wildlife. Yet selenium is also
an essential micronutrient for many animals, prokaryotes and algae, though there
is no known function of selenium in land plants. There are four plant genera
with species recognized as selenium hyperaccumulators (accumulating &gt;0.1% dry
weight selenium), including Stanleya (prince's plume; Brassicaceae) in the
western United States. Stanleya includes seven species, one of which (Stanleya
pinnata) is a known selenium hyperaccumulator. The goal of this project is to
infer the process of diversification of selenium accumulation, tolerance,
localization and chemical form in the context of intraspecific relationships
within Stanleya to better understand which DNA changes caused these
physiological changes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By understanding which DNA changes
gave rise to selenium accumulation and tolerance we can improve crops for both
phytoremediation (environmental clean-up using plants) and biofortification.
Selenium deficiency is estimated to cause $545 million in losses to livestock
producers every year. Stanleya pinnata metabolizes selenium into a healthy anti-
carcinogenic form, and understanding this physiological pathway may lead to
improved crops for both humans and livestock.