* 1210819
* Dissertation Research: Wings versus Legs: Mechanistic Underpinnings of Variation in Locomotor Behavior among Birds
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Kenneth Dial, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Tamra Mendelson
* 09/30/2014
* USD 12,346.00

Among the 10,000 species of living birds and their extinct dinosaurian
ancestors, the relative size of, and investment in wings versus legs varies
dramatically. This variation probably has profound effects on locomotor
performance and many related aspects of bird ecology, including habitat
preferences, foraging strategies, migration patterns, and parental care. In an
effort to understand the ecological ramifications of how wings and legs function
independently and cooperatively during development and evolution, the
investigators will measure wing and leg morphology and locomotor performance in
Australian brush turkeys (Alectura lathami) throughout their development. These
data will be compared to previous studies we have conducted with two species
having different patterns of locomotor development [mallard ducks (Anas
platyrhynchos) and chukar partridges (Alectoris chukar)], and these comparisons
will provide new insight into leg and wing structure and the mechanics of
movement in juvenile and adult birds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
integrates the approaches of several biological disciplines and so the result
will be broadly significant. This project will train undergraduate students in
principles of scientific investigation. In addition, the investigators will
disseminate their result to the public by making presentations to several groups
(Montana Audobon Society, Upward Bound, the Society of Environmental
Journalists, the Montana Girl Scouts) and to popular media outlets (History
Channel, National Geographic).