* 1210399
* Laboratory Safety Workshop:  Setting Priorities and Research Goals
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2013
* James Gibson, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 02/28/2013
* USD 16,908.00

This Laboratory Safety Workshop is funded by the Chemistry Division at the
National Science Foundation. The Laboratory Safety Workshop will gather
researchers, students, and health and safety professionals to provide a forum
for in-depth dialogue regarding the challenges and opportunities for improving
the effectiveness of laboratory safety programs in the research setting, with
particular emphasis given to chemical hazards in laboratories. Chemical hazards
receive very little regulatory guidance or oversight and have the potential to
cause serious and immediate injury. The aim of the workshop is to establish
research priorities and criteria to study laboratory safety empirically, with
the goal of translating research outcomes into evidence-based, fit-for-purpose
best practices in the laboratory. At the November 2010 National Academy of
Sciences (NAS)-sponsored Safety Summit in Washington, D.C., problems and
challenges in laboratory safety were identified. This proposed workshop will
strategize solutions to address those problems by focusing on research (led by
the University of California (UC) Center for Laboratory Safety and its
affiliates) that would lead to the development of data-driven laboratory safety
practices.

Diverse participation is important to the success of this workshop. There is a
high level of interest from a diverse group of leaders in this field, including
representatives from NIOSH, OSHA, the Chemical Safety Board, NIH, NAS, NSF and
Principal Investigators and students across the country. In addition to
partnering with traditional professional health and safety organizations,
outreach efforts will be made to relevant scientific organizations that promote
women and minorities who are currently underrepresented in the sciences. The
intended partnering organizations include the American Public Health
Organization, the Campus Safety Health and Environmental Management Association
(CSHEMA), the American Industrial Hygiene Association, the Association for Women
in Science, the National Organization for the Professional Advancement of Black
Chemists and Chemical Engineers (NOBCChE), the Society for the Advancement of
Chicanos and Native Americans in Science (SACNAS), and Great Minds in STEM.