* 1210597
* Dissertation Research: Food-associated Calls and Social Foraging Decisions in Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes)
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2012,01/31/2015
* Lisa Obryan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* emilia martins
* 01/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

Previous studies have found that chimpanzees often give food-associated
vocalizations when they find food, and that these vocalizations may provide
other chimpanzees with information about the amount and quality of the food that
has been discovered. This study will use a combination of experiments with
captive chimpanzees and observations of wild chimpanzees to solve a long-
standing puzzle:&lt;br/&gt;given that chimpanzees often compete over food, why
should they provide other chimpanzees with such information about food that they
have found? This study will test the central hypothesis that chimpanzees benefit
from giving these calls, not by sharing food, but by coordinating their travel
with valued group members. Experiments with captive chimpanzees will test
whether chimpanzees that hear recordings of food-associated vocalizations from
other chimpanzees increase their own foraging effort. Observations of wild
chimpanzees are expected to show that chimpanzees call more frequently when with
valued members of their group, such as mates and allies, and that when
chimpanzees hear such calls, they spend more time searching for food in a given
spot. This research will result in a greater understanding of the role food-
associated communication play in the social foraging decisions of chimpanzees.
By approaching the puzzle of food-associated call production from a social
decision-making perspective, these studies will transform our understanding of
this calling behavior while simultaneously providing novel insight into the role
communication plays in social decision-making processes.