* 1210577
* Dissertation Research:  Estimating gene flow directionality and shared biogeographic histories of Western Atlantic Syngnathidae
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Michael Hickerson, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2014
* USD 15,000.00

The western Atlantic is a biologically diverse marine environment where powerful
ocean currents can play a significant role in the formation and persistence of
marine species. The aim of this project is to investigate how major current
forces as well as climatic and geographic processes have contributed to the
diversification of western Atlantic seahorses and pipefishes (Syngnathidae).
Most species of Synganthidae have the potential to disperse passively by rafting
on floating vegetation, a biological trait well suited for studying the long-
term and contemporary effects of ocean currents on population connectivity. The
investigators will reconstruct DNA genealogies and integrate GIS-based
environmental data to estimate contemporary and historical species distributions
while examining the impact that gene flow and climatic history have had on these
co-distributed taxa. By using recent advances in next-generation DNA sequencing
methods, questions regarding what drives diversification in this group of fishes
will be addressed. This will contribute to a better understanding of how
ecological and evolutionary processes shape today?s Syngnathidae populations and
provide further insight into the dispersal potential of fish in the western
Atlantic.

Robust inference of gene flow directionality and demographic history among
populations may prove a cost effective alternative to traditional ecological
surveys and prove useful in the estimation of population connectivity for marine
reserve placement and management. The information gathered in this research will
serve as the basis for a website aimed at implementing and interpreting gene
flow inference for conservation management. In addition, the pursuit of these
objectives will include the training of undergraduate students from Queens
College, New York, in molecular ecology and evolution research.