* 1210421
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Spatial variation in bill morphology and genetic structure in the Island Scrub-Jay: Adaptive divergence within a single-island endemic?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Cameron Ghalambor, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,690.00

The spatial scale of adaptive differentiation and the mechanisms that drive it
has been at the forefront of evolutionary debate since Darwin. Because birds can
fly, dispersal and gene flow between populations has traditionally been thought
to be high, leading to constraints on local adaptation and divergence. Yet,
increasingly evidence is accumulating that divergent selection can promote
adaptive differences between adjacent bird populations even in the presence of
gene flow. Recently, small-scale patterns of adaptive differentiation in bill
morphology were detected in the Island Scrub-Jay (Aphelocoma insularis), a
species that is confined to a single island in southern California. This work
will be extended to test mechanisms hypothesized to facilitate divergence with
gene flow, including disruptive selection across habitat ecotones and linkage
with traits related to mate choice.

Beyond the implications for understanding the scale of adaptive differentiation,
the data collected will be used to inform management strategies aimed at
conserving the Island Scrub-Jay ? a species that has a total population size
estimated at <3000 individuals. Research on this unique insular endemic will
also be used to engage the public by creating educational activities for high
school students and by further developing and promoting a citizen science
program on the island where the work is conducted.