* 1210743
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Relationship between diverse male coloration and speciation in darters
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Muchu Zhou, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2015
* USD 14,152.00

Selection on differential reproductive success of males and females (sexual
selection) has been linked to speciation by driving divergence in both a male
trait and the female preference for that trait. However, this process should not
apply to the diversification of traits selected via male-male competition rather
than female preference. Such traits may nevertheless facilitate speciation if
involved in species recognition, and be favored if mating among species is
disadvantageous (i.e., reinforcement against hybridization). This project
investigates orangethroat and rainbow darters, representatives of a speciose
fish clade with diverse and distinctive male breeding coloration. In both,
competition between males affects their reproductive success while female
preference does not. The research will incorporate (1) preference experiments to
test whether male coloration mediates species recognition, (2) field surveys to
examine the factors underlying male color diversification, and (3) a breeding
design to measure hybrid inviability and thus the potential for reinforcement.

This project will elucidate the poorly understood relationship between
speciation and male-male competition, a major aspect of sexual selection.
Additionally, there will be opportunities for science education through
participation in public outreach events involving native aquatic fauna, as
darters make attractive and accessible subjects for teaching about ecology,
evolution, and conservation. Finally, this project will mentor undergraduates in
evolutionary concepts and the process of scientific inquiry.