* 1210964
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Foliar and floral evolution in geographic context: cryptic evolution in the mycoheterotrophic Pyrola picta species complex (Ericaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Diana Jolles, Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2014
* USD 10,273.00

Species in genus Pyrola section Scotophylla (part of the Heath family) grow in
western North America and possess several intriguing life history attributes
that vary among species and will be investigated for this study. These include a
special strategy for retrieving nutrition directly from fungi (i.e.,
mycoheterotrophy), leaves that range from large and photosynthetic to minute and
non-functional, and flowers that are buzz-pollinated by bumble bees yet retain
the ability to self-pollinate in the absence of bees. At least two findings
complicate our general understanding of how species in section Scotophylla
achieved (and maintain) reproductive isolation. First, the identification of
cryptic species within the complex suggests that different genetic lineages have
converged on a very similar form. Second, hybridization among species has been
detected at low frequencies in populations where species co-occur. In order to
understand how gene flow relates to speciation and morphological diversity, this
study focuses on the phylogeography (i.e., mapping geographic and genetic
lineage histories) of section Scotophylla using DNA sequence information from
plants across revised species ranges. Additionally, this study focuses on (1)
understanding how mixed-mating systems contribute to gene flow and species
diversity, (2) determining the causes of breakdown in reproductive isolation,
and (3) understanding how timing in development has played a role in the
evolution of leaf morphology, anatomy, and function in this mycoheterotrophic
plant lineage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will provide a revision of
geographic ranges for species in section Scotophylla, the description of a new,
cryptic species, and a contribution to ongoing discourse concerning how the
recognition of cryptic species affects our interpretation of biological
diversity. As fundamental, symbiotic elements of mature forest communities,
mycoheterotrophic taxa like Pyrola serve effectively as indicators of ecosystem
health, ultimately making ecology and evolution more accessible to a range of
audiences. Understanding the evolutionary history of Pyrola lineages through
time may ultimately change peoples? perceptions of both natural history and
ongoing efforts by conservation biologists in western North America. Findings
from this study will be available in peer-reviewed journals, at scientific
conferences and in non-scientific forums, and as interpretive literature for
students and teachers interested in natural history.