* 1210293
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Evolutionary consequences of behavioral drive and inhibition in a tropical lizard
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Jonathan Losos, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,999.00

Behavior determines how organisms interact with their environment, and has long
been posited as a pacemaker for evolutionary diversification. The classical view
is that behavior drives evolution by exposing organisms to new selective
pressures. Behavior can also restrain evolutionary change. The ?behavioral
inhibition? hypothesis suggests that some behaviors, such as thermoregulation,
helps organisms maintain a constant selective environment, obviating the need to
adapt even in the face of changing environments. This research tests the idea
that a single behavior (perch use) can simultaneously impede physiological
evolution while impelling morphological evolution in Anolis cybotes. This
species is found in different thermal environments, so the researchers expect
that it will use behavior to maintain a constant body temperature. The
researchers are using a replicated experiment to test this hypothesis, comparing
habitat use, physiological, and morphological characteristics of A. cybotes in
the Dominican Republic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is the first
empirical test of the idea that behavior can simultaneously impede and impel
evolution in different traits. This study will provide an excellent example of
evolution in action. The research will help show that, while natural selection
drives evolution, it is behavior that mediates the selective environment. The
authors will disseminate the results of this study to popular scientific
articles, public lectures, scientific blogs, and museum exhibits. The results of
this study will help inform policy makers and conservationists how species can
mediate the thermal environment, and use these data in the light of climate
change to protect species and their environments.