* 1210503
* Material World Network: Understanding and Exploiting Mixed-Mode Ultra-Fast Optical-Electrical Behavior in Nanoscale Phase Change Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Ritesh Agarwal, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 08/31/2016
* USD 360,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY The objective of this Materials World Network project is to
investigate comprehensively the material properties of phase change materials in
mixed optical-electrical phase transitions. The underlying principle of memory
storage in Ge-Sb-Te alloys is reversible crystalline to amorphous phase
transitions that are associated with significant changes in optical reflectivity
and electrical resistivity. Although the optical and electrical mechanisms have
been independently investigated, there is no work done on the mixed-mode
operation, i.e. switching the material optically while probing it electrically
and vice-versa. This is however extremely important for a host of potentially
game-changing applications ranging from optically gated ultra-fast transistors
to non-von-Neumann arithmetic processing. This collaboration between PIs in US,
UK and Germany will focus on investigating fundamental phase switching
properties in mixed-mode, elucidating phase change mechanisms via dynamic
optical probing of electrical phase transitions, and exploring the materials
best suited for unconventional future arithmetic processors. The work will
involve growth and characterization of new compositions of phase change
nanowires, optical pulse induced switching which will be probed electrically,
and detailed size- and composition-dependent studies of mixed mode operation in
nanowires.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY The von Neumann model of computing, which is currently
used in computer architecture, utilizes designs with separate divisions for
processing, logic and memory. Although this design has been highly successful
for today's computers, there is clearly a need to go beyond von Neumann's model
to keep up with the ever-increasing demand for faster computers with
unprecedented capabilities. Combining arithmetic processing capabilities via
optical excitation with electronic memory on a common platform is one possible
solution to go beyond the conventional computer architecture and phase change
materials are very promising in this regard. This Materials World Network
project plans to study for the first time the optical-electrical mixed mode
behaviour of phase change materials. Although the remarkable properties of these
materials have made them commercially successful in memory devices, the
fundamental material properties that govern their phase transitions between
crystalline and amorphous states are still quite unknown. The project will
provide fundamental and novel insights into how the electrical behaviour of
these materials is influenced by optical excitation and vice versa. The research
seeks to transfer best practises between PIs in three participating countries.
The results of this work will greatly impact the development of non-von Neumann
computing using arithmetic processing techniques that can revolutionize
computing as we know it. Research and educational activities will be integrated
by the involvement of undergraduates in the research program; incorporating new
research results in the teaching module, and training high school teachers from
the local school districts in three countries. In addition, international
collaborative opportunities will give students opportunities to spend time in
another laboratory and will provide a unique opportunity to pursue cutting edge
research across national boundaries.

This project is supported by the Electronic and Photonic Materials program and
Office of Special Programs, Division of Materials Research.