* 1210893
* Materials World Network: Novel Fullerenes as the N-Type Materials in Bulk Heterojunction Organic Photovoltaics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,10/31/2015
* Yang Yang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 10/31/2015
* USD 405,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This Materials World Network project will
investigate the design rules and compatibility of n-type fullerene molecules
with photoactive polymers, and apply the obtained understanding to achieve
breakthrough performance in photovoltaic devices. The centerpiece of the
technical approach is the rational design and synthesis of novel fullerene
materials to address three key issues: a) raising LUMO Energy level of fullerene
for higher photo-voltage; b) polarity fine-tuning of the fullerene by
introducing substitutes to achieve optimized morphology; and c) absorption
enhancement through introducing chromophores to the fullerene compounds. The
relationship between the structures of these novel acceptors and the energy
levels, charge generation/recombination, absorption, solubility, electron
mobility, surface energy, and morphology of the donor/acceptor blend films will
be comprehensively investigated. This project will be in collaboration with
Prof. Kung-Hwa Wei of NCTU in Taiwan. The combined study will lead to
understanding on the design rules of n-type fullerenes with emphasis on not just
the LUMO-HOMO position, but also the relation between morphology, charge carrier
lifetime, and charge transport in the materials system. This understanding is
important for achieving organic photovoltaic performance milestones. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Organic photovoltaics (OPVs) are an
area of growing importance in exploring sustainable energy sources. This
Materials World Network project seeks to provide a deep understanding of the
core issues in OPV materials for energy device technology through a
complementary international collaboration. This project will provide a platform
for undergraduate training and showcase the importance of renewable energy to
society. The project will provide education and awareness to K-12 students on
clean-energy issues, science and careers in association with the outreach
programs in UCLA's NSF Clean-Green IGERT program. A summer camp opportunity for
high and middle school students will be provided as part of the project. In
addition, a course on renewable energy and solar cells, as well as an OPV solar
cell teaching module for UCLA Clean &amp; Green IGERT are planned.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Polymers Program and the Office of
Special Programs in the Division of Materials Research.