* 1210554
* Dissertation Research:   Antioxidant physiology, alternative reproductive strategies, and the information content of pigment based ornaments:   A life history perspective
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* John Rotenberry, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2014
* USD 14,946.00

Male ornamentation influence whether or not they gain access to mates. Given
that ornaments are physiologically costly to express, elaborate ornaments may be
restricted to individuals in good condition, providing an ?honest? signal of
quality to females. However this may not always be true, as males may have to
allocate resources between different factors such as ornamentation versus self-
maintenance or parental care. The proposed research seeks to understand sexual
ornaments as life history investments, whose development may tradeoff against
other alternatives. Specifically, allocation of antioxidant capacity may mediate
a tradeoff between attractiveness and self-maintenance, with balance of this
tradeoff depending on life history. Oxidative stress occurs when antioxidant
capacity is overwhelmed by the production of pro-oxidants through physical
activity or immune response, which can then lead to onset of aging and diseases.
Expressing carotenoid and melanin-based pigmented ornaments may increase mating
success, but also consume molecules with antioxidant capacity and intensify
expensive contests over mates, potentially elevating oxidative stress and
suppressing survival and parental performance. This research will: (1) employ
longitudinal sampling to explore whether expressing pigmentation increases
oxidative stress and reduces parental performance in California yellow warblers
(Setophaga petechia brewsteri); and (2) use a comparative approach to explore if
pigmentation correlates differently with oxidative stress in the Mexican,
mangrove warbler subspecies of S. petechia (S. p. bryanti), which displays a
"slow' life history (long survival, small clutch size, non-migratory) versus in
"fast" lived California warblers. Mangrove warblers are predicted to display
greater "honesty" in signaling oxidative status, due to greater value of
survivorship. By taking a life history perspective, this work provides a novel
conceptual framework for understanding complexities of sexual signaling systems.
Broader impacts include understanding factors influencing reproductive success
in a Species of Special Concern and forging collaboration with Mexican
researchers.