* 1210149
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute for FY 2012 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Melissa Thaw, Thaw                    Melissa        N
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2013
* USD 5,836.00

This action funds Melissa Nicole Thaw of the University of Nevada, Las Vegas to
conduct a research project, entitled "Mechanisms of nutrient transport to Lake
Taihu," during the summer of 2012 at Hohai University in Nanjing, Jiangsu,
China. The host scientist is Dr. Zhongbo Yu.

The intellectual merit of the research project comes from understanding how
nitrogen and phosphorous are transported to Lake Taihu through groundwater, the
air and by attaching to fine sediment. High levels of nitrogen and phosphorous
have led a poisonous form of algae to bloom and pollute Lake Taihu. In the past,
Lake Taihu has provided water to as many as 30 million people. It is important
to understand how nutrients are transported to lakes because the occurrence and
severity of these types of algae blooms are increasing around the world.

Broader Impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce.