* 1210338
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Kin selection and intragenomic conflict in the reproductive behavior of honey bees
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Peter Nonacs, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2014
* USD 15,000.00

Any individual that has both a mother and father will have 50% of their genes
coming from each parent. For most traits, these maternal and paternal genes work
in harmony. There are, however, some traits in which particular offspring
behaviors benefit one parent, but harm the other. This can result in a genetic
conflict within an individual's own development and behavior. One potential
example of such a conflict concerns whether honey bee workers ought to lay eggs
in the presence of their mother, the queen. The father benefits genetically when
workers lay eggs; but worker egg laying must come at the expense of the queen's
reproductive output. Therefore, the genes in workers that come from their mother
ought to oppose worker reproduction and "police" any worker-laid eggs by
destroying them. The goal of this project is to mathematically model within-
genome conflicts to predict the conditions under which "imprinted" genes might
evolve (i.e., genes that produce different effects in offspring depending on
whether they come from the mother or father). This project will also selectively
breed honey bees to determine if the expression of worker laying and worker
policing behavior depends on the parent-of-origin for their genes. Tissue
samples then can be preserved for later genomic analyses to find which genes are
imprinted. Investigators now recognize that imprinted genes and within-genome
conflict are common in nature. Within-genome conflict has been implicated in
human health problems, such as some complications that may arise during
pregnancy. Thus, understanding the evolution and expression of within-genome
conflict in an easily manipulated system, like honey bee colonies, is likely to
have broad impacts for understanding general questions of how genotypes are
transformed into phenotypes.