* 1210520
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Effects of community structure on host-pathogen dynamics of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Julia Buck, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2014
* USD 11,719.00

The recent emergence of infectious diseases in wildlife has brought increased
attention to their role in current population declines and species extinctions.
One such disease is the chytrid fungus, which infects amphibians globally, is
often lethal to the host, and is associated with species extinctions. Recent
research has found that zooplankton can consume the infective stage of this
pathogen, but it is unknown whether this is ecologically important for
protecting amphibian populations from infection. This project will combine
laboratory experiments with surveys of lakes in the Sierra Nevada Mountains to
answer the question of how zooplankton affects the dynamics of chytrid infection
in frog species. Experiments will investigate whether consumption of the chytrid
fungus by zooplankton reduces infection levels for two different life stages of
frog species under controlled environmental conditions. These results will be
compared to data from a field survey of the chydrid fungus in the natural lakes.
This field study will quantify interrelationships among infection intensity of
endangered mountain-yellow legged frog hosts, zooplankton, and the presence of
predatory fish.

Understanding the causes for losses in biodiversity is a pressing challenge in
conservation biology. This research will contribute to urgently needed control
measures for the emerging infectious chytrid pathogen responsible for worldwide
population declines and extinctions of amphibians. Several undergraduate
students will be given research training in experimental and field ecology. This
project will also develop teaching modules on emerging disease and conservation
issues that will be presented to groups of middle and high school students from
traditionally underrepresented backgrounds visiting Oregon State University
through pre-college programs.