* 1210262
* Dynamics of Asynchronous Networks, Adaptation and Visualization
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2012,12/31/2012
* Michael Field, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* James Alexander
* 12/31/2012
* USD 286,925.00

The project will develop the mathematical theories of asynchronous and adaptive
networks as part of a general scheme for pattern recognition, visualization of
complex dynamics and 'qualitative' computing. The work will combine ideas on
adaptive networks inspired by computational neuroscience, notably Spike-Timing
Dependent Plasticity (STDP), with mathematical techniques developed in the study
of statistical properties of dynamical systems with multiple time scales. We
allow for asynchronous dynamics (no global clock); specifically, nodes of the
network may not be updated synchronously (at each time step). Of special
interest is the further development of a very promising Globally Asynchronous
Locally Synchronous (GALS) network architecture that combines randomness (coming
from node dynamics) with a loose (sloppy) asynchronous logic. Overall, the
research will use mathematical techniques developed in the study of statistical
properties of dynamical systems with the mathematics of network dynamics and be
guided by numerical simulation and experimentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
physical, electrical and biological systems can be modeled by networks of
interacting differential equations and maps. The most realistic models allow for
randomness, discontinuity, time delays and asynchrony - there may be no global
clock and so the nodes of the network may not be updated synchronously (by way
of contrast, the motion of the planets round the sun is synchronous: all the
planets continually move and interact, via gravity, with all the other planets).
Asynchrony is a characteristic feature of much recent technology as well as of
complex biological systems, such as the brain. The project will develop new
models for network dynamics that involve a mix of random, asynchronous and
deterministic dynamics. As part of the work, it is proposed to refine and
develop existing novel visualization tools with the aim of identifying key
dynamical features in complex network dynamics, such as patterns of
synchronization in large networks. Of great potential significance in
applications is the development of new adaptive methods for high speed pattern
recognition and learning.