* 1210179
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute for FY 2012 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Benjamin Zinszer, Zinszer                 Benjamin       D
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2013
* USD 5,836.00

This action funds Benjamin D. Zinszer of Pennsylvania State University to
conduct a research project, entitled "Special brain processes in bilinguals for
categorizing objects and sounds," during the summer of 2012 at Beijing Normal
University in Beijing, China. The host scientist is Professor Hua Shu.

The Intellectual Merit of the research project is a step towards the
consolidation of first and second language learning as well as cross-language
transfer under a unified developmental model. Differences in categorical
representation of phonology and semantics have been widely observed between
languages, necessitating a coherent explanation for the resolution of these
conflicts in bilinguals. The results promise to benefit language educators with
an improved understanding of the underlying challenges and learning processes
that learners undergo throughout language learning. This study includes a
diverse sample of participants, across ages and language histories in China, and
provides an opportunity to extend this research to under-represented populations
of Chinese-English bilinguals in the United States.

The Broader Impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-
hand research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science,
science policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce.