* 1210361
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Identifying Ecological Mechanisms Underlying Soil Microbial Functional Responses to Climate Change
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2012,12/31/2013
* Christine Hawkes, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 12/31/2013
* USD 14,881.00

Soil bacteria and fungi are strongly influenced by local precipitation regimes,
which are rapidly changing as the planet warms. Because these microorganisms
regulate nutrient cycling through ecosystems, it is important to understand how
they will respond to wetter or drier conditions. The Edwards Plateau in central
Texas is an ideal 'natural laboratory' to study microbial responses to changes
in precipitation regime, since mean annual rainfall decreases by 40 cm over a
short distance while soil chemistry and plant communities do not change. This
project uses both laboratory and field experiments along the Edwards Plateau to
understand how changes in microbial populations and communities affect soil
processes. Intact soil cores have been transplanted from the dry western end of
the Edwards Plateau to the wet eastern end, and vice versa. By monitoring
changes in microbial community composition in these cores over time, researchers
can link changes in microbial communities with alterations in carbon cycling in
response to rainfall. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since many regions of the United
States are expected to experience dramatic increases or decreases in
precipitation over the next century, farmers, ranchers, and land managers need
to understand how plant and soil communities will respond to changing climates.
This study will shed light on the mechanisms by which microbial communities
acclimate to altered rainfall patterns; results will help local landowners
prepare for changes in precipitation. The investigators will engage
undergraduate students, and particularly those from under-represented groups, in
their field research. Through the University of Texas Freshman Research
Initiative program, undergraduates will have the opportunity to learn standard
field ecology techniques and novel, next-generation sequencing methods for
identifying bacterial and fungal species in environmental samples.