* 1210886
* Applied Matrix Theory and Complex Approximation:  Estimating Norms of Functions of Matrices
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2017
* Anne Greenbaum, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2017
* USD 352,892.00

Many questions in applied and computational mathematics, such as questions about
the stability of differential or difference equations or questions about the
convergence of iterative methods for solving linear systems, are really
questions about norms of functions of matrices, such as matrix exponentials or
matrix powers. In the case of a real symmetric matrix (or, more generally, a
normal matrix), these questions are answered in terms of the matrix eigenvalues,
but when the matrix is highly nonnormal (meaning that its eigenvectors are
nearly linearly dependent or it does not have a complete set of eigenvectors),
eigenvalues tell only part of the story. The asymptotic behavior of powers of
matrix exponentials or the matrix itself for large exponents is still determined
by the eigenvalues, but transient behavior is not. In this project, the
principal investigator will use other sets in the complex plane that can be
associated with a matrix, such as the field of values or the epsilon-
pseudospectrum, to give more information about the behavior of such matrix
functions e.g. for finite powers. In the other direction, new results about the
behavior of such matrix functions will lead to new insights into problems in
complex approximation theory.

This award will support work in the mathematical areas of matrix theory and
complex analysis that is fundamental in many application areas in science and
engineering. A range of mathematical methods is available for describing the
long-term behavior of systems (will a radiation level eventually decay to zero,
will flutter in an aircraft eventually die out), but a more crucial question may
be what happens in the near-term. While a computer simulation may answer this
question for a specific scenario, general results about what determines the
transient behavior of such systems are often lacking. This project will provide
better mathematical tools for analyzing such questions for a wide class of
models. The award will support graduate student training in these areas through
research assistantships.