* 1210682
* Dissertation Research: Associations between Symbiotic Bacterial Communities and Infection by an Emerging Fungal Pathogen: Distinguishing Cause from Correlation
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Cheryl Briggs, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Peter Alpert
* 05/31/2014
* USD 15,000.00

Project Summary: Symbiotic microflora (communities of microbes living on or in
multicellular organisms) are important players in the health of multicellular
organisms. Variation in the microbial species inhabiting the human body has been
linked to differences in susceptibility to diseases from obesity to
salmonellosis. In contrast, little is known about the microflora of non-human
animals or plants. This study assesses how symbiotic microflora affect disease
resistance in the mountain yellow-legged frog (Rana sierrae). Previous results
show that differences in the microbial communities found on the skin of these
frogs are linked to variation in the severity of chytridiomycosis, a disease of
the skin that results from infection by the fungal pathogen, Batrachochytrium
dendrobatidis. The current study investigates the causes responsible for these
patterns by experimentally manipulating the microbial communities living on the
skin of R. sierrae, subsequently exposing frogs to B. dendrobatidis, and
measuring resulting disease progression. This experiment addresses three
questions: (1) Which factors control the identity of microbes that make up the
normal microflora? (2) Do differences in the species composition of the
microflora affect the ability of the frogs to resist infection by B.
dendrobatidis? (3) When infection by B. dendrobatidis does occur, does it
disturb the symbiotic microbial community, leading to changes in the microbial
species that make up the normal microflora? Results will advance fundamental
understanding of the factors shaping symbiotic microbial communities and their
importance in health and disease.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
Amphibians worldwide are undergoing mass declines and extinctions, and
chytridiomycosis is one of the greatest threats to these animals. This study is
relevant to the management of chytridiomycosis and the conservation of
amphibians. Laboratory and field trials are currently underway to test the use
of probiotic bacteria to protect amphibians from the disease, yet basic
knowledge about the symbiotic communities naturally occurring on threatened
amphibians and their function in disease resistance is limited. Such knowledge
will be improved by this study. In addition, this project provides a critical
training opportunity for the graduate student and for an undergraduate assistant
who will gain research experience through integral participation in the study.