* 1210884
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Ecological Costs and Benefits of Secondary Compounds in Fleshy Fruits
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* M. Deane Bowers, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2014
* USD 14,998.00

Because plants are rooted in place, their ability to colonize new areas often
depends on animals, who consume fruits, move elsewhere, and then deposit the
seeds contained in those fruits. This form of seed dispersal is essential for
the natural regeneration of forests. To attract seed dispersers, plants produce
nutritious and colorful fruits; however, the nutrients in those fruits can also
attract fruit pests, such as insects and fungi that cause fruits to rot. As a
defense against such enemies, plants produce an array of chemical compounds,
called natural products or secondary compounds, that can act as insecticides or
fungicides. These compounds are often used by humans as organic pesticides or in
the treatment of infections, but very little is known about the variety of
compounds produced in fruits and how they affect the animals that depend on
fruits for food. This research will examine a group of these fruit natural
products, the amide-alkaloids, that are found in tropical pepper plants (family
Piperaceae), a large group that includes several economically important species
(such as Piper nigrum, the fruits of which are the source of black pepper). A
series of experiments will test the effects of individual amide-alkaloids on the
organisms that consume pepper fruits in tropical forests. These organisms
include fruit-feeding bats, which are the main beneficial seed dispersers of
pepper fruits, as well as fruit pests such as insects and fungi. All field
experiments will be conducted at the La Selva Biological Station in Costa Rica,
an area where pepper plants and their associated fruit-feeding bats, insect
pests and fungi are found in high abundance.

The benefits of the study include an improved understanding of seed dispersal
and the natural defense of fruits against pests -- two processes that are
critical for plant survival and have direct relevance for agriculture and forest
management. In addition, this study will create excellent opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate student training due to its integrative approach that
combines biology and chemistry. The research team will include students from
both the US and Costa Rica, providing opportunities for international
collaboration and cultural exchange. The results will be disseminated through
scientific publications, as well as educational activities for K-12 students and
the general public.