* 1210661
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Mycorrhizal legacy effects of a plant invasion may limit forest restoration
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,11/30/2013
* Sara Grove, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Peter Alpert
* 11/30/2013
* USD 14,999.00

Invasive plants have large direct impacts on native plant populations and
communities. However, an invasive species may also change the environment in
ways that persist long after the species itself is gone, through a legacy
effect. Legacy effects may be caused by the disruption of mycorrhizal
mutualisms, in which plants rely on certain soil fungi for nutrient acquisition.
We do not understand the degree to which plant invasions affect plant-fungal
interactions, and no one has yet described how long these impacts persist after
invasion as a legacy effect. Scotch broom is an aggressive, introduced shrub
with important ecological and economic impacts. This project aims to understand
how invasion by Scotch broom affects mycorrhizae and the consequences this may
have for restoration of local, native forests of Douglas fir, which partly
depend on mycorrhizal fungi. Research will quantify the temporal aspects of both
the development and persistence of this potential legacy of biological invasion,
using a combination of large-scale field experiments and observational studies,
greenhouse experiments, soil nutrient analyses, and a state-of-the-art molecular
approach to characterize fungal communities. Beyond its intellectual merits,
this research will have broader impacts in resource management. A major aim is
to inform the management of an aggressive, introduced shrub in the context of
reforestation. Scotch broom invasion has significant economic impacts on the
regional economy of the Pacific Northwest due to losses of timber, agriculture
and range production, and wildlife. Through close collaborations with private
and public foresters, the information gained from this research will be
available immediately for management. Findings will be disseminated in both
formal and informal settings. Several undergraduates from diverse backgrounds
will gain valuable lab and field research skills and conduct independent
research on different aspects of the project.