* 1210767
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Impacts of global warming at high elevation tree lines in the Himalayas
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2012,11/30/2013
* Camille Parmesan, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Peter Alpert
* 11/30/2013
* USD 14,999.00

Temperature rise from anthropogenic climate change is often especially
pronounced at high elevations, where it threatens the survival of many species.
This project will study how the upper elevational boundary of trees at about
4000 m is responding to climate change in relatively pristine forests of the
Nepal Himalayas. Preliminary work suggests that the upper elevational boundary
of one of the dominant trees, a species of Rhododendron, is rapidly shifting
upward, with individuals at the highest elevations being more tolerant to
extreme climate conditions but less tolerant of competition than individuals
only 150 m lower. This project will expand this work to include additional
measures of differences between individuals and sites that differ in key
characteristics such as aspect and rainfall. Results will help show how montane
species respond to climate change, how responses may depend upon interactions
between species or site specifics, and which mechanisms drive shifts in range at
high elevation and determine associated risks of local extinction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will train students in field methods and
provide them with an opportunity to explore natural areas distant from cities.
Additionally, the project will form a new international collaboration between
researchers at the University of Texas and Tribhuvan University and the Nepal
Academy of Science and Technology in Nepal. The co-PI will teach short courses
to undergraduate and graduate students in Kathmandu on current trends in
ecology, climate change research, and advanced statistical tools. Outreach
presentations to the general public will be given in Jumla and Kathmandu to
increase their awareness of climate change and its impacts on their lives.