* 1210846
* Dissertation Research:   Microbial Community Structure and Ecosystem Function: Linking Methanogen Community Composition to Methane Production Rates in Wetland Soils
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Brendan Bohannan, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2015
* USD 14,967.00

This study will explore the relationship between the community of microbes
present and the production of methane in peatlands in northern Michigan.
Peatlands produce significant amounts of methane, a powerful greenhouse gas that
traps 25 times more heat than carbon dioxide per unit weight, and drives almost
a fifth of human-caused global climate change. Methane is produced by
methanogens, a group of microorganisms in the domain Archaea, via two pathways.
These pathways are carried out by distinct groups of methanogens, so
understanding the relationship between the methanogens present and methane
production rates is essential to understanding the contribution of peatlands to
future global climate change. Because the overwhelming majority of methanogens
remain unculturable, it is necessary to use a culture-independent, gene-based
approach to identify the methanogens present in the environment. For these
investigations, mcrA, a gene involved in methanogenesis in all known
methanogens, will be used as a molecular marker. mcrA DNA and mRNA from peat
samples will be sequenced to identify the methanogens present, and to quantify
their biodiversity. The use of high-throughput sequencing will allow an
unprecedented level of replication across space and through time, and the
resulting methanogen data will be correlated to measured rates of methanogenesis
in the peat samples, along with environmental factors such as temperature, pH,
and water chemistry.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation
improvement project will contribute to the understanding of methane production
rates in boreal peatlands, a highly significant source of this greenhouse gas.
In addition to enhancing the training of a doctoral student, this project will
provide research experience for several undergraduates including those from
groups underrepresented in science.