* 1210436
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The dynamic role of natural enemies during plant invasions
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2015
* Jennifer Lau, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2015
* USD 14,943.00

Biological invasions result when plants, animals, and other species are
introduced into regions where they did not historically occur. Invasive species
cause over $137 billion in damages to native ecosystems and human interests
around the world every year. Yet, despite their importance and over 50 years of
intensive study, there is no consensus about what underlies their success. The
goal of this project is to test one of the key hypotheses explaining the success
of invasive species: biological invasions occur because invasive plant species
are not strongly impacted by competitors, predators, and herbivores in areas
outside their native range. Additionally, while newly introduced species may
receive little damage from novel enemies, this phenomenon may be temporary --
invasive species may acquire more enemies over time. These ideas will be tested
by planting native, non-invasive introduced, and invasive introduced plant
species into field environments where the presence of enemies (herbivores and
disease) has been experimentally manipulated. A key prediction is that removal
of enemies will not benefit invasive species, compared to native and non-
invasive introduced plants, as they are already experiencing little damage from
enemies. Further, invasive species introduced longer ago may start to resemble
native species and benefit from the removal of enemies.

Given the economic costs and environmental harm caused by biological invasions,
it is important to understand what causes them to differ from native and non-
invasive introduced species. This research will help determine what factors
contribute to invasion success; doing so can help predict and prevent future
invasions. This work also will help to predict the long-term consequences of
invasions (e.g., whether they will continue to be problematic or whether the
accumulation of enemies will eventually limit their impacts). Results will be
shared broadly, including academic audiences, the general public, and K-12
students. Working with elementary, middle, and high school teachers in rural
schools across southwest Michigan, the co-PI will develop lesson plans and
workshops for student and teacher development, covering topics such as invasion
biology, community ecology, and evolution. The co-PI will continue to mentor
undergraduate and high school students pursuing scientific careers.