* 1210792
* Materials World Network: Ceramic Anode-Supported Solid Oxide Fuel Cells with High Performance and Tolerances Towards Carbon Deposition and Sulfur Poisoning
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2018
* Kenneth Reifsnider, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 380,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) can convert fuels to
electricity with increased efficiency, reduced pollution, and reduced greenhouse
gas emissions. The deactivation of the anode from the practical fuels is a major
barrier to realize the commercial and environmental benefits of the SOFC
technology. This Materials World Network project is bringing a new paradigm to
overcome electrode deactivation issues, significantly enhance SOFC performance
and durability and consequently facilitate the rapid application and
commercialization of the SOFC technology. Widespread deployment of the SOFC
technology will make energy conversion more efficient and more environmentally
benign. The collaborative project is educating and preparing US graduate
students with a global perspective and multidisciplinary skills needed to tackle
complex problems in areas of material science and energy conversion
technologies. Outreach to the public and underrepresented groups from this
project will not only place into context the societal need for efficient,
alternative sources of power production, but also help to prepare a qualified
workforce to overcome the many challenges that impede the development and
deployment of fuel cell technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:
The objective of this Materials World Network project between the University of
South Carolina and the China University of Mining &amp; Technology, Beijing is
to fabricate, characterize and elucidate mechanisms of high performance ceramic
anode-supported solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) with enhanced tolerance to carbon
deposition (coking) and sulfur poisoning in order to achieve direct conversion
of practical fuels to electricity using SOFC technologies. Double perovskite
materials with compositions of Sr2FexMo2-xO6-y (x varies from 1 to 2) are being
created specifically to overcome the durability problems that limit the lifetime
of conventional anodes. Fundamental understanding of the double perovskite
materials are guiding further development of mixed ionic and electronic
conducting ceramic materials as SOFC anodes. Freeze-drying tape casting is being
used to create and maintain porous ceramic anode microstructure to reduce
concentration polarization. Novel sintering process with sintering aids are
being studied to obtain gas impermeable thin electrolyte membrane to reduce
Ohmic losses. A variety of advanced characterization methods are being applied,
including X-ray and neutron diffraction, electron microscopy, X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, dilatometry,
and micro X-ray computed tomography to deconvolute the composition,
microstructure, defect chemistry, and electrochemical and catalytic property
relationships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Ceramics
Program and the Office of Special Programs in the Division of Materials
Research.