* 1210895
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Investigating the accumulation of evidence for speciation: species delimitation in a rapid and recent radiation
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* David Tank, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2015
* USD 14,980.00

Although it is widely accepted that speciation is a gradual and constant process
with no clear boundaries for the identification of species, to our knowledge, no
study has empirically evaluated the accumulation of species properties across
time scales or from a comparative phylogenetic perspective. The research
objective of this study is to evaluate the order and magnitude of change in
species properties over time in the mostly South American plant genus Bartsia L.
- a group of closely related species that show varying degrees of morphological,
ecological, and geographical differentiation, but for which the evolutionary
relationships are as of yet, unknown. To accomplish this objective, the proposed
work includes, 1) a rigorous assessment of species delimitation using multiple
lines of evidence including molecular, morphological, ecological, and
geographical information, 2) the reconstruction of a well-resolved species
phylogeny, and 3) an evolutionary comparative analysis of the accumulation of
the inherent properties of a species. In addition, the resulting robust
phylogenetic hypothesis for the South American species of Bartsia will provide
the necessary framework for future comparative ecological and evolutionary
studies in this group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The páramo is considered one of the
most biodiverse montane ecosystems in the world and a more thorough
understanding of páramo biodiversity is essential for the development of
effective conservation strategies for this ecologically important and fragile
Andean ecosystem. To actively aid in the conservation of the páramo we will
engage in several lectures about patterns of biodiversity in the Andes sponsored
and coordinated by collaborating institutions in Peru, Ecuador, and Colombia.