* 1210346
* DISSERTATION RESEACH: Diversification in the South American "dry diagonal" biomes: Distribution modeling and multilocus comparative phylogeography in three co-distributed species
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Fernanda Werneck, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* David Mindell
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,940.00

Models of population divergence have mostly been developed and validated for
temperate zones or rainforests, and their generality to other habitats is
largely unexplored. This project will use a rigorous statistical hypothesis-
generating and molecular-testing framework to investigate the diversification
processes of three diverse groups of lizards widely distributed across the
eastern-central South American ?dry diagonal? biomes, which are species-rich but
historically neglected. The main goals are (1) to use modeling to predict
stability areas across past climatic fluctuations, (2) based on the stability
surface, to generate and test genetic predictions for expected diversification
histories using multiple genetic markers and integrative analytical approaches,
and (3) to use a model-based comparative approach to test for spatial and
temporal co-divergence in the three lizards
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diversification studies can help elucidate how
species and genetic diversity originated and have been maintained, which are
essential parameters to endorse conservation decisions. The project focuses on a
sub-continental scale that enhances opportunity for international collaboration.
The genetic results will reveal new species, and the resources generated
(specimens, tissues, sequences, and palaeo models) will be available to the
community on public databases so they can be compared to other biomes and taxa.