* 1210547
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Diversification and species delimitation in lizard malaria parasites
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Susan Perkins, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2014
* USD 14,452.00

Malaria parasites in the genus Plasmodium are well known as causing disease in
humans, but half of the roughly 200 species in this genus use lizards as their
vertebrate hosts, and many of these species can be found in lizards in Panama.
These parasites have been the focus of studies on ecology, epidemiology, and
behavior, but their taxonomic classifications and patterns of diversification
remain unclear, and this has hindered their use as a model for studying disease.
The first goal of this study is to resolve the taxonomy of these Panamanian
parasites. Malaria parasite species are traditionally classified based on
differences in their morphology, but the simple and changing morphology of the
Panamanian species has confounded taxonomists for decades. Their taxonomy will
be revised by analyzing genetic information using novel species-delimitation
methods. The second goal of this study is to clarify the patterns of
diversification in the widespread lizard parasite Plasmodium floridense. It is
distributed in southern North America, throughout the Caribbean, and in Middle
America, but like most malaria parasites, its history of colonization remains
unknown. Newly collected samples from Panama will be combined with previously
collected samples from across the parasite?s range, and these will be used to
elucidate the parasite?s pattern of diversification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of this research will be disseminated broadly and used to promote
teaching and learning. Curriculum materials will be developed in partnership
with the Gottesman Center at the American Museum of Natural History (AMNH) to be
used in New York City high school biology classrooms. Lectures and laboratory
activities will also be developed as part of the Science Research Mentoring
Program at the AMNH. Both will introduce urban high school students to the vast
diversity of parasite species from across the tree of life. Finally, results of
this research will be posted over several entries on two blogs, each of which is
well established and has a wide readership, to facilitate the dissemination of
the research to the general public.