* 1210870
* Requesting support for young US scientists to attend the Conference on Mathematical Geophysics 2012
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Eli Tziperman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 04/30/2013
* USD 35,000.00

This proposal requests funds to help support meeting costs and travel expenses
of U.S. students, post docs and young scientists to the International Conference
on Mathematical Geophysics to be held in the University of Edinburgh, from June
18-22, 2012. No tenured faculty will be supported with these funds, and priority
will be given to underrepresented groups (women and minorities). The Conference
on Mathematical Geophysics (CMG) is sponsored by the Committee on Mathematical
Geophysics of the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics (see organizing
committees below). The conference website can be found at
http://www.cmgedinburgh2012.org.uk. The 2012 conference is titled "Confronting
models with data".

This conference brings together applied mathematicians, computational scientists
and Earth scientists from geophysics, physical oceanography, and atmospheric and
climate dynamics, to discuss advances in Earth sciences. This year's meeting
emphasizes the need to confront complex mathematical Earth-system models with
increasing quantities of observations of the Earth, oceans and atmosphere. The
scope of the CMG meeting is significantly extended this year to include
dedicated sessions in physical oceanography, atmospheric and climate dynamics,
and applied math, connecting the latter to the "Mathematics of Planet Earth"
international initiative. This meeting provides a unique multi-disciplinary
forum for the exchange of ideas and techniques across the disciplinary
boundaries in the Earth sciences. It allows interactions among Earth scientists
from disciplines that do not normally communicate, such as physical
oceanographers and geophysicists. Funds are requested to support travel and
lodging costs for 22 U.S. students, post-docs, and early career scientists,
approximately a half of the number attending past meetings.

The proposed funding provides an important opportunity for U.S. students and
early career scientists to interact with each other and with senior scientists
in an informal setting. The organizers will directly contact Earth science
faculty members in universities and colleges with students from under-
represented groups, to encourage their students and colleagues to apply for
travel and lodging grants to attend the conference. Earth science issues to be
discussed in this meeting are all highly relevant not only from a scientific
point of view, but especially due to their societal and economic implications.
This includes the study of earthquakes, climate change and more.