* 1210607
* Dissertation Research: Do the concomitant effects of pH and ammonium concentration on ammonia availability explain differential ammonia oxidation by bacteria and archaea?
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Jeffrey Norman, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 06/30/2014
* USD 14,999.00

Ammonia oxidation, a key step in the global nitrogen cycle, is only known to be
performed by two groups of microorganisms, ammonia oxidizing bacteria and
archaea. Although these groups both occur in large numbers in soil environments,
they, like many microorganisms, may only be active under certain conditions.
This study will investigate how environmental conditions interact to control the
activity of ammonia oxidizing bacteria and archaea. Soil samples will be exposed
to different environmental conditions and the activity of ammonia oxidizing
bacteria and archaea will be measured using molecular based techniques.
Experimental treatments will include variation in ammonium concentrations and
soil pH, both of which have been shown to individually alter the activity of
cultured representatives from these two groups. Use of naturally occurring
populations of soil microorganisms will lend field relevance to these culture-
based observations, and should lead to a better understanding of nitrification
by investigating the ecology of the organisms that perform this important
nutrient transformation in the nitrogen cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts of this project will include an additional research opportunity for the
doctoral student. In addition, undergraduate students will be involved in
various aspects of this project, providing them with exposure to research and
opportunities to develop their own independent research projects.