* 1210504
* A Group Travel Proposal for the NSF/India CDS&amp;E Workshop
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Nozer Singpurwalla, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 12/31/2013
* USD 21,000.00

This project is to support US-based scientists to attend the NSF/India
Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering (CDS&amp;E) Workshop to
be held in Bangalore, India, December 21-22, 2011. The participants include
students and junior faculty from a cross-section of institutions and a cross-
section of disciplines. The ground-floor participation of these investigators
will help define the field, foster future collaborations, leverage strengths,
and explore mechanisms for joint work. The US team will actively attend the
workshop roundtables, describe their ongoing research, and point the way for
future developments in the field. A final report articulating the essence of the
workshop and the strengths of the collaborating teams will be made.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A consequence of the massive proliferation of computers in
all walks of life, scientific and social, has been the generation of large
volumes of multi-dimensional data. The challenge of extracting actionable
information from such large datasets has spawned the notion of the field
Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering (CDS&amp;E). For
CDS&amp;E to emerge as a viable scientific discipline, a multi-disciplinary and
multi-national approach is envisioned. With the above in mind, this exploratory
workshop in CDS&amp;E aims to define the field, to address the major problems
that it poses, to catalyze new thinking paradigms and practices, and in general
to nurture collaborations among researchers in this nascent research area. The
participation of the US-based scientists in the workshop will contribute to the
development of CDS&amp;E as a new academic discipline and will serve as a
prototype for developing architectures for new Virtual Institutes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference Website: http://nsfcac.rutgers.edu/cdse/us-
india-workshop/