* 1210521
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Selective constraints, genetic correlations, and divergence of the flavonoid pathway in Silene vulgaris
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Douglas Taylor, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,915.00

The plant flavonoid pathway forms distinct groups of chemicals responsible for
several important roles, including pigmentation, plant defense, antioxidants,
and sunscreen. An interconnected network of genes is responsible for the
production of each flavonoid subgroup. Changes in gene regulation and subsequent
flavonoid expression will be controlled by genes and enzymes that are shared
among different branches of the pathway, suggesting that there may be trade-offs
between flavonoid groups and therefore the related ecological functions. Next-
generation sequencing in the form of multiple transcriptomes will be made of
Silene vulgaris individuals taken from a reciprocal transplant experiment of
high and low elevation plants (high and low UV-B environments) to test for
adaptation to specific environments and flavonoid gene expression, which will be
compared to chemical analyses of flavonoids. This will allow the consideration
the entire flavonoid pathway simultaneously, in particular how increased
expression of a specific branch affects the overall expression phenotype.
Studying the correlated traits of a metabolic pathway will shed light on the
evolution of secondary metabolism in plants, illuminating how different points
in gene networks can be subject to adaptive evolution and influence overall
pathway development. Since flavonoids are ubiquitous, this research will be
applicable to most plants. In particular, the proposed research will also expand
on knowledge of plant adaptive divergence along UV-B gradients, shifts in which
have been associated with human-mediated global change. This proposal also
details using next-generation sequencing techniques in a natural setting and
non-model organism, which may encourage further studies along those lines.