* 1210140
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute for FY 2012 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Tae Kim, Kim                     Tae            K
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2013
* USD 5,836.00

This action funds Tae K. Kim of the University of Alabama in Huntsville to
conduct a research project, entitled "Modeling the solar wind outflow using
interplanetary scintillation data," during the summer of 2012 at the Solar-
Terrestrial Environment Laboratory (STEL), Nagoya University in Nagoya. The host
scientist is Dr. Munetoshi Tokumaru.

The Intellectual Merit of the research project lies in its multidisciplinary
nature and potential impact on improving understanding of the solar wind flow
throughout the heliosphere. Encompassing a number of scientific disciplines such
as astrophysics, solar and space plasma physics, and computational sciences,
this research primarily focuses on numerical modeling of the solar wind flow
from near the Sun out to the heliospheric boundary with the local interstellar
medium using solar wind speed and density estimated from interplanetary
scintillation (IPS) observations at STEL as boundary conditions. Use of
realistic, time-varying boundary conditions such as those provided by IPS
observations is necessary for accurate modeling of the heliosphere since the
plasma properties in the interplanetary space fluctuate with time, often in a
very dramatic fashion.

The Broader Impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-
hand research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science,
science policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce.