* 1210357
* Dissertation Research:   Evaluating the functional significance of  microbial community composition associated with nitrogen cycling in fresh and saltwater wetlands
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Rima Franklin, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2015
* USD 14,981.00

Microbes regulate many important ecological processes such as nitrogen cycling
in wetland ecosystems. A major area of uncertainty is whether the composition of
the microbial community is an important determinant of the rates at which
nitrogen is processed, or if these rates are independent of which microbial taxa
happen to present. This doctoral dissertation improvement research project will
address this knowledge gap while simultaneously examining potential climate
change impacts on nitrogen biogeochemistry. Specifically, the intrusion of
saltwater into historically freshwater wetlands, an anticipated consequence of
sea level rise, is expected to alter microbially-mediated nitrogen cycling
processes including denitrification (DNF) and dissimilatory nitrate reduction to
ammonium (DNRA). A reciprocal transplant experiment that moves soil microbial
communities between saltwater and freshwater wetlands will be used to determine
the importance of environmental conditions, especially salinity, on DNF and DNRA
activity rates. Further, by using soil cores that are both open and closed to
migration from the host environment this work will explicitly test what role
community composition plays in determining these biogeochemical rates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing an understanding of the relationship between
microbial community composition and rates of ecosystem processes is important
for understanding the impacts of climate change, land use change, and other
factors influencing ecosystems worldwide. The findings will also be useful in
enhancing environmental engineering efforts to mitigate nitrogen pollution.
Undergraduates from Virginia Commonwealth University's exceptionally diverse
student body will be involved in all aspects of this research, and results will
be brought directly into an existing course in Applied and Environmental
Microbiology.