* 1210642
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Systematics of the Tillandsia fasciculata Complex (Bromeliaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Kenneth Cameron, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2014
* USD 14,959.00

The evolution and distribution of species across the islands of the Caribbean
are based overwhelmingly on zoological, rather than botanical, studies. This
project integrates a suite of novel approaches to study the pattern and process
of evolution in the Tillandsia fasciculata species complex, an epiphytic
flowering plant classified in the pineapple family (Bromeliaceae). Goals of the
study are to: 1) evaluate the ancestry of the T. fasciculata complex and
determine evolutionary relationships among its species, subspecies, and
varieties; 2) examine genetic variation within this species complex throughout
the Caribbean; and 3) predict the possible occurrence of T. fasciculata in
geographic space based on known distribution data. This complex is an ideal
model system to study evolution and biogeography since it occurs in and around
the entire Caribbean Basin. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide
educational training to the doctoral student co-PI, who is in a unique position
to broadly disseminate his findings via local plant society meetings and/or
amateur publications, and through botanical gardens that focus on the importance
of maintaining ex-situ plant material for scientific research and conservation.
Results will be the first to evaluate the status of threatened bromeliads
throughout the West Indies, one of the world?s most fragile biodiversity
hotspots.