* 1210285
* Direct Mapping of Radiative Feedback in Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Sally Oey, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2016
* USD 239,386.00

The ionizing radiation from massive stars is a major component of the energy
budget of individual galaxies and of the cosmos itself. Knowing about the fate
of these photons is fundamental to understand both galaxy and cosmic evolution.
The escape fraction of Ionizing Lyman continuum radiation from starburst
galaxies generally is only a few percent, and appears to be "trapped". In
contrast, discrete HII regions in ordinary star-forming galaxies seem to have
substantial leakage of ionizing photons having long path lengths. Dr. Oey and
her team investigate this contrasting behavior in different scale phenomena in
order to improve our understanding of the fate of these energetic photons.
Ultimately this can lead to an observationally tested description of the ultra-
violet field emerging from different types of galaxies with different star-
formation properties.&lt;br/&gt;The team uses modern wide-field, narrow-band
imaging technology to directly identify optically thin versus optically thick
HII regions and to do ionization-parameter mapping. They plan to quantitatively
parameterize the relation between nebular optical depth and cooler interstellar
phases for the large and small Magellanic Clouds, and will directly measure
optical depths for the nebular population of the nearby galaxies M31 and M33,
again relating these to the interstellar medium environment.&lt;br/&gt;The
technique is also applied to nearby starburst galaxies to evaluate the escape of
ionizing radiation and related ionization morphology. These results should have
broad impact in the astrophysical community, since the fate of Lyman continuum
radiation is one of the most important outstanding issues in cosmic evolution.
Likewise, the results should contribute to the understanding of the ionization
of the diffuse, warm ionized medium in star-forming galaxies. The project has
impact on scales ranging from individual stars to the cosmos itself. The work
builds directly on the Dr. Oey's comprehensive program on feedback from massive
stars.&lt;br/&gt;This project will use the Maryland-Magellan Tunable Narrow Band
Filter, which was built with NSF support. A graduate student will be trained in
the use of tunable filter devices, which are now being commissioned on existing
and planned new-generation telescopes. The PI is involved in several outreach
activities, including a partnership with the historic University of Michigan
Detroit Observatory, which is starting to open its facilities to undergraduate
students and the public. The continued involvement by the PI and her team with
the University of Michigan Exhibit Museum of Natural History and more recently,
the University of Michigan Museum Studies Program will advance science education
in the museum environment.