* 1210936
* Dissertation Research: Iron redox dynamics as a driver of organic matter decomposition in humid tropical forest soils
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Whendee Silver, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2014
* USD 15,000.00

Soils worldwide contain twice as much carbon as the atmosphere, so to understand
the global carbon cycle it is important to understand the factors influencing
soil organic carbon accumulation and decomposition. Tropical soils contain
potentially high concentrations of both organic carbon and iron minerals. In the
laboratory these iron minerals have been demonstrated to react with oxygen in a
way that decomposes organic compounds that are otherwise difficult for micro-
organisms to degrade. The current study will test whether these reactions affect
soil organic carbon in natural soils, a finding that would transform the
understanding of soil carbon cycling because up to now micro-organisms were
thought to be primarily responsible for most soil organic matter decomposition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insights from these experiments could improve conceptual
and mathematical models that describe the influence of soils on the global
carbon cycle, and thus improve prediction of the causes and consequences of
climate change. Understanding whether and how organic matter decomposition
processes driven by iron and oxygen are important in natural ecosystems could
also contribute to remediation of soil organic pollutants. Scientific training
of graduate and undergraduate students and community volunteers will be
supported by this project, and findings will be disseminated in local schools
and through online curricula.