* 1210516
* Dissertation Research:   Environmental Controls on Stream Bacterial Community Structure &amp; Metabolic Function
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Margaret Palmer, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 05/31/2014
* USD 13,535.00

Understanding how the fate of carbon is influenced by biological communities is
one of the greatest challenges in ecosystem science. Freshwater ecosystems,
including streams, are now recognized as sites for the transport, processing,
and burial of substantial amounts of organic matter. Communities of microbes,
including bacteria, account for a vast majority of the processing of organic
matter in streams, but there is much that is not known about how microbial
communities impact the fate of organic matter in streams. This project will
address this knowledge gap by studying how bacterial community diversity, stream
water chemistry, and organic matter composition influence whether organic matter
is consumed by stream microbes or transported downstream. A mesocosm experiment
will be conducted to test the hypothesis that changes in pH and organic matter
composition will impact the stream microbial community and its ability to
process organic matter. Genetic bacterial community fingerprints will be used to
quantify how the bacterial community responds to the experimental treatments.
Bacterial metabolic responses will be measured using enzyme assays and overall
metabolic rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to
understanding of the relationship between microbial community structure and
metabolism in freshwaters. As watersheds are altered by human activity, pH and
organic matter inputs to aquatic ecosystems are also changing. Since streams may
be viewed as sentinels for environmental change, this study will generate
insight into the response of freshwater communities to global change.
Undergraduate researchers will be engaged in all aspects of the work to further
their scientific understanding. Results will be communicated at scientific
meetings and in journals. Educational materials will be developed for local
primary school students that assist in interpreting this work and broader
concepts of ecosystem ecology.