* 1210867
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phenological shifts and species interactions: Disentangling the role of timing and synchrony
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Volker Rudolf, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2013
* USD 14,916.00

Seasonal weather changes determine the timing of many life-history events,
including bird migration, plant flowering, and frog breeding. However, the
specific set of weather cues that signal these events differs among species;
some species may respond to temperature, others to rainfall. Therefore, year-to-
year differences in weather can result in different responses among species,
which can alter the timing of when species arrive or become active in a given
area and which other species they may encounter. This could affect the outcome
of species interactions, such competition or predation. The investigators of
this project will experimentally manipulate colonization patterns of newly-
hatched insects and amphibians in ponds. Specifically, they will vary arrival
synchrony of individuals within a species as well as arrival time of species
relative to one another. The goal is to determine how differences in arrival
time and synchrony affect growth rates and survival of interacting species.

Understanding how seasonal variation impacts species interactions is crucial
because global climate change is altering the annual activities of species
throughout the world. Although many studies have documented such "phenological
shifts," the consequences for species interactions -- and ultimately the
biodiversity and functioning of ecosystems -- remain poorly known. To help
complete this project, the investigators will hire and mentor an undergraduate
student, who will be recruited from the Rice NSF AGEP program (a program that
seeks to increase underrepresented groups in science). Also, the investigators
are organizing a citizen scientist project to monitor the phenologies of local
plants and animals, with the goal of training community members to generate data
for a National Phenology Network program, called Nature's Notebook. Data
contributed to this program are used by scientists, educators, policy-makers,
and resource managers to understand the effects of climate change and other
environmental changes.