* 1210478
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: A synthetic analysis of evolutionary patterns in the Squamate family Cordylidae
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Darrel Frost, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 05/31/2014
* USD 13,910.00

The process of adaptive radiation (the rapid diversification of one species into
several species that are each specialized to a specific environmental niche) has
been an intensely debated aspect of evolutionary biology since Darwin. Recent
methods that analyze the correlation of ecology, morphology and evolutionary
history allow us to study adaptive radiations in a quantitative and statistical
framework. The girdled lizards (family Cordylidae) are a family of distinctively
armored lizards from sub-Saharan Africa that encompass a wide variety of
morphologies, life histories and behaviors, making them an ideal system to
investigate the evolution of adaptive traits. This project will combine DNA and
morphological data to recover the evolutionary relationships of all 80 members
of the Cordylidae. A series of fossils will then be used to recover the age of
key ancestors, and a comprehensively sampled analysis utilizing state-of-the-art
computed tomography (CT) will be combined with newly developed techniques to
analyze patterns and processes of morphological and ecological variation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings of this research will be communicated to the
public via events at the American Museum of Natural History and through the
Museum's website. This project will also help develop the Museum's digital
collection, with three-dimensional models of all the scanned specimens to be
made freely available for download. This project will facilitate collaborations
between U.S. and African scientists and will train undergraduates and high-
school students in a series of CT imaging techniques.