* 1210498
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Genome-Wide Analysis of Recent Hybridization Among Switchgrass Ecotypes
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Paul Grabowski, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,999.00

The hybridization of genetically distinct groups is an important, natural
occurrence in many plants that can generate new species and transfer beneficial
traits from one group to another. Genetic information, such as which and how
many genes affect hybridization, is lacking for most plants, including many
ecologically and economically important species. This research will use state-
of-the-art DNA sequencing methods to examine the natural hybridization of two
ecotypes (genetically distinct varieties adapted to different habitats) of
switchgrass, a perennial tallgrass native to North America. These DNA sequencing
methods generate hundreds of times more data than previously possible, thus
enabling analyses across the entire genome of switchgrass rather than just a
handful of genes. The data will be used to identify hybrid populations, analyze
patterns of migration, and identify regions in the switchgrass genome that are
being transferred between ecotypes or that decrease the success of hybrids.
&lt;br/&gt;Switchgrass is an emerging bioenergy crop and one of the most widely
used species for land conservation. The patterns of genetic variation and
hybridization identified in this project will have direct implications on
selecting appropriate varieties of switchgrass for bioenergy production and
conservation needs. Additionally, the characterized hybrid populations will be
valuable resources for future work identifying genes that affect economically
important bioenergy traits. Beyond the bioenergy and conservation implications,
this proposal will act as a template for implementing new genotyping methods in
other ecologically and/or economically important species that, like switchgrass,
do not have the research resources of traditional model organisms.