* 1210643
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The effect of plant phylogenetic and chemical diversity on herbivore community structure and plant host herbivore damage
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Diego Salazar, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2014
* USD 15,000.00

One of the great challenges for ecologists is to find general rules that apply
to all or most ecosystems throughout the world. One such rule that seems to be
universally true is that simplification of natural plant diversity to single
species plantings, such as occurs in agriculture and forest plantations, leads
to high vulnerability of the plantings to pest insect outbreaks. Insects can
better find their food plants, and there is more food available in single
species plantings than in more diverse vegetation. The goal of this study is to
more clearly understand the factors that contribute to vulnerability of
simplified ecosystems. Three components are likely to be important: the number
of plant species, the evolutionary relatedness of the species, and finally,
differences in plant traits that influence attack by insects that are unique to
each plant species. The goal of this study is to test the effect of these
intrinsic plant differences on patterns of damage caused by insects by creating
field experimental plant communities with different evolutionary and chemical
intrinsic differences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will take place in a
tropical wet forest site in Costa Rica using plant species related to the source
of the spice black pepper. This study will not only render valuable insight into
how biodiversity can affect natural ecosystems, but also enrich our knowledge of
plant-herbivore systems so that we can develop novel ways to manage conventional
and organic agricultural practices. In addition, because related plant species
to those being studied are known to produce chemicals with insecticidal
properties that have been used successfully against agricultural pests, the
study may discover new compounds of similar value for the control of such
insects. This project will also provide an opportunity to collaborate and train
undergraduate students from the University of Costa Rica and the Organization
for Tropical Studies. Furthermore, the laboratory component of this project that
will be carried out at the University of Missouri-St. Louis, will allow two
undergraduate students from the university to participate on all aspects of the
chemical analysis. This will allow the students to obtain "hands on" research
experience.