* 1210781
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Hedyotis L.  (Rubiaceae) in Asia: Phylogeny, Character Evolution, and Biogeography
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Wayne Hynes, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,541.00

The plant genus Hedyotis is a group of nearly 180 Asian-Pacific tropical species
in the plant family Rubiaceae (the coffee family). Hedyotis and its related
genera are currently taxonomically ill-defined groups. Hedyotis exhibits high
levels of species endemism, with many species occurring on a single island or
mountain, and its closest relatives occur in Africa and America. Additionally,
some of the island and high elevation species in the Hedyotis-Oldenlandia
complex have evolved from herbaceous ancestors into small trees. This is known
as secondary woodiness, and is often specific to islands or island-like
habitats. By building a phylogeny using DNA and morphological data, this project
aims to improve the classification of the group, investigate broader issues of
ancient dispersal patterns, and examine the evolutionary development of
secondary woodiness in the Asian and Pacific species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will resolve the classification of the fourth largest plant family
(Rubiaceae), and improve plant collections and botanical knowledge from five
under-collected biodiversity hotspots. Additionally, this research will build
partnerships with international institutions in six countries, foster
collaborations between scientists, and train students in phylogenetics, botany,
and taxonomy.