* 1210649
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Vocal communication in golden hamsters: Behavioral and neural responses of males to female vocal signals
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Robert Johnston, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Tamra Mendelson
* 07/31/2014
* USD 14,995.00

For decades, scientists have been intrigued by how animals recognize the
species-specific vocalizations used in social communication. Auditory signals
are processed and recognized along the auditory system in the brain. However,
vocal recognition must also involve the activation of other brain regions that
affect the internal state of the receiver, and subsequently, modulate the
behavioral responses to vocal signals. To address this question, the researchers
are studying ultrasonic vocalizations (USVs) produced by the golden hamster in a
sexual context, and behavioral and neural responses to these vocalizations. Both
male and female hamsters exhibit a diverse vocal repertoire during sexual
encounters. The hypothesis to be tested in this project is that USVs function in
sex recognition, and by activating brain regions involved with reward and
motivation, USVs increase sexual arousal and stimulate approach behavior to the
sound source. The research tests the hypothesis that behavioral responses are
regulated by dopamine, a critical compound in mediating reward. Preliminary data
suggest that females vocalize more than males and that female USVs are longer in
duration and have broader bandwidth than male USVs. In addition, the
vocalizations of both sexes exhibit specific sound features that could indicate
levels of sexual arousal and motivation of the caller. This study represents a
key innovation in the study of USVs by integrating: 1) acoustic and statistical
analyses of USV to demonstrate sex discrimination, 2) playback experiments to
validate sex recognition and 3) neural responses to the USVs to reveal the brain
regions and mechanisms involved in recognizing the behavioral significance of
these USV. Moreover, this study will shed light onto other functions of USVs,
which in recent years have become important in understanding social behavior and
communication in rodent model species used in biomedical research. The research
will also provide research opportunities for STEM undergraduate students.