* 1210531
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Climate change and regime shifts
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2014
* David Post, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 04/30/2014
* USD 14,994.00

Understanding how climate change alters interactions among species is one of the
big challenges facing ecologists today. The consequences of changes to existing
interactions among species are especially important in lake ecosystems where
there is the potential for shifts between alternate states. Lakes often can be
found in either a clear-water state with little algal growth, or a turbid state
in which there are frequent dense algal blooms. Two factors which largely
determine whether a lake will be clear or turbid are nutrients and algal
consumers. Nutrients, especially nitrogen and phosphorus, increase the growth
rate of algae leading to algal blooms and a turbid state. Algal consumers,
particularly of the genus Daphna, are very effective grazers of algae, limiting
their populations and promoting the clear-water state. The increase in global
temperatures is decreasing the length and severity of winters, which increases
the abundance of over-wintering Daphnia. This study focuses on understanding how
lake nutrient status affects the climate driven differences in over-wintering of
Daphnia. Experimental ponds will be used to perform the critical experiment to
determine where the tipping point between a turbid and a clear-water state is
across the range of lake nutrient concentrations and overwintering Daphnia
abundance seen in natural lakes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Determining the
conditions that bring about shifts between ecosystem states is an important part
of the management of ecosystems under a changing climate. This research will
answer fundamental questions about alternate states in lakes and provide a
useful tool for lake managers to use for promoting the clear-water state in
lakes. Results of this study will be published in a management oriented journal;
as well an ecological journal to ensure they reach the audience that can make
use of them. This study will determine the densities of Daphnia required to be
achieved for a given nutrient level, providing lake managers with targets for
their management activities to maintain beautiful clear lakes. Additionally,
this project will provide an undergraduate student with training and mentoring
in the conduct of scientific research.