* 1210302
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Systematics, ecology, and evolution of the Clavariaceae (Agaricales)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Patrick Matheny, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2014
* USD 14,984.00

The Clavariaceae is a poorly studied family of mushroom-forming fungi and the
earliest evolutionary branch in the order Agaricales, the most diverse group of
mushroom-forming fungi in the Agaricomycotina. The family is characterized by a
high diversity of morphological and ecological features, including roles as
decomposers and plant root symbionts. A robust phylogeny coupled with
evolutionary analyses should yield insights into patterns that have led to its
high diversity. The products of this research will include a molecular-based
phylogeny, with which ecological and trait evolution analyses will be performed.
Additionally, identification and description of novel species and a taxonomic
revision of the family are planned. The research will also contribute to the
first modern floristic treatment of the family in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this research will be presented at
professional and amateur scientific meetings. A molecular reference dataset of
known species of Clavariaceae will be produced that will aid identification of
DNA sequences obtained from soil and other environmental samples. The proposed
collaborative effort involves researchers in Europe and Australia and
contributions from domestic and international herbaria and amateur naturalists.
Several undergraduates will be trained in aspects of molecular biology and
mentored in evolutionary biology.