* 1210270
* Dissertation Research:  Ecosystem scale abiotic and biotic drivers of food web structure in deep phreatic aquifers
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Benjamin Schwartz, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2013
* USD 15,000.00

Karst aquifers are sources of groundwater for human use, are an integral
component of the water cycle, and may contain diverse microbial, invertebrate,
and vertebrate communities. Many karst aquifers are threatened by groundwater
extraction and contamination, but relatively little is known about their
community structure, ecosystem function, or biogeochemical cycling. This
research, on the Edwards Aquifer of south-central Texas, will address links
between hydrogeology and geochemistry, the distribution of organic matter, and
the trophic structure of groundwater communities. Specific issues that will be
addressed will include the ways that hydrology and geochemistry affect the
spatial and temporal distribution of chemolithoautotrophic and photosynthetic
organic matter and utilization by groundwater species, whether biodiversity in
groundwater habitats is supported by resource partitioning, and whether the
prevailing paradigm of truncated trophic structure in subsurface habitats is
supported by isotopic data.

These issues will be addressed by sampling across geochemical gradients in the
freshwater and saline portions of the aquifer. Methods will include inorganic
and organic geochemical characterization of groundwater, geospatial analysis of
geochemical data, stable isotope analyses, and morphometric analyses of
invertebrates. Preliminary results show that organic matter produced both by
plants, using sunlight, and by microbes that derive energy from redox reactions
involving inorganic substrates (chemolithoautotrophs) is utilized by
invertebrates, and both types of organic matter are distributed unevenly within
the aquifer, being controlled by the movement of water (photosynthetic matter
being prevalent near recharge features) and geochemistry (chemolithoautotrophic
production occurring where fresh and saline groundwaters mix).

This project will have substantial societal importance because it directly
relates to water quality and the maintenance of biodiversity in ecosystems that
are intensively managed for human use. The project also will provide field and
laboratory opportunities for students, including Hispanics and women employed or
enrolled as graduate students in the PIs laboratory.