* 1210005
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute for FY 2012 in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Lauren Jarocha, Jarocha                 Lauren         E
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2013
* USD 5,836.00

This action funds Lauren Elizabeth Jarocha of The University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill to conduct a research project, entitled "Electron paramagnetic
resonance studies of radical reactions to improve solar cells and artificial
photosynthesis," during the summer of 2012 at Tokoku University in Sendai,
Miyagi Prefecture, Japan. The host scientist is Seigo Yamauchi.

The Intellectual Merit of the research project is related to the development of
a detailed understanding of the role structure and mechanism play in proton-
coupled electron transfer reactions (PCET). This type of reaction is important
in both artificial photosynthetic devices and dye sensitized solar cells. Proton
coupled electron transfer reactions involve radical intermediates, which can be
studied directly by electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy. The
proposed work explores ruthenium based oxidative catalysis and reductive
quenching proton coupled electron transfer reactions using high-field time
resolved electron paramagnetic resonance to obtain accurate information on the
structure, dynamics, chemical properties, and mechanism of these reactions,
which will be helpful in designing more efficient chemical reactions for use in
solar cells and artificial photosynthetic devices.

The Broader Impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-
hand research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science,
science policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce.