* 1210526
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Weed Profiling:   A Molecular Phylogenetic Test of Darwin's Naturalization Hypothesis in Asteraceae
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Daniel Potter, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* joseph miller
* 12/31/2014
* USD 15,000.00

Expanding beyond their native ranges, some plant species become ecologically
dominant in new areas, affecting biodiversity, ecosystem function, and human
health. Thus, the ability to understand and predict invasive behavior is of
great importance. Using weed-rich tribes of the cosmopolitan family Asteraceae
as models, this project will investigate evolutionary relationships among native
and invasive taxa, with the goal of facilitating development of predictive
frameworks for screening potentially invasive taxa. Phylogenies will be
reconstructed based on DNA sequence data and used to test how relatedness
between natives and exotics determines invasive/weedy behavior in Mediterranean
climates in the US and Europe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Once exotic plants establish
in new regions, they are difficult to control. Hence, identifying and preventing
potentially invasive species from reaching ground zero is the most economically
and environmentally desirable management method. This study will provide the
basis for developing frameworks for screening potentially problematic species,
as well as insights into traits that influence the success of exotic invaders.
Mediterranean climate ecosystems are both highly diverse and highly endangered,
rendering them ideal as study systems. The project will provide scientific
training for high school and undergraduate students and outreach efforts aimed
at raising interest in environmental sciences among Asian American youth.