* 1210313
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: MIMETIC DIVERGENCE AND THE EVOLUTION OF REPRODUCTIVE  ISOLATION IN THE MIMIC POISON FROG, RANITOMEYA IMITATOR
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Kyle Summers, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 06/30/2014
* USD 14,995.00

Understanding how species form is a central goal for understanding how
biodiversity is generated. Speciation may be driven by many causes, for example,
by adaptation of a single species to distinct environments, a process known as
ecological speciation. A mimetic radiation (when a single species adaptively
radiates to resemble distinct model species) represents an ideal scenario for
studying ecological speciation. We have identified a mimetic radiation in a
species of Peruvian poison frog, Ranitomeya imitator, that has undergone
divergence in color pattern to mimic four unrelated model species. The goal of
this project is to assess whether mimetic divergence has led to reproductive
isolation among different mimetic morphs of R. imitator. To test this, this
project will assess reproductive isolation between mimetic morphs using a
combination of population genetic analyses, mate choice experiments, and
analyses of advertisement calls. This project may help elucidate whether
ecological speciation occurs in a predictable way by identifying whether
morphological divergence is a predictor of reproductive isolation. The study
species, Ranitomeya imitator, has been highly publicized recently for its
remarkable parental care strategies, both by the BBC (?Life in Cold Blood?
series) and by the NHK (Japanese Broadcasting Corporation, currently in
production). However, surprisingly little has been made about this species?
fascinating mimicry system, which may be because this aspect of the species has
barely been studied. As mimicry provides such a visually powerful example of
natural selection, this research may help bring this aspect of this species?
biology to the public eye.