* 1210922
* Dissertation Research: Molecular Basis of Cryptic Genetic Variation in Evolved Lines of Caenorhabditis remanei
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* William Cresko, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,200.00

How do organisms survive in and adapt to novel, stressful conditions? Genetic
variation that is not exposed in a normal environment (called cryptic genetic
variation) may nevertheless be exposed through phenotypic plasticity in novel
environments. A key gap in our understanding of cryptic genetic variation is the
identification of its molecular basis and evolution. When exposed to
ecologically relevant stressful environments in the lab, the nematode
Caenorhabditis remanei evolves rapidly in response to selection, and populations
alter their response to alternative environments. The PIs will use next-
generation sequencing technology to identify the key genetic and transcriptional
changes that have occurred in these evolved lines, enabling the identification
of genes and developmental pathways that expose cryptic variation in new
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently little is known about how the
exposure of this cryptic genetic variation by a new environment can impact
evolution in natural populations. As global climate change rapidly alters
habitats and creates novel environments, many species of economic and
conservation concern are faced with new environmental challenges. Thus it is
becoming increasingly important to understand how environmental factors interact
with genes in populations to direct evolutionary change. This research improves
our understanding of this process.