* 1210094
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Biodiversity and community ecology of the gut microbiota in herbivores with respect to dietary toxins
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2014
* Maria Denise Dearing, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 03/31/2014
* USD 14,999.00

Some of the most important interactions that facilitate mammalian life are
between mammals and the diverse communities of microbes that reside within their
digestive tracts. Mammalian herbivores in particular exhibit the most diverse
gut microbial communities, which are thought to conduct fiber fermentation and
other nutritional processes to benefit the host. However, in addition to fiber,
plants also produce plant secondary compounds that act as anti-herbivore
defenses. It has long been proposed that mammalian herbivores might also house
microbes that detoxify these toxic compounds. This proposal aims to advance our
knowledge of the microbes that live within the guts of a group of herbivorous
rodents: woodrats. Woodrats hold tremendous promise for understanding diversity
and for discovery of novel detoxifying microbes and genes, as they feed on a
variety of plants containing toxins that likely have shaped gut microbial
diversity. Indeed, microbes do allow woodrats to consume plant toxins, and the
consumption of these toxins strongly changes their gut microbial communities.
The central objective of the proposed research is to understand the biodiversity
and community ecology of the gut microbiota in herbivores with respect to
dietary toxins. The research will specifically investigate how evolutionary
history and exposure to dietary toxins influence the community genetics of
foregut microbes in a wild herbivore, and how dietary toxins might alter
resident gut microbial communities and allow for invasion by a novel community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support the training of a graduate
student in the emerging field of microbial metagenomics. In addition, high
school and undergraduate students will be involved in the research and receive
mentoring in the conduct of independent research. This project will support the
development of an inquiry-based lecture geared towards the public, which will be
presented at local schools and museums. Results from this research will identify
important microbial genes associated with the detoxification of plant toxins,
which could be useful in agricultural systems, especially in developing areas
where livestock often need to feed on plants containing such toxins.