* 1210359
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Adaptive divergence in Anopheles gambiae (with gene flow): facilitation via chromosomal inversions
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Qixin He, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2015
* USD 15,000.00

Climate change and human disturbance increase the threats posed by disease
vectors. Therefore, understanding mechanisms enabling their rapid adaptation is
of central importance. This study focuses on whether a specific chromosomal
structural change (i.e., chromosomal inversions) facilitates adaptive divergence
of the mosquito Anopheles gambiae, the most severe malaria vector in sub-Sahara
Africa. Such chromosomal structural changes may promote local adaptation because
they buffer populations from the mixing effects of migrants from different
habitats. This study will test this hypothesis empirically using a framework
that will provide detailed demographic, geographic, and temporal information
relevant to testing mechanisms of rapid adaptation. The study will also provide
insights into the current debate regarding the source of adaptation: rapid
adaptation facilitated by new inversion mutations or pre-existing genetic
variation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will be directly relevant to
informing pest control agencies of which demographic or genetic factors will be
the best target to impede rapid adaptation in mosquitoes. For example, it can
provide critical information on whether genetically modified mosquitoes can
compete with native populations and survive in the local environment. The work
will foster academic communications between US and Cameroonian researchers and
students, and promote the education of local communities in malaria preventions.