* 1210320
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Ornament evolution in Anolis lizards: the interaction between survival and reproductive  selection in a manipulative field experiment with replication
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Jonathan Losos, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Friar
* 05/31/2013
* USD 14,953.00

Animals that attract mates using visual signals are casting their message into a
world full of hostile entities - predators, prey, competitors - all of which are
eager to intercept their message. Creating signals that will capture the
attention of the intended target without attracting unwanted attention is a
constant challenge for wild animals. The objective of this study is to uncover
how variation in signal color influences how competing selective forces act on
the individual using lizards in the neotropical genus Anolis. Specifically, the
ornament color of males in the wild will be manipulated to see how this affects
individual survival and reproductive success. Another component of this study
will be to determine how an individual's outcome can change depending on
population-level variation in the strength of competition, which will be altered
by manipulating the sex ratio in six experimental
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will help elucidate how several
competing forces can act in conflict or in concert to shape animal signals, a
key question in the study of ecological and evolutionary biology. The diversity
of animal signals, especially visual signals, is thought to be an important
force in creating species diversity; the results of this research may therefore
also contribute to our understanding of how natural processes create and
maintain species diversity.