* 1210973
* Investigating the Complex Interaction of Dark Matter and Gas in Cluster of Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Elena Rasia, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 07/31/2017
* USD 361,280.00

Astrophysicists have discovered that about 96% our Universe appears to consist
of two unknown constituents called dark matter and dark energy. This project
aims to establish the properties of the interaction between these dark
constituents and the luminous matter within clusters of galaxies, with
particular emphasis on the influence on mass distribution. The mass of these
objects is a fundamental quantity to derive cosmological parameters, i.e., to
quantify the importance and evolution of the Universe's dark and luminous
components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide current large
astronomical collaborations and future astronomical survey teams with detailed
mass theoretical models built at four levels of increasing spatial complexity.
Easily observable global quantities (zero dimension) will be related to the
total mass through scaling relations. The project will extend previous results
to an observationally-oriented analysis. Beyond the search for dependence of
results on gas physics and dark energy, this part of the project will provide a
clear indication on best sample selection and observation strategies to be
adopted in X-ray and optical observations. The second part of the project is
based on the concentration-mass relation (one dimension). While discordant
observational results and theoretical predictions have recently created an
increasing tension, this analysis aims to test X-ray, weak lensing, and strong
lensing techniques to address this tension. Theoretical models produced by
different gas physics and various dark energy models will be compared. Finally,
the last two parts of this project aim to advance our theoretical understanding
and modeling of cluster cosmology. The cluster mass derived from either X-ray or
gravitational lensing is strongly influenced by the existence of sub-structures
and geometry of the system. The next part of the project will identify the gas
physical process that best characterizes the morphology of real clusters, and
two observational techniques will be applied and tested using our synthetic
catalogue. The final part of the project will provide observers with a complete
three-dimensional (3D) model of galaxy clusters. New observational techniques
recently introduced to derive the 3D shape of clusters will finally be
tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator (PI) will directly train
an undergraduate student, who will learn how to connect theory with observations
and to collaborate with international scientists. The PI also believes strongly
in mentoring underrepresented students, and diversity will be encouraged in the
research group. All the products of this project will be made available to the
public through Deep Blue, a service offered by the University of Michigan
Library.