* 1210600
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Priority effects in the establishment of the oak leaf tie community
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Elisha Sigmon, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2013
* USD 14,982.00

Understanding the factors that structure ecological communities is a central
goal in ecology. When new communities are formed, the identity of the initial
colonists can determine which types of organisms ultimately populate the
resulting community. The role that the effects of early colonists, termed
priority effects, play in structuring insect communities is largely unexplored.
This project examines the insect communities that inhabit leaf ties, which are
shelters between overlapping leaves built by caterpillars using silk. Other
insects subsequently inhabit leaf ties leading to an increase in the abundance
and diversity of insects on the plant. Experimental manipulations will be used
to determine if aggressive behavior exhibited by initial colonists influences
subsequent community development and composition. Priority effects will be
demonstrated if leaf ties colonized by caterpillars that vary in aggressive
behavior contain different insect communities. This research will aid in
understanding the dynamics of an ecologically important yet understudied insect
community that is important for forest health and
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide training to young
scientists and educate the local community about these fascinating insects. This
project will train undergraduate research assistants who will subsequently
conduct independent research projects. Volunteer Master Naturalists will also be
trained in the basics of plant-insect ecology through a local program; they will
then lead community groups and students on nature walks aimed at conveying
natural history information and basic ecological relationships of local fauna
and flora.