* 1210500
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   The Maintenance of Cooperative Nest Construction in Sociable Weavers (Philetairus Socius)
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2014
* William Searcy, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2014
* USD 14,918.00

Although evolution by natural selection has often been depicted as favoring
ruthless, selfish behavior, cooperation is actually widespread in nature.
Consequently, the evolution of cooperative behavior has become a central problem
in biology. The present research examines the evolution of a particular form of
cooperation, cooperative nest building in an African bird. Communal nests
represent a public goods dilemma: each individual benefits directly from the
communal nest, but would benefit more if it could refrain from contributing to
nest-building as long as others continued to maintain the nest. Such public
goods dilemmas are common in human societies but have rarely been explored in
non-human animals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate
cooperative nest construction behavior of a Namibian bird, the sociable weaver.
Observations of nest construction in nature will examine relative contributions
of the sexes and of individuals to test whether cooperation in this instance can
be explained via kin selection. Simply, kin selection is a type of natural
selection favoring aid to genetic relatives. An agent-based model will be used
to further explore the possibility that cooperative nest building can be
sustained through kin selection. The computer code used to implement the model
will be made available to other scientists, thus facilitating future modeling
efforts in social evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, an experiment
will test whether individuals that forego cooperative nest construction are
punished by others; such punishment is a common explanation for contribution to
public goods in human societies. Thus the research will test whether theories
explaining contribution to public goods in human societies explain cooperation
in this model system. The project will also contribute to the development of the
next generation of scientists and engineers. The project includes undergraduate
mentoring and training in genetic analyses and behavioral observation, thus
providing useful research experience for the next generation of American
scientists.