* 1210587
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Persistence of Monoecy in Deep Time: An Integrated Biological and Paleontological Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Stephen Weeks, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 08/31/2013
* USD 14,961.00

This project integrates paleontology and evolutionary biology to investigate the
evolution of sexual systems. The existence of so many methods of reproduction in
the natural world remains difficult to explain. Contemporary theories assume
that sexual reproduction should allow long term survival as the dispersal and
recombination of genetic material provides a population of organisms with the
ability to adapt to environmental change. Small freshwater crustaceans, or ?clam
shrimp,? are ideal for the study of sexual system evolution as the group
contains species that comprise males and females, species where females no
longer exist and have been completely replaced by self-fertilizing
hermaphrodites (with the ability to fertilize their own eggs) coexisting with
males, and species with only self-fertilizing hermaphrodites. Using the
otherwise inconspicuous ?clam shrimp? as a study group, it is possible to
identify sex via carapace (shell) shape analysis techniques in both living and
fossil populations. Once sexes are identified, we can deduce sexual system via
sex ratio of the population. &lt;br/&gt;This study aims to collect fossil data
from worldwide repositories in order to provide, for the first time, empirical
evidence to test established theories about the origination, duration and
extinction of sexual systems over geologic timescales. We can then address the
commonly held belief that unisexual systems represent an evolutionary ?dead
end.? The results of this study will also provide a foundation for future
research utilizing the fossil record to perform transformative studies into the
evolution of mating systems.