* 1210769
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Integrating STEM approaches to understand the dispersal of grassland plants
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2015
* Brent Danielson, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2015
* USD 14,935.00

Although most plants are essentially stuck in one place for most of their life
cycle, they are able to move to new and sometimes distant locations as seeds.
Understanding how seeds move or "disperse", is important for determining a plant
species' ability to traverse increased distances to find suitable habitats as
those habitats change naturally or through the actions of humans. The
availability of nutrients might strongly affect the number of seeds a plant can
produce, the quality of those seeds, and how far they can disperse. To
understand how changes in nutrients might influence seed dispersal, tallgrass
prairie seeds will be collected along a north-south gradient from Texas to
Minnesota from plots to which nitrogen, phosphorous, and potassium have been
added. Dispersal patterns are difficult to understand because most prairie seeds
are too small for traditional tracking devices. To combat this difficulty an
alternative approach will be used: the "flight" of seeds will be studied in wind
tunnels, using aerodynamic engineering technology to determine the distances
seeds can travel. These distances will be used to make predictions about the
ability of different plant species to move between disparate
habitats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will immerse undergraduate students
in both the Engineering and the Biology Departments at Iowa State University
(ISU) in research that integrates biology, mathematics, engineering and
technology. This unique approach will allow for broader thinking of young
scientists. In addition, the cross-departmental nature of this project will give
students and faculty the chance to expand the current scope of their research
studying seed dispersal from many angles. Results from this research will be
incorporated into ISU curriculum through undergraduate seminars developed by
graduate students. The importance of integrating engineering, math and
technology into the biological sciences will also be presented through various
interactive activities to elementary and middle school students through local
programs that encourage exploration of science at a young age.