* 1210412
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Dissecting ant societies: elucidating how colony size affects brain and behavioral specializations
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Sabrina Amador-Vargas, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Tamra Mendelson
* 09/30/2014
* USD 15,000.00

This dissertation research seeks to understand how brain anatomy correlates with
task-specialization within ant societies. The research develops a model
experimental system of acacia ants, which nest symbiotically in hollow spines of
acacia plants, feed on food produced by the plant, and in return protect the
plant. Acacia ants are ideal for this study because workers are similar in shape
but exhibit distinct behavioral groups that are specialized on different tasks
critical for the coordinated functioning of the society. The research
specifically tests (1) whether task-specialization correlates with different
brain structures; and (2) how society size affects the behavioral and neuro-
anatomical specialization among workers. The research contributes to the
understanding of animal sociality. The research will be the first to use
multiple behavioral groups of an ant species to explore the links between brain
and behavior, while controlling for worker morphology. The study will also
provide insights into the poorly understood brain anatomy of ants that rely
heavily on visual stimuli and visual communication. The investigations involve
collaborating researchers in Panama, Costa Rica, and the USA, as well as field
sites in Costa Rica and Panama. As part of the research, the doctoral trainee is
supervising the Master's thesis of a female student from the Universidad de
Costa Rica. Undergraduate students from the University of Texas and a high
school student are digitally reconstructing brain anatomy. The trainee also
disseminates research results through regular presentations to students,
schoolteachers, park rangers, and naturalist guides.