* 1210762
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Experimental tests of the evolutionary forces shaping linkage disequilibrium
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2014
* Matthew Rockman, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,966.00

Each individual has a distinctive combination of gene variants strung together
along their chromosomes. Because genes that are near one another on the
chromosomes tend to be inherited together, populations harbor only a subset of
all possible combinations of gene variants, yielding statistical associations
between them. The vital biological process that shapes this association pattern
is genetic recombination during meiosis. This study investigates the
evolutionary forces that determine the relationship between association patterns
and recombination rates along the chromosomes, a relationship crucial for
shaping genetic diversity. A combination of experimentally evolved and natural
populations will be used to tease apart the evolutionary forces shaping genetic
diversity in the Caenorhabditis elegans genome at an unprecedented resolution.
The proposed research will explicitly test the conformity of long-standing
theoretical predictions governing the relationship between patterns of genomic
association and meiotic recombination with careful experimental measurements of
both. The comprehensive understanding of the relationship between genomic
association patterns and meiotic recombination rates from this study will find
widespread application in genome-wide association studies (which searches for
genetic variants in populations), linkage mapping (which searches within
families), and evolutionary genomic studies. The results and methodologies
developed in the course of this research will be published in open-access
format, which will facilitate the broadest possible dissemination of this
research. Funding of this research will provide a female Ph.D. student with the
opportunity to pursue an independent line of research from that of her mentor.