* 1210556
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phylogeographic discord in the comparative genomic history of Amazonian birds
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Robb Brumfield, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 05/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

The production of species diversity is of fundamental interest, but the factors
that cause diversification are poorly understood. Diversification is known to
occur at different rates depending on the species or group of species involved,
and comparative study of this variation can reveal the processes that promote
diversity. Comparative phylogeography is the study of diversification at the
population level within different species, and it allows us to observe
differences in diversification at the point where speciation occurs. The goals
of this study are to use comparative phylogeography and novel methods of
generating data to detect differences in diversification across species, and to
analyze the factors that promote faster diversification in some species than in
others. Phylogeography will be compared across sixteen Amazonian bird species
with similar distributions. A new set of genetic markers scattered across the
genome will be used to generate data from 24 individuals of each species. These
genetic sequences will be extracted from museum tissue samples using a new
method of enriching genomic DNA for sequences of interest, and then sequenced on
a next-generation sequencing instrument. New analytical tools for testing models
will allow us to measure the processes that are most important in driving the
diversification of a given species. The massive amount of data generated by this
method will allow for analysis of more complex models than could ever be
analyzed previously, giving us new insight into the processes promoting species
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project provides research opportunities
for undergraduate students in Louisiana and the geographic scope of the project
fosters inter-institutional and international collaborations. The research
provides a test of next-generation sequencing methods and a new genomic marker
set, and our results will aid in the application of these methods to other study
systems. New biogeographic and geographic genetic data from our work support
conservation efforts in the Amazon. All specimens, audio recordings, and
observational data from our fieldwork and genetic data from our lab work are
deposited in publicly accessible collection and databases. We consider these
resources invaluable for current and future, pure and applied research on
Amazonian birds and other systems.