* 1210523
* ITAMP/B2 Institute Winter Graduate School in AMO Physics to be held January 8-20, 2012 in Tucson, Arizona
* MPS,PHY
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2012
* Hossein Sadeghpour, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 11/30/2012
* USD 7,500.00

This grant provides partial support for students to attend the Winter Graduate
School on Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics: Ultracold and Ultrafast Atomic
Physics, January 8-20, 2012. The school, organized by ITAMP (Institute for
Theoretical Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics) and the B2 (Biosphere 2)
Institute, seeks to enhance the training of students in two of the major
research areas in contemporary atomic, molecular and optical (AMO) sciences --
"Toward absolute zero" and "Extreme light" -- identified in "Controlling the
Quantum World," one of the volumes in the 2010 NRC Decadal Physics Review. This
inaugural winter school allows students to interact with eminent scientists in a
relaxed atmosphere, away from the distractions of everyday life. Multiple
lectures are given on subjects associated with "ultracold atomic and molecular
physics" and "ultrashort and ultrastrong coherent physics" in an environment
that fosters interaction and discussions, with plenty of opportunities for
teachers and students to mingle outside the classroom, and the possibility for
initiating new collaborative projects. The meeting is aimed primarily at
graduate students representing a broad spectrum of interests in experimental and
theoretical research in AMO physics and who come from diverse backgrounds and
programs across the nation.