* 1210311
* Collaborative Research:  The Aspherical Nature and Evolution of Supernovae
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Douglas Leonard, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2017
* USD 148,259.00

This award will support a long-term comprehensive spectropolarimetric survey of
all types of supernovae. The principal goal of this effort is to improve the
understanding of the characteristics and importance of asymmetries in supernova
explosions by focusing on the observable evolution. Polarimetry allows one to
probe spatial scales in a supernova that cannot be resolved through direct
imaging from earth or space. Spectropolarimetry further enhances the power of
this technique by revealing wavelength dependent variations that may result from
optical depth dependent geometries. In recent years, evidence has grown that
nearly all supernovae exhibit departures from spherical symmetry. These results,
together with advances in computing power that enable full three dimensional
modeling, are exposing the possibility that asymmetries are not just observable
consequences of supernovae, but may in fact be a necessity of the explosion
mechanism itself. The investigators will obtain repeat spectropolarimetry of the
brightest core collapse and thermonuclear. These data will be augmented with
both photometry and high-resolution spectroscopy.

The project is expected to have an impact on astrophysics as the diagnostic
power of polarimetry continues to advance, especially in the era of giant
telescopes and time-variable astronomy. This project will also support a number
of outreach and education efforts at each institution and will contribute to the
education and training of undergraduate and graduate students. In addition, Dr.
Hoffman will continue her leadership of the Collaborative Research in
Astrophysics (CORA) program at the University of Denver. This program is based
on studies that show that participation in group research projects increases
retention of female students in scientifically and technically demanding majors.