* 1210673
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Transcriptomic basis of convergent evolution in bioluminescent squid
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Todd Oakley, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,991.00

The phenomenon of convergent evolution fascinates scientists across disciplines.
Classic examples of convergent traits, such as the camera-eyes in vertebrates
and cephalopods or the wings of bats, birds and insects, remind us of the
efficacy of evolution as well as the common environmental constraints shared by
organisms. Yet, the extent to which convergent molecular processes drive
structural convergence remains unclear. This study investigates if the number of
possible ?molecular solutions? for a trait favored by natural selection is as
limited as the number of structural solutions. By investigating gene expression
profiles, this project addresses whether the pressure of natural selection
influences genomic resourcefulness and causes the independent deployment of
similar genetic pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Convergent forms of
bioluminescence have originated often across diverse forms of life, providing an
excellent system for investigating convergent evolution. Within cephalopods, a
form of bioluminescence reliant on a luminous symbiotic bacterium has evolved
multiple times. This study investigates if the expression profiles for genes
required for the specialized organ housing these bacteria are as similar as the
profiles between organs that share an evolutionary history (eyes, brain, etc.).
Results of this work have important consequences for our understanding of gene
expression evolution and the evolution of animal-bacteria symbiosis.