* 1210170
* Materials World Network: Classical and Quantum Optical Metamaterials by Combining Top-down and Bottom-up Fabrication Techniques
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Xiang Zhang, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 07/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Benefiting from advancement of micro and
nanofabrication tools, the research in metamaterials has been recently extended
from microwave to terahertz and optical frequencies. The scale-down of
metamaterials to meet optical frequencies, paves the way for a new class of
metamaterials, namely quantum metamaterials, which could have a profound impact
on a broad range of applications in telecommunication, optical imaging, energy
harvesting, health care, and homeland security. However, further breakthrough in
the field of optical metamaterials is hindered by several factors: (1) the
capability of current top-down fabrication techniques to engineer structures at
a few nanometers scale; (2) lack of long range ordering by using the bottom up
nanofabrication approaches; (3) optical loss in the metal-based optical
metamaterials; (4) lack of optical control at low photon levels in optical
metamaterials. In this project, scientists aim to solve the above issues by
combining top-down and bottom-up nanofabrication techniques for the
manufacturing of optical metamaterials, and by extending metamaterials to the
quantum regime to reduce the loss and to introduce novel optical control schemes
that go beyond classical metamaterials. This project combines synergistically
three collaborators, two in the UK and one in the US, to investigate the
fabrication, characterization and modeling of novel classical and quantum
optical metamaterials. The central rationale for this collaborative group is
that it matches a UK group with expertise in large scale nanofabrication, a UK
group in demonstrated theoretical capabilities in nonlinear optics, with a US
group with demonstrated record of various optical characterization techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Metamaterials are man-
made materials that mimic the order of the matters. Metamaterials consist of
artificially engineered "atoms" and "molecules", which can be designed to show
optical properties unattainable from naturally occurring materials.
Metamaterials present a novel platform for controlling light at one's will with
potential applications such as a powerful imaging lens that beats the imaging
diffraction limit and an invisibility cloak that renders object invisible to
outside observers. By introducing a novel nanofabrication paradigm, this
collaborative project aims at solving the issues that hinder the practical
application of metamaterials, and bridging the gap between the proof-of-concept
demonstrations in the laboratory to real world applications. The research to be
undertaken here has several areas of broad impact. First, it will foster an
interdisciplinary examination of the fundamental materials science, which
includes fabrication, materials physics, optical physics, and theory. Second it
will enable three groups in the US and the UK, with a strong history of
interactions and complementary expertise and capabilities to collaborate. This
work involves the opportunity for both graduate and undergraduate students to
collaborate and travel in an international setting. Third, the program has
concrete plans and procedures to seek out recruitment of diverse student
collaborators. Fourth, the project enables students to collaborate via extended
visits and shorter trips with a major National Laboratory, i.e. Lawrence
Berkeley Lab, where one of the PIs was an academic staff, as well as the London
Centre for Nanotechnology, UK's premier nanofabrication facility shared by the
University College London and Imperial College London.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the Electronic and Photonic Materials program and Office
of Special Programs, Division of Materials Research.