* 1210099
* Asteroid Lightcurve Observations and Analysis
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Alan Harris, MoreData!, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2015
* USD 182,996.00

Dr. Warner and his team continue their existing program to produce about 100
asteroid lightcurves per year. Lightcurve observations measure the changes in
light from an asteroid over time, and are among the productive research projects
that can be done with modest instrument (less than 0.5-m) telescopes and high-
end commercial CCD cameras. Smaller telescopes can obtain lightcurves for
modeling of objects as small as about 2-5 km and up to the largest asteroids.
Lightcurve observations are obtained in a few days to weeks, and from these data
it is possible to determine the rotation rate of an asteroid, its taxonomic
class based on multi-color photometry, absolute magnitude (and thus its
approximate size), surface light scattering properties, and sometimes an initial
indication of its shape and the spin axis orientation. These characteristics
provide constraints on theories regarding the development and evolution of the
asteroids within our Solar System. The results help to understand two processes
involving the thermal re-radiation of sunlight by asteroids: First, the
Yarkovsky effect, which changes the size of an object's orbit and, second, the
YORP effect (Yarkovsky-O'Keefe-Radzievskii-Paddack), which is believed to be
responsible for aligning the spin axes within asteroid groups or families. The
YORP effect is thought to be the primary mechanism for forming small binary
asteroids by causing a parent asteroid to spin up to a point where it sheds mass
that becomes a satellite. . The project has also lead to the discovery of a
dozen binary asteroids, and more discoveries might follow. The new lightcurve
data are used to develop ideas on binary formation, spin axis orientation, and
orbital migration, along with more clearly defining the role of the Yarkovsky
and YORP effects on asteroid evolution. Dr. Warner and his team coordinate their
efforts with other lightcurve and binary search programs through regularly
published quarterly articles in the Minor Planet Bulletin that lists potential
targets; the CALL (Collaborative Asteroid Lightcurve Link) web site that lists
targets and provides a 'reservation' system to help coordinate observing
efforts; and through maintaining the asteroid Lightcurve Database (LCDB). This
database gives up-to-date results of all lightcurve results and is frequently
used by other researchers. This project engages a large number of high school
and undergraduate students and faculty at educational institutions around the
world, as well as the general public ('backyard astronomers') in astronomical
research.