* 1210513
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Within species reproductive isolation: does chloroplast inheritance mediate cytonuclear incompatibility?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Laura Galloway, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,969.00

New species arise as populations within a species become differentiated and are
no longer able to produce viable hybrid offspring. Even though such divergence
occurs in many species, however, most do not undergo speciation. What prevents
this speciation process from occurring? In the plant species Campanulastrum
americanum reduced viability of between-populations hybrids is correlated with
divergence in the chloroplast genome. Offspring of these low performing hybrids,
though, often show complete recovery. Chloroplast and mitochondria genomes are
typically inherited only from the mother. However, hybridization between
divergent populations may lead to their inheritance from both the mother and
father. This project will test whether inheritance patterns of the chloroplast
are affected by hybridization, and if inheriting the chloroplast from both
parents allows this species to overcome reduced offspring viability due to
chloroplast divergence.

The proposed work will enhance graduate training by supporting a new
collaboration for the purpose of learning a technique for quantifying
chloroplast inheritance patterns. In addition, this work will allow for the
continued training of undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds through
independent research projects. Finally, the proposed research will advance our
understanding of how new species form, and whether altered inheritance patterns
of the organelle genomes, such as the chloroplast, may result in slowing the
speciation process.