* 1210742
* Dissertation Research: Disentangling spatial patterns and scale-dependency of soil microbial communities in an agricultural landscape.
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Kirsten Hofmockel, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 04/30/2014
* USD 14,958.00

Soil microorganisms carry out many processes that are vital for maintaining
productive soils and sustainable agricultural lands. For example, they recycle
nutrients and regulate greenhouse gas emissions. However, little is known about
the distribution of microorganisms across the landscape. To address this
knowledge gap, this research project will study how different factors, such as
agricultural management practices and soil properties, influence the
distribution and function of microorganisms at local and broader spatial scales.
The experiments will be conducted as part of the Landscape Biomass Project, a
large-scale research and demonstration farm in central Iowa. Results from this
project will generate data for modeling soil microbes and the processes that
they perform. These models, in turn, will inform management decisions that
promote soil carbon and nitrogen retention and minimize greenhouse gas
emissions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data collected as part of this project will
strengthen cross-disciplinary research that involves the fields of ecology and
biogeochemistry, agronomy, hydrology, forestry, and economics. The project will
support international collaborations with soil modelers in the United Kingdom.
It will foster training of undergraduate students in the biogeochemical sciences
through hands-on field and laboratory experience. Finally, results will be
presented to a diverse group of public and private stakeholders at on-site field
presentations, meetings with a farmer advisory board, and at workshops with
policy makers.