* 1210755
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Genetics of Adaptation to a Novel Stressful Environment in Mimulus
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Kathleen Ferris, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2014
* USD 14,371.00

Closely related populations or species often occupy ecologically disparate
habitats. Adaptation to new habitats can eventually lead to speciation. Local
adaptation to different environments has been repeatedly demonstrated in plants
and animals; however, the traits and genes that underlie this adaptation are
poorly understood. This study focuses on finding the traits and genes that allow
two species of Monkeyflower, Mimulus laciniatus and the as yet unnamed Bald Rock
Mimulus (BR), to survive in a unique habitat. Other closely related Mimulus
species occur in streams and seeps, but M. laciniatus and BR have independently
colonized a harsh granite outcrop environment. Another unique characteristic
that both these species share is a lobed leaf shape. Because of the
physiological properties of lobed leaves they are predicted to be adaptive in
the dry, exposed granite outcrop environment. The PIs will use genome mapping,
genetic manipulation, field experiments, and environmental manipulations to
assess the adaptive significance of lobed leaves in the novel granite outcrop
environment.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Understanding how plants adapt to harsh
environments is essential for agricultural improvement and conservation,
especially in light of climate change. If lobed leaf shape is important for
adaptation to a dry environment then it could be incorporated into agricultural
breeding programs. This project will also provide many opportunities to mentor
undergraduates and high school students, including women and under-represented
minorities, through programs at Duke and the Durham public schools.