* 1210360
* CNH: Pluvials, Droughts, Energetics, and the Mongol Empire
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Neil Pederson, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2017
* USD 1,394,398.00

This interdisciplinary research project will focus on the role of energy and
water in the rise and fall of the Mongol Empire, the largest contiguous land
empire in the history of the world. The success of the Mongol Empire is a
historical enigma. At its peak in the late 13th century, the empire controlled
areas from the Hungarian grasslands to southern Asia and Persia. Powered by
domesticated livestock, the Mongol Empire grew at the expense of farmers in
Eastern Europe, Persia, and China. What environmental factors contributed to the
rise of the Mongols? What factors influenced the disintegration of the empire by
1300? Energy is considered as critical for human and natural systems to
function, yet few studies have examined the role of energy in the success and
failure of past societies. As modern energy sources become increasingly taxed,
examples of how past societies adapted to changing energy sources is critical.
In a similar way, as societies become rapidly urbanized, freshwater will be
threatened. Water allows biological systems to capture solar energy and humans
to capture, transform, and allocate this energy through their development of
social and political systems. This project will combine archaeological and
historical data from the Mongol Empire with tree-ring records of past climate,
modeled estimates of grassland productivity and livestock abundance, and lake
sediment records of water quality to illuminate the role of energy and water in
the history of the Mongol Empire. The investigators will focus on the Orkhon
Valley, the seat of the Mongol Empire, where recent environmental and
archeological discoveries allow detailed descriptions of past human and
environmental conditions for the first time. The researchers hypothesize that
the arc of the Mongol Empire was influenced by the energy available to nomadic
pastoralists for building a mobile military and governmental force sufficient to
conquer and govern a significant portion of Asia and Eastern Europe. They also
will investigate whether the contraction of the empire was related to drought,
declining grassland productivity, and poor water quality associated with rapid
urbanization and climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enhance
basic understanding on multiple topics, including the role of water and energy
in human and natural systems, the change in climate from the warm Medieval
Climate Anomaly to the cold Little Ice Age, the application of lake sediment
data for understanding impacts of livestock on water quality, and relationships
between climate variation and ecosystem health. Understanding the role of water
and energy in the evolution of a historical society of international renown will
help advance consideration of current perspectives on modern systems and their
dependence on energy and water sources. Tree-ring records developed through this
project will allow hundreds of wooden artifacts to be dated, thereby providing
an annual history of events at Karakorum, the ancient capital of the Mongol
Empire. This project also will provide education and training opportunities for
undergraduate students, graduate students, and post-doctoral fellows in an
international collaborative context. This project is supported by the NSF
Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems (CNH) Program and the NSF Office
of International Science and Engineering.