* 1210052
* Physics and Astrophysics with IceCube Neutrino Observatory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2016
* USD 854,597.00

This award supports the University of California-Berkeley group to continue
their participation in the newly completed IceCube Neutrino Observatory at the
South Pole. The Berkeley group plays a leading role in calibrations, monitoring,
simulations, operations, management, and other service tasks in addition to
analyzing data. Over the period of this award the group will engage in a range
of physics and astrophysics research. Using the newly available and powerful
background veto capabilities of the cubic kilometer detector the group will
measure atmospheric neutrino-induced cascades and search for a diffuse
extraterrestrial flux of high-energy electron neutrinos. The goal is the first
definitive detection of electromagnetic and hadronic particle showers initiated
by interactions of high-energy neutrinos in a medium. They will search for
violation of Lorentz-invariance and superluminal neutrinos using high-energy
neutrinos detected by IceCube to improve the current limit or find a violation
using time-of-flight measurements with respect to gamma-ray bursts and core-
collapse supernovae. Finally, they will use data from DeepCore, the low energy
extension of IceCube, for high-statistics measurements probing the dark matter
and neutrino oscillations sectors. These measurements will depend on precise
knowledge of geometrical and optical detector and ice properties. The Berkeley
group will extend their measurements of the optical properties of the deep ice
with measurements of the scattering function and the properties of the columns
of refrozen ice surrounding the optical sensors.

Broader Impacts: Members of the group will visit and give talks to students at
nearby colleges with predominantly minority enrollments, to local groups of
amateur astronomers, and to the general public. The PI will give talks to
business leaders in the Bay Area and give talks and advise scientists in
developing countries. Members of the group will communicate with reporters
writing about science in the popular press and coordinate outreach activities
involving the Teachers Experiencing Antarctica program and the Upward Bound
program. The group is also involved in spin-off projects, through its inventions
of novel instruments such as the optical dust logger and the biospectral logger.
These projects advance our understanding of climate change and microbial life
under extreme conditions close to those on Mars. The group will continue
communications with glaciologists who use results from the Berkeley group's ice
measurements to get a more complete understanding of glacial ice, and the
movement and fate of the Antarctic ice sheet.