* 1210671
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Out of the Bushes and Into the Trees: Alternative Approaches to a Problematic Lamiaceae Phylogeny
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Pamela Soltis, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,764.00

The mint family (Lamiaceae) is among the most diverse and economically important
families of flowering plants, with many species used in traditional medicines or
serving as important sources of timber, culinary herbs and spices, and essential
oils. The extreme morphological complexity of the Lamiaceae, combined with the
large number of species spanning diverse habitats, presents many taxonomic, or
classification, problems; it is often difficult to distinguish closely related
species. Numerous molecular studies have been published recently to help revise
classifications?studies that reconstruct phylogenetic (genealogical)
relationships among species using information from the genetic code (DNA).
However, these analyses regularly yield patterns of unresolved relationships,
and standard approaches used to resolve phylogenies, such as the reasonable
addition of species and genes into the analyses, have been largely ineffective.
The proposed research uses Lamiaceae as a case study to evaluate new,
alternative approaches for resolving difficult phylogenetic problems and
explores the limits of how evolutionary relationships can be efficiently and
cost-effectively reconstructed for large groups of organisms. These approaches
involve large-scale DNA (or genome) sequencing and new computational methods for
phylogenetic inference. The research represents a necessary step towards
resolving difficult phylogenetic problems in Lamiaceae and will help move mint
systematics ?out of the bushes and into the trees??that is, to resolve clear
evolutionary trees from the current unresolved ?bush?
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is at the forefront of
systematic biology, combing field botany with recent advances in computational
biology and molecular genetics, and it has the potential to demonstrate the
efficacy of new, cross-disciplinary approaches to resolving difficult
phylogenetic problems that can be applied to other problematic groups of plants
and animals. The results of this study will: produce the first chloroplast
genomes for Lamiaceae; contribute insights into the evolutionary history and
biogeography of North American mint groups; and provide an essential framework
for a much-needed taxonomic revision. Moreover, because this study requires
field exploration and population sampling, it will facilitate the discovery and
recognition of new mint species or important sources of genetic diversity that
may warrant protection by government agencies or conservation organizations.