* 1210850
* MWN: Magnetization Dynamics in Metallic Ferromagnetic Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Ilya Krivorotov, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 360,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this Materials World Network project is
to study spectral properties of spin waves in metallic ferromagnetic
nanostructures in the presence of pure spin currents from spin Hall effect. For
these studies, a series of experiments that employ on-chip ferromagnetic
resonance and near-field Brillouin light scattering will be carried out. These
measurements will focus on understanding of the effect of geometric confinement
on nonlinear spin wave interactions and the effect of spin currents on spin wave
dispersion and damping in ferromagnetic nanowires. These phenomena will be
studied both experimentally and theoretically, and the research program will
foster international collaboration and student exchange between US (UC Irvine)
and German (University of Duisburg-Essen and University of Muenster) academic
institutions. The fundamental understanding of the effect of pure spin currents
on spin waves gained through this program will contribute to innovation in the
emerging field of magnonics - a spin based energy efficient processing of
information. This project will expose a number of high-school, undergraduate and
graduate students to nanoscience and will prepare specialists for the US
electronics and magnetic recording industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;When the size of a magnetic material is reduced
down to a few millionths of a millimeter, it acquires new scientifically
interesting and technologically important properties. For example, familiar
electric currents in such materials can create pure magnetic currents that flow
perpendicular to the electric currents. Furthermore, magnetic waves in such
materials can be used for transmitting and processing information in analogy to
the familiar electric signals that carry information in computers and cell
phones. The main advantage of the magnetic waves over the electric signals is
their low energy compared to the energy of electrons in electric circuits. Thus,
circuits that use magnetic waves to carry information and pure magnetic currents
to process information should offer significant energy savings desired in mobile
electronic devices. The purpose of this Materials World Network project is to
understand how pure magnetic currents interact with magnetic waves and to find
energy-efficient ways to manipulate magnetic waves with pure magnetic currents.
This research will advance our fundamental understanding of magnetism and will
enable the development of energy-efficient magnetic circuits. This project will
expose a number of high-school, undergraduate and graduate students to
nanoscience and will prepare specialists for the US electronics and magnetic
recording industries. This research program will also foster international
collaboration and student exchange between US (UC Irvine) and German (University
of Duisburg-Essen and University of Muenster) academic
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Condensed
Matter Physics program and the Office of Special Programs in the Division of
Materials Research.