* 1210442
* EAGER: Feasibility of the Solid Oxide Membrane-Based Electrolysis Process for Solar Grade Silicon Production
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Soumendra Basu, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 07/31/2013
* USD 100,000.00

PI: Pal, Uday Institution: Trustees of Boston University Proposal Number:
1210442 Title: EAGER: Feasibility of the Solid Oxide Membrane-Based Electrolysis
Process for Solar Grade Silicon Production

This is a one-year early-stage exploratory research program aimed at producing
silicon from silica. If successful, it will lead to a larger research program
producing solar grade silicon and achieving the industrial goal for solar power
of $1/Wp (watt at peak exposure) which could enable widespread grid parity.

Intellectual Merit:

This membrane-based silica electrolysis process will employ a solid oxygen-ion
conducting membrane (SOM), such as stabilized zirconia, to electrolyze silica
and other impurity oxides. The feasibility studies will involve dissolving
silicon dioxide with controlled amounts of impurity oxides (such as those of P,
Fe and Cr) in a molten fluoride flux and increasing the applied electrical
potential between the electrodes to first deposit more electronegative
impurities, followed by the deposition of pure Si at the cathode. The anodic
reaction during the electrolysis process will produce pure oxygen gas at an
inert anode, protected from the molten flux by the SOM. In order to demonstrate
feasibility, the following research activities will be undertaken:

- Employ appropriate molten fluoride flux system for performing SOM electrolysis
of silica with controlled amounts of impurity oxides. Research will include
survey and selection of the fluoride flux systems using differential thermal
analysis, impedance and thermo-gravimetric measurements.&#56256;&#56440; - Use a
simple electrolysis cell design with appropriate reference electrodes to measure
and analyze current response as a function of the applied electrical potential.
This information will be used to model mass-transfer resistance in the system
due to chemical diffusion, migration and convection and understand the charge-
transfer mechanism during the deposition process.

- Characterize the microstructure and chemical composition of the metal deposit
(silicon) and relate it to the process model.

In the next phase of the program, more detailed process characterization
employing multiple gas bubbling tubes, thermocouples and cathodes will be
performed for impurity removal and solar grade silicon deposition. The chemical
and physical properties of the deposit will be characterized to assess its
suitability for solar grade application. A finite element SOM electrolysis
process model will be developed. The process model will combine electric current
density with heat transfer, fluid flow, and diffusion for use as a tool for
process design. It will run in three dimensions, and calculate boundary layer
structures in order to estimate changes in concentration polarizations and mass
transfer resistances. Other model features will include determining: multiple
species deposition using boundary layer profiles from mass transfer calculations
to estimate deposition rates for more- and less-electronegative species as well
as for silicon; shape evolution of the growing silicon cathode in order to
optimize electrode placement for favorable product form; new stirring methods in
addition to argon bubbling or rotating electrodes such as employing DC magnetic
field. By using this model ?MOxST? will explore electrode geometry and
placements, and stirring conditions for process scaleup.

Broader Impact:

Solar-grade silicon (SoG-Si) represents a large fraction of the cost of solar
cells. This process is expected to significantly lower the cost of SoG-Si,
reduce Green House Gases (GHG), and increase energy efficiency compared to the
currently used methods of silicon production. While this study is focused on
SoG-Si, the process can be used for production of other energy-intensive metals
(Li, Ti, Al, etc.), leading to increased overall energy efficiency and
reductions in GHG emissions. The project will provide research opportunities for
two graduate students, increasing expertise in the areas of electrochemical
processing and energy/environmental systems. Students will be explicitly
recruited by working in conjunction with under-represented student
organizations, and through our contacts with Howard University. Undergraduates
will be supported through a supplementary REU proposal and through BU?s matching
grant programs.