* 1210454
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Historical dynamics of American beech at its northern range limit
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Jason McLachlan, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2013
* USD 14,847.00

Climate-driven shifts in distribution towards higher latitudes are expected to
occur for many tree species. The ability of a species to move will depend mostly
upon dispersal and colonization by individuals from populations at the poleward
edge of its range, and the details of these migration processes are likely to
determine the genetic structure of the new populations for millennia to come,
and hence their ability to adapt to their new environment. This research seeks
to anticipate this future by examining the past northward migration after
glacial retreat and the present genetic population structure of a dominant tree
of the temperate deciduous forests of the eastern U.S., American beech. By
analyzing genetic data from pollen and macrofossils preserved in lake sediments
for thousands of years in Upper Michigan, the project will elucidate the
important patterns of colonization by beech patterns and show how these led to
patterns of genetic diversity. By further integrating these historical data with
genetic analyses of beech populations today, the project will help understand
the long-term genetic consequences of climate-driven migration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how climate change will affect forests and
biological diversity is important to society, because we depend upon forests for
many products and upon diversity for maintaining a well-functioning environment.
The project will also contribute to forest conservation and management by
helping suggest which populations are genetically at risk and need immediate
conservation attention. Moreover, the project will train undergraduate students
in the process of scientific research.