* 1210378
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Climate-mediated effects of pathogens on plant communities
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Erin Mordecai, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2014
* USD 12,654.00

Although the harmful effect of disease on agricultural crops and livestock is
well-known, scientists are just beginning to recognize the importance of disease
in wild plants and animals. In addition to killing infected individuals and
reducing populations of plants and animals, diseases can affect the species
composition of ecological communities. For example, when species compete for
resources, such as food and water, and also share a disease, the disease can
prevent the better competitor from dominating and allow the species to coexist.
Alternatively, the disease could wipe out the less competitive species more
quickly. This study will investigate whether a fungal disease that kills grass
seeds is contributing to the invasion and dominance of a harmful exotic grass
species, cheatgrass, in the U.S. Intermountain West. The invasive grass degrades
rangeland and promotes fire, but also spreads a fungal disease that kills seeds
of native grasses as well as cheatgrass. The experiment will measure the disease
in field populations in Utah, and calculate its impact on cheatgrass invasion
and native plant persistence using mathematical models. The study will also
manipulate fall rainfall to determine whether the disease's impacts depend on
climate conditions.

This research will improve scientific understanding of the effect of disease on
a harmful grass invasion. The results will inform management decisions based on
using disease to combat the invasive grass. Expanding scientific understanding
of the impacts of wildlife disease will also aid conservation of other
communities of interest such as tropical forests and coral reef fishes. In
addition to its scientific impacts, this project will promote research
experience for undergraduates. The research will also be incorporated into
teaching materials for undergraduate courses. This project has already provided
research experience for five undergraduates (four female), and it will result in
the completion of a doctoral dissertation by a female mathematical biologist, an
underrepresented minority in this field.