* 1210518
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Assessing early molluscan evolution with emphasis on aplacophorans
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Kenneth Halanych, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,742.00

With an estimated 200,000 living species, Mollusca is the second most species-
rich animal group. Many molluscs are economically, ecologically, or biomedically
important. Additionally, the molluscan body plan is extremely varied, ranging
from slugs to clams to giant squid. Because of molluscs' variation, diversity
and abundance in the fossil record, there has been great interest in identifying
the primitive condition of the group for nearly 200 years. The worm-like mollusc
group called Aplacophora (Latin for "without a shell") has long been thought to
be important to understanding early molluscan evolution. However, little is
known about the evolutionary history (phylogeny) within this mostly deep-sea
group. This research aims to reconstruct aplacophoran phylogeny using a
combination of traditional and cutting-edge, next-generation DNA sequencing
technologies. New morphological data will be collected using traditional
microscopy and characters will be mapped onto the phylogeny to infer primitive
features of Aplacophora as well as Mollusca as a whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Understanding how these animals have evolved will be of great interest to
paleontologists and invertebrate biologists who have long sought to understand
the early evolution of this diverse and fascinating group. Moreover, as molluscs
are important models in the fields of neurobiology and parasitology, the results
of this work will directly inform biomedical research.