* 1210525
* Dissertation Research: Impact of monsoon rains on soil microbial communities in an arid grassland
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Egbert Schwartz, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 06/30/2014
* USD 14,751.00

Microbial communities are important regulators of organic matter decomposition
and nutrient cycling in soils. In arid regions such as Arizona and New Mexico
about half of the annual total precipitation occurs during the summer monsoon
season when plant growth is rapid and nutrient requirements are high. This study
will investigate how monsoon rains and plant growth impact the soil microbial
community in these arid regions. Three separate experiments will be conducted to
assess how soil microbial biota is influenced by 1) timing of the water
addition, 2) degree of moisture, and 3) plant growth. Instantaneous changes in
bacterial community composition are expected with watering, while a delayed
response is predicted for the fungal community. In plots where moisture is
withheld, changes in the structure of both bacterial and fungal communities are
predicted to be less pronounced. Finally, plant removal is expected to prevent
establishment of many fungal populations and some bacterial strains.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arid land ecosystems are undergoing change with grasslands
being replaced by desert shrubs. Understanding how the soil microbial community
responds to seasonal rains is critical to understanding organic matter
decomposition and nutrient cycling in desert ecosystems, which in turn, is
important for understanding vegetation dynamics. A partnership with a local
Native American-serving K-8 school will allow the researchers to bring their
research into the classroom, with lessons centering on the three sisters
planting scheme -- a traditional Native American companion planting of corn,
beans, and squash.