* 1210492
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Maternal effects of stress in a plural-breeding rodent
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* L Romero, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2014
* USD 15,000.00

The quality of parental care influences offspring fitness. In domesticated
laboratory rodents, pups that have chronically stressed mothers receive low
quality care, leading pups to develop highly reactive stress responses. Affected
pups will have high stress hormone levels as adults, which can have severe
consequences on their future survival and reproductive output. This research
examines the relationship between stressed mothers, poor maternal care, and the
offspring stress response and survival in the degu (Octodon degus), a wild,
free-living rodent. Degus practice a unique reproductive tactic called "plural
breeding with communal care" where multiple mothers cooperate to raise each
other's pups. This research also will ask whether this unique social strategy
can buffer the offspring against post-natal stress. By manipulating the stress
levels of mothers and measuring stress hormone levels in pups in both field and
laboratory experiments, this research will provide a comprehensive description
of the links between stress, development, and, ultimately, survival. This link
has never been demonstrated in a wild, free-living rodent. This research will
have broader impacts because it will address the link between parental care and
offspring survival, which is a major unsolved problem in ecology and stress
physiology. Further broader impacts of this research will include scientific
outreach through a weekly blog that is incorporated into the curriculum of an
undergraduate course, presentations to senior citizens and middle/high school
girls, undergraduate research opportunities, and support for a young scientist
completing her PhD research.