* 1210282
* Materials World Network: Investigation of Nonpolar and Semipolar GaN on Si and Sapphire: Optical Processes and Efficiency
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Hadis Morkoc, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this Materials World Network
project is to investigate the fundamentals of nonpolar and semipolar GaN growth
on low cost Si and sapphire substrates with the aim of understanding the
mechanisms governing defect formation and constituent/impurity incorporation as
well as processes responsible for radiative recombination. Insight into
mechanisms responsible for the defect formation will make it possible to devise
approaches for reducing the defect density, particularly the stacking faults and
partial dislocations, and produce high-optical-quality material for light-
emitting diodes with enhanced brightness and potentially for laser diodes. The
absence of polarization in nonpolar GaN and substantially reduced polarization
in semipolar GaN will allow higher recombination efficiencies and eliminate the
dependence of emission energy on injection level. After interrogating cleanly
the optical matrix elements, In and Mg incorporation, and Mg activation energy
in optimized GaN films, systematic studies of oscillator strengths and radiative
recombination rates in nonpolar and semipolar InGaN/GaN and GaN/AlGaN quantum
wells and double heterostructures will be undertaken to answer the critical
question which non-polar and semipolar GaN orientation has the potential to
provide higher efficiency light emitters than polar c-plane GaN.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;A multi-
institutional/multidisciplinary international program bringing together the
unique expertise in growth, available at the Virginia Commonwealth University,
extensive capabilities of precise optical measurements at the University of
Magdeburg (Germany), and demonstrated experience in theoretical modeling at the
University of Montpellier 2 (France) will be undertaken in an effort to
understand the synthesis and properties of transformative nonpolar and semipolar
nitride semiconductor structures for high efficiency light emitters. This
approach will shed the much needed light into the fundamentals of defect
formation, impurity incorporation, and optical processes and thus will lay the
critical groundwork for attainment of bright light sources for solid-state
lighting, as well as lasers and detectors for consumer and military
applications. This Materials World Network project will allow a broad
perspective of materials science, engineering, and semiconductor theory and
provide a fertile ground for teaching graduate and undergraduate students the
intricacies of science and soft skills necessary for success in the global,
cyber-enabled nanotechnology workforce, with the additional benefit of exposure
to cultures of science in the US, Germany, and France. Cross training of
graduate students by leading international groups, research experiences for
undergraduate students, and expansion of outreach programs for middle school
students in the fields of materials science and semiconductor devices will go a
long way for training the future skilled workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the Electronic and Photonic Materials program and Office
of Special Programs, Division of Materials Research.