* 1210818
* Materials World Network: Complex Oxides for Heterogeneous Optoelectronic Integration
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Bethanie Stadler, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 07/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;This US-UK Materials World Network collaboration
focuses on adding magneto-optical (MO) and electro-optical (EO) properties that
are orders of magnitude greater than currently available to semiconductor
photonics by integrating both doped yttrium iron garnet and lithium niobate,
respectively, onto III-V structures. With motivations such as source-integrated
photonic integrated circuits and electronically-reconfigurable opto-electronic
integrated circuits, there has been intense work on adding MO and EO materials
to semiconductor platforms. However, complex oxide integration requires thermal
crystallization methods together with thermal expansion mismatch, substrate
dissociation, and interfacial diffusion. This work aims to converge on a
solution involving controlled strain and interfaces using buffer layers and seed
layers (both ~10 nm), oxide patterning, and rapid thermal annealing for
minimized thermal treatment. Subsequent doping in thicker films is used to meet
specifications of maximized MO or EO activity. The optical, magnetic, and
electronic properties are characterized to analyze the both the structures and
compositions, and the materials performance is tested on carefully designed
waveguide structures. In the case of MO integration, non-reciprocity is expected
to be realized without the high-power options. Integrated ferroelectric oxides
also unlocks doors to EO functionality in both near and long term applications,
such as active frequency modulation and reconfigurable
photonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;This research
project is a collaboration between US and UK scientists. The research focuses on
integration of magneto-optical and electro-optical materials with semiconductor
materials, opening doors for novel properties such as enhanced magneto-optical
activity and new devices such as photonic isolators so that optical sources can
be integrated with photonic integrated circuits. The team meets online with
tools that enable attendees to see each other's faces, writings and slides, and
to hear each other's voices. The pedagogy of these tools will be an interesting
side study. In addition, students exchange time in each other's lab to gain
important experience with new cultures and new science. It is anticipated that
the online/exchange interaction model developed here in international research
will be extended to US-Kenya and UK-Pakistan collaborations in the future -
building on relationships that are already underway.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the Electronic and Photonic Materials program and Office
of Special Programs, Division of Materials Research.