* 1210016
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute for FY 2012 in Singapore
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Anne Kwiatt, Kwiatt                  Anne           C
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2013
* USD 5,836.00

This action funds Anne Cathleen Kwiatt of the University of Texas at San Antonio
to conduct a research project, entitled "Analyzing garbage raiding patterns and
diet of urban monkeys in Singapore," during the summer of 2012 at Nanyang
Technological University in Singapore, Singapore. The host scientist is Michael
D. Gumert, Ph.D.

The Intellectual Merit of the research project is to examine human impact on
nonhuman primate behavior and ecology; particularly examining how urban
environments impact male and female monkey dietary and behavioral strategies
differently. The research examines the degree to which variation in diet, social
behaviors, and activity budgets of long-tailed macaque monkeys is affected by
urban modified-human environments and explores the ecological constraints placed
on these behaviors using both behavioral data collection and stable isotope
analysis.

Broader Impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-hand
research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science, science
policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce. Results of the research are expected to contribute to
primate conservation and management plans. By better understanding dietary
variation and the ecological conditions that may promote flexible behavior such
as raiding, more effective management plans may be created for urban human-
sympatric monkeys in Singapore, as well as throughout Southeast Asia.
Additionally, results can contribute to modern conservation and evolutionarily
sustainable approaches that increasingly look not only at species on the edge of
extinction, but at species succeeding on the edge of human societies.