* 1210879
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Role of evolutionary potential in limiting species' distributions
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2015
* Daniel Bush, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2015
* USD 14,984.00

Some plant and animal species are rare while others are widespread but all
species occupy a limited number of areas. This leads to the question of what
prevents a species from expanding its range by adapting to conditions at and
beyond current range margins. The aim of this research is to test the hypothesis
that range limits arise because genetic variation in ecologically important
traits is lower at range edges than at the center of a species? range. To
address this hypothesis, the investigators will combine artificial selection
experiments that quantify genetic variation in key traits for populations from
the center and edges of a species? range, with field estimates of the strength
of natural selection on those traits at the range center and edges of the
scarlet monkeyflower.

The proposed research addresses the broader issue of understanding the processes
that may constrain adaptation in populations. Populations at the edges of
species? geographic distributions may be particularly important to the
persistence of species in the face of global change. Consequently,
investigations of whether populations at the peripheries of species? geographic
ranges can adapt to marginal environments are crucial to understanding how
ranges may shift in response to environmental change. This is important
information for wildlife managers and conservation biologists. In addition, this
research will provide many opportunities for undergraduates to obtain research
experience in field ecology, greenhouse experiments, and data analysis and
interpretation.