* 1210322
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Modeling ornament-preference coevolution with individual-based simulations: An exploration of parameter space
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Adam Jones, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2013
* USD 5,756.00

Some of the most spectacular traits in nature are ornaments used by members of
one sex in competition for access to mates or fertilization opportunities. Of
particular interest is the process by which mating preferences and sexually-
selected ornaments evolve in tandem. There are many models describing the
various conditions determining how these traits evolve together, but all of them
rest on assumptions that have never been theoretically tested. The genes
controlling the ornament and genes controlling the mating preference have always
been assumed to be inherited in a manner that maintains a constant genetic
architecture. The goal of this study is to explore the dynamics of ornament-
preference joint evolution when the genetic architecture itself is allowed to
evolve. Individual-based simulation models will be used to explore regions of
parameter space that facilitate or hinder the rapid evolution of mating
preferences and ornaments predicted by long-standing theory. The results of this
project will provide a better understanding of the evolution of genetically
correlated traits in general. Moreover, the simulation models will be useful for
the demonstration of evolutionary processes to students and will help to
communicate to the public how computer models can be used to dissect complex
natural processes.