* 1210899
* Dissertation Research: Phylogeny of Tettigoniidae (Orthoptera): Evolution of Katydid Defenses and Ears
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Joseph Mugleston, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Tamra Mendelson
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,990.00

Katydids are a well-recognized family of insects, yet surprisingly little is
known about the historical relationships between the 6500 known species. Also,
little is known about the evolution of their unique morphological features such
as the sound reception organs on their front legs (commonly referred to as ears)
and the origins of their defenses against predation: leaf-like wings, bright
warning coloration, and camouflage. This project will result in the first
phylogenetic analysis of katydids and provide the groundwork for understanding
the development of their unique ears and methods of
camouflage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA data generated during this project will be
used to develop two formal lab exercises for undergraduate students. During the
duration of funding, these exercises will provide over 1,000 undergraduate
students with hands-on training in how to align DNA sequences, reconstruct
phylogenetic trees, map characters on topologies, and how to use phylogenetics
to answer fundamental questions in science. This research will also provide
minority undergraduate students with direct mentorship on specific projects.
These students will generate data for a subset of the project, analyze results,
present their findings at national meetings, and be senior author on a
publication coming from this work.