* 1210172
* The LIGO Open Science Center
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Alan Weinstein, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2014
* USD 699,278.00

We propose to begin the development of the LIGO Open Science Center (LOSC),
which will give access to LIGO data to a broad user community. The LOSC will
gather relevant data products generated by the LIGO Laboratory and the LIGO
Scientific Collaboration (LSC) and its partner scientific collaborations, and
make those data products available to outside users along with tools and support
for those users' goals. The LOSC will operate before, during, and beyond
operation of the Advanced LIGO observations, providing user services that are
not funded or available in any other way. Data products, supplied by LIGO
Laboratory and the LSC, will include low-latency transient GW event candidate
broadcasts; catalogs with information about confirmed transient and long-
duration detections; the full strain time series data stream in 6 month
intervals with associated data quality information; and digital data products
associated with all LIGO and LSC publications. When completed, the LOSC will
provide (a) a web portal, client tools, and a layer of data access services
through which the user can discover and access a range of LIGO data and metadata
products; (b) long-term data curation; (c) user documentation, helpdesk, online
tutorials, and user feedback forums; (d) sponsorship of tutorials, workshops and
conferences to help users derive maximal science from the data and communicate
their experiences and findings to each other and to the LSC; and (e) LIGO data-
centric resources to facilitate LIGO and LSC education and public outreach
efforts about gravitational wave and related science. In FY13 we will begin the
initial development phase of the LOSC and provide a foundation for continued
development and deployment in the era of Advanced LIGO operations (FY14 and
beyond). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The public release of LIGO data by the LOSC will
enable broad participation in the advancement of gravitational wave physics and
astrophysics. Numerical relativists, relativity theorists, and astronomers and
astrophysicists will use LIGO observations to better understand the dynamics of
strongly curved spacetime, and the origins and properties of gravitational wave
sources. The LOSC will enable cross-disciplinary science throughout the
relativity and astrophysics community, enabling scientists to ask deeper
questions and carry the field in new directions. It will be interoperable with
other astronomy data systems from both NASA and the NSF Virtual Observatory, to
enable joint data mining and cross-referencing with other archives. It will
promote international efforts for open data through interactions with
gravitational wave projects in France, India, Italy, and Japan. It will extend
and leverage the LIGO observations by making data available and usable into the
far future. It will enable the use of LIGO data for education of university
undergraduates and graduate students, and amateur and professional scientists,
throughout the nation and the world. Through the activities of LIGO Laboratory
and LSC outreach efforts, it will provide resources for public outreach to build
interest and excitement in gravitational wave and multi-messenger astronomy in
young scientists and the public.