* 1210904
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Disease Invasion Dynamics: Brucella abortus and Mycobacterium bovis in African Buffalo
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Anna Jolles, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 05/31/2014
* USD 12,480.00

Interactions between co-infecting pathogens are common in wildlife populations
and each pathogen has the potential to affect one another?s transmission. In
African buffalo, disease interactions may have important social and economic
consequences because buffalo are the main reservoirs of brucellosis and bovine
tuberculosis. Both brucellosis and tuberculosis are bacterial infections that
cause significant morbidity during spill-over infections to cattle in areas
surrounding wildlife preserves, such as on the borders of Kruger National Park,
South Africa. Bovine tuberculosis was only recently introduced into Kruger
National Park's buffalo population in the 1980s, so its effects on both the
buffalo population as well as on brucellosis transmission are unknown. Bovine
tuberculosis may reduce the spread of brucellosis if it causes increased
mortality in co-infected animals or may increase the spread of brucellosis if
the immune suppression it causes enhances the transmission of brucellosis. This
project aims to understand how the immune-suppression and increased mortality
caused by Bovine tuberculosis affect brucellosis transmission. The project will
combine immunological tools to investigate pathogen interactions in individual
buffalo, with mathematical models to scale up from individual hosts to predict
population scale consequences for disease transmission in buffalo.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will foster stronger linkage between
veterinarians and ecologists through collaborations, and outreach in Africa and
at the veterinary school at Oregon State University. Understanding the
mechanisms and consequences of wildlife disease interactions requires
integration between these fields as they offer different perspectives and
techniques. Results from this project will have practical implications for
management of wildlife diseases in general and for predicting the consequences
of new pathogens in their wildlife reservoirs.