* 1210695
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Patterns, causes, and consequences of gut microbial community variation across fish
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Susan Kilham, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 06/30/2014
* USD 14,987.00

The consortium of microbes that live in and on an organism can strongly
influence the host's condition and fitness. Fish are the most diverse vertebrate
group, but little is known about their microbial constituents of fish or how
they impact their ecology and evolution. To explore factors that shape fish
microbial communities, this project investigates the variation in gut bacteria
across fish using three major model systems: sticklebacks, guppies and
Tanganyikan cichlids. This work aims to determine how fish gut microbial
communities have shifted in response to alterations in diet, trophic level, and
habitat, and to determine how fish adaptations (i.e., to different feeding
ecologies) may feed back and affect the microbial communities within their
environment. An experimental approach with sticklebacks and guppies will
investigate the variability of gut microbes due to diet and habitat as well as
the impact of fish ecology on bacterial communities in the environment. The work
on cichlids will investigate broad scale patterns of gut microbial communities
across multiple, related species that have diverse diets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation will address the role of evolutionary
history and diet in structuring microbial communities across wild fish
populations, laying groundwork for future studies on their functional
contributions to fish ecology. By enhancing the understanding of what
constitutes a typical gut bacterial community of wild fish, this research will
also provide insights into fish health and physiology. The PIs will train
undergraduates, use next-generation sequencing technologies, and integrate data
generated from this project in undergraduate coursework. They will also
disseminate findings to the public through popular and peer-reviewed articles
and presentations at scientific meetings.