* 1210957
* DOCTORAL DISSERTATION:   Testing mutualistic function in a multi-trophic mating system in mosses
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Erin Shortlidge, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2015
* USD 14,915.00

About 300 million years prior to the origin of flowering plants, ancestors of
mosses were colonizing land and creating the groundwork for the radiation of
land plants. Around the same time, microarthropod (insects) inhabitants of
mosses appeared in the fossil record. Thus, mosses and microarthropods
potentially represent the earliest plant-insect mutualisms, and we propose to
test the hypothesis that both of these partners gain fitness benefits when they
interact. The PIs will test whether insects move moss sperm to other mosses,
akin to the way a bee moves pollen from flower to flower. The PIs will also test
whether the insects benefit by having places to lay their eggs that are safe
from predators. The PIs will also determine whether there is a food ?reward?
provided by the mosses for the insects. These questions will be addressed using
integrated ecological, molecular genetics, and physiological
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the fitness consequences of this
non-angiosperm ?pollination? system will greatly broaden our knowledge of the
diversity of pollinator interactions and mutualisms in the early history of
life. Additionally, the project will be used as a tool for teaching ecology, the
scientific method, and organism life cycles to students in Portland Public
Schools. Middle school students will collect moss from local populations and
grow plants through the alternation of generations. Similarly, students will
rear microarthropods through the insect life cycle. Data gathered by students
will be used in the classroom as a tool to explore data analysis and hypothesis
testing.