* 1210560
* Dissertation Research: Developing Biogeochemical Tracers of Apatite Weathering by Ectomycorrhizal Fungi
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Erik Hobbie, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 04/30/2013
* USD 13,517.00

Apatite (a calcium phosphate mineral present in most soils) is the most
important source of phosphorus to most natural ecosystems. In intensively
managed forests where large amounts of phosphorus are removed by harvesting,
knowing the rate at which phosphorus is supplied by apatite weathering is
critical to determining whether such harvesting is sustainable over the long
term without fertilization. It has been suggested that when biological demand
for phosphorus or calcium exceeds the supply, ectomycorrhizal fungi that grow in
a mutualistic relationship with tree roots may be able to accelerate the
weathering of apatite and other soil minerals by releasing organic acids into
the soil. The process has been demonstrated in controlled laboratory
experiments, but is difficult to measure in the field. Thus, the pattern and
importance of ectomycorrhizal weathering in nutrient-stressed ecosystems is
poorly understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use the elevated
concentrations of rare Earth elements (REEs) and the distinctive isotopic ratios
of lead (Pb) in apatite to trace its weathering products. REEs and Pb isotope
concentrations will be measured in apatite extracted from soil samples and also
in the mushrooms produced by ectomycorrhizal fungi. Soils and mushrooms will be
collected at eight northern hardwood forest stands where nitrogen and phosphorus
fertilization experiments have recently begun and which differ in soil apatite
abundance and stand age. These measurements across stands with contrasting
natural and manipulated nutrient demand and availability will improve our
understanding of the ecosystem-scale controls on ectomycorrhizal weathering, and
the species of fungi responsible. The work will ultimately lead to improved
estimates of long-term nutrient supply under different harvest regimes and soil
mineralogies, and therefore improve our ability to manage such forests
sustainably. Additional broader impacts will include involving undergraduate
students, international students, and middle school teachers in research
activities.