* 1210308
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:   Surmounting the Bottleneck: Using Population Genomics to Study the Process of Formation and Establishment in Autotetraploids
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Kirsten Bomblies, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2014
* USD 15,000.00

Genome duplication, which creates individuals with twice the genetic content, is
a common phenomenon in the plant kingdom and an important contributor to the
diversity of life. Though it has been increasingly recognized as important,
little is known about the evolutionary processes that generate duplicated
genomes and result in new species. To enhance our understanding of this process,
the PIs study the plant Arabidopsis arenosa, a species that has two types of
populations. One type has duplicated genomes (tetraploids) and the other type
has the typical ancestral genome size (diploids). The PIs are currently
collecting DNA sequence data from many tetraploid populations to learn about
their evolutionary history, but having these same data from the diploid
progenitor is crucial for understanding the context in which the tetraploids
arose. DDIG funds will be used to collect more individuals that have duplicated
genomes so that comparisons between the type types of populations can provide
insight into speciation.

This project will not only elucidate the biological processes that give rise to
evolutionary novelty but will also train aspiring scientists who will travel to
eastern Europe to collect plants and extract their DNA back in the US. The
results will be presented to the scientific community and general public to
increase awareness of this important evolutionary process. High school students
will also benefit through an online organization called Planting Science that
allows researchers to mentor young, aspiring students.