* 1210859
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Does Pheromone Evolution Drive Reproductive Compatibility in Dusky Salamanders? A Phylogenetic, Functional, and Behavioral Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Ronald Bonett, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2014
* USD 13,970.00

The biological world is rich with sounds, smells, and movements that serve as
communication signals, and demonstrate the evolution of life. Many species use
specific signals to recognize mates, but signals and mate choice are
evolutionarily dynamic. To date, few studies have examined the impact of signal
similarities and differences on lineage diversification and adaptive radiations.
This study incorporates molecular and behavioral techniques to test how
reproductive isolation and speciation may have been influenced by the evolution
of highly variable reproductive signals; courtship pheromones. The investigation
will focus on dusky salamanders (genus Desmognathus), a group that displays
dramatic differences in ecology, body size and life history and is known to have
undergone a relatively recent adaptive radiation. The research specifically will
test how convergence and introgression play a role in the geographic
distributions of these pheromones, and if pheromone divergence is correlated
with patterns of behavioral reproductive compatibility or
isolation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will develop molecular tools that can
be used by other investigators, and provides a framework for the study of
protein based mate recognition signals. This research will be disseminated
through workshops at regional colleges and universities to provide further
education on molecular biology, reproductive systems, and the evolution of
communication.