* 1210883
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Using comparative phylogeography to understand evolutionary diversification in Central American freshwater fishes
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2014
* Justin Bagley, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,040.00

A central challenge in biology is to understand how new biodiversity arises. In
this study, we examine how historical factors (climate change and geological
events) interact with biological factors (natural selection) to shape
biodiversity in tropical fish species. We focus on freshwater fishes found in
Central America, a geologically complex area where changing sea levels, volcanic
activity and formation of modern drainage basins over the past 7 million years
have had a profound impact on freshwater species. By comparing DNA sequence data
from multiple populations within several co-occurring species, we will
reconstruct the evolutionary history of fishes in this region. We will integrate
these genetic data with additional research focused on the role that natural
selection has played in driving morphological and life history diversification
in these species. Combined, this study will provide insight into how biological
diversity is generated, especially under changing climatic conditions and
against a dynamic earth history. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
facilitate teaching and cultural exchange between North American and Central
American scientists and students, including international research
collaboration. Graduate and undergraduate students will be funded to participate
in field collections, while others will be trained in laboratory DNA sequencing
and dissection techniques. This project will engage local Central American
communities in learning about their fish fauna, and products of this work will
be broadly disseminated as publications and presentations at international
conferences. This project also will incorporate simulation methods accounting
for potentially confounding processes, which should produce more biologically
realistic models and inferences. Moreover, by ushering in increased
understanding of biodiversity within and among Central American fish species at
various spatial scales, this project will provide critical information for
future conservation planning.