* 1210810
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Speciation Genomics: Expanded Sampling of a Remarkable Avian Radiation
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Michael Sorenson, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* George Gilchrist
* 05/31/2014
* USD 14,426.00

Speciation, the evolution of new, distinct species from a single ancestral
population, is the fundamental process generating the earth?s biodiversity. This
project focuses on a group of twelve finch species called ?munias? that
represent one of the most extraordinary examples of rapid speciation in birds.
The twelve species, most living in New Guinea or surrounding islands, are nearly
identical genetically, but have evolved an astounding diversity of plumage
colors and patterns, as well as differences in bill size. This project combines
the first significant field research on these birds (the grant specifically
supports fieldwork in the Trans Fly region of Papua New Guinea, where two
additional species will be sampled) with modern genome sequencing technology to
reconstruct the evolutionary history of these species and determine the number
and identity of genes that are responsible for differences among species.

Given their morphological diversity and recent origin, the munias provide an
exceptional opportunity to advance the new field of speciation genomics, which
seeks to understand the patterns of genetic change responsible for the evolution
of new species. The research will test the hypothesis that natural selection on
a small number of genes is sufficient to generate new species, challenging a
classic model of gradual genome-wide divergence. As such, the results may
overturn commonly held assumptions about the nature of species and speciation.
The research will also advance our understanding of the evolution of plumage
coloration in birds generally and will provide critical data for making informed
decisions on priorities for biodiversity conservation.