* 1210069
* NSF East Asia and Pacific Summer Institute for FY 2012 in China
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Christopher Cirone, Cirone                  Christopher    T
* Fellowship Award
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2013
* USD 5,836.00

This action funds Christopher T. Cirone of University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign to conduct a research project, entitled "Investigating residential air
conditioning systems powered by renewable solar energy and the reuse of waste
heat," during the summer of 2012 at Zhejiang University in Hangzhou, Zhejiang.
The host scientist is Dr. Guangming Chen.

The Intellectual Merit of the research project is to characterize the potential
for integration of absorption refrigeration systems with a solar thermal
generator and waste heat sources in residential buildings. This practice is
desirable due to the primary energy conservation this pairing can offer to the
residential building sector. It is important to discover specific applications
where waste or renewable heat driven absorption refrigeration can be used to
reduce building energy consumption and to understand the specific limitations
where this technology is inadequate in comparison with other conventional
systems. Continuing to identifying feasible applications and limitations is
important to invigorate continued research on this progressive system.

The Broader Impacts of an EAPSI fellowship include providing the Fellow a first-
hand research experience outside the U.S.; an introduction to the science,
science policy, and scientific infrastructure of the respective location; and an
orientation to the society, culture and language. These activities meet the NSF
goal to educate for international collaborations early in the career of its
scientists, engineers, and educators, thus ensuring a globally aware U.S.
scientific workforce.