* 1210532
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Mate choice, parasites and immune response in Western bluebirds"
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Anne Jacobs, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 06/30/2014
* USD 14,999.00

Parasites can influence many aspects of their hosts' lives, including the mates
they chose. Animals may mate with less-parasitized individuals, and, by doing
so, ensure that genes for parasite resistance are passed on to their offspring.
A large body of work has focused on examining how parasites influence mate
choice by measuring immune response and determining whether preferred mates have
a stronger immune response. This assumes that a stronger immune response results
in fewer parasites infecting the host. However, this assumption is rarely
tested. Moreover, many studies have found conflicting results, with some
reporting that preferred mates have a stronger immune response, while others
report the exact opposite result. Dr. Zuk and Ms. Jacobs will clarify the role
of immunity in determining parasite levels and mate choice using an experiment
conducted on western bluebirds. They will use feeding trials, in which some
individuals receive supplemental food, while others are left alone as controls,
to examine how immune response influences parasite levels in wild birds.
Supplemental food has been shown to allow individuals to mount a stronger immune
response; if a strong immune response always results in lower parasite loads,
then fed birds should have fewer parasites, and birds with stronger immunity and
fewer parasites should be preferred as mates. The investigators will use new
molecular methods to accurately measure infection with avian malaria, a common
parasite of birds. This project will help researchers better understand what
affects immune response and parasite levels in wild animals. Such knowledge has
important consequences for human health, as many emerging diseases in humans
come from animals. Results of this project will be broadly disseminated using
open access journals, and the project itself will provide an opportunity to
train undergraduate research assistants in basic field and research techniques.