* 1210304
* Materials World Network: Bioinspired Composite Single-Crystals - From Structural Evolution to Mechanical Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Shefford Baker, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 07/31/2017
* USD 790,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: With support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program and the Office of Special Programs in the Division of Materials
Research, this research aims to develop a unified understanding of the
formation, structure, and mechanical properties of synthetic and biologic single
crystal composites. The Materials World Network team with members from Cornell
University (supported by the Division for Materials Research), Lawrence Berkeley
National Labs, and the UK (Universities of Leeds and Sheffield, supported by the
EPSRC) offers a rare synergy of expertise in crystal growth, biomineralization,
materials synthesis, polymer and colloid synthesis, mechanical properties, and
materials characterization. Many natural systems produce elaborate composites in
which fragile mineral single crystals and soft polymers are combined to create
materials with superior mechanical properties. Such composites are typically
understood and modeled in terms of homogeneous ideal mineral crystals embedded
in a host organic matrix. However, the mineral single crystals are themselves
composites in which a variety of organic and inorganic materials are occluded.
Very little is known about how these single crystal composites form or their
extraordinary properties. The research goals of this international collaboration
are to: (1) Characterize single crystal biominerals and determine how their
design leads to superior mechanical properties; (2) Translate these design
strategies to the synthesis of calcite crystals occluding small molecules,
structurally and chemically well-defined polymers and particles, and compliant
and stiff frameworks, and evaluate the growth mechanisms involved; (3)
Characterize and model the structural and mechanical properties of the composite
crystals to elucidate synthesis-structure-function relationships; and (4) Begin
to apply the understanding gained to generate novel composite materials. Just as
the inspiration for this work comes from biological systems, the insights gained
can be applied to better understanding the biological systems themselves.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: With support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program and the Office of Special Programs in the Division of Materials
Research, this collaboration brings together experienced and internationally-
recognized researchers from the United States and Britain. The inspiration for
this work comes from biominerals, which are formed using energy efficient,
sustainable methods, and have unique morphologies and superior properties.
Crystallization is a hugely important topic that has relevance to phenomena and
applications as diverse as scaling, weathering, and the production of
biomaterials, pharmaceuticals, and nanoparticles. Calcium carbonate, which is a
significant focus of this proposal, is itself of tremendous industrial
importance and an effective medium for carbon capture. By developing novel
approaches to the synthesis of composite crystals, this research will provide a
general and facile route for controlling the structure and properties of
crystalline materials, leading to materials with tailored properties. This
vision is anticipated to provide the basis for synthesizing next-generation
materials such as artificial bone and tough synthetic dental enamel. In
addition, the proposed project will promote intercultural exchanges in both
training and teaching by offering: (1) Extended and short-term personnel
exchanges of PIs and students with the UK collaborators; (2) International
summer internships for undergraduates, with a focus on reaching under-
represented minorities in STEM; and (3) a capstone international workshop on
bio-inspired composite crystals organized by the PIs and their appointed
researchers. The PIs will also work with science teachers to develop and
distribute lesson plans for middle school students (Grades 6-8) with a focus on
using examples from biomineralization to teach concepts of scientific
classification and mechanical properties. In addition, this project will promote
dialog and collaboration with national labs and facilities (e.g., the DOE-funded
Molecular Foundry) to facilitate transfer of knowledge and capabilities for
creation of useful technologies made possible by this research.