* 1210292
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Underwater soundscapes and their potential role in the settlement of estuarine benthic invertebrates
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2014
* David Eggleston, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* emilia martins
* 12/31/2014
* USD 14,999.00

Most bottom-dwelling marine organisms (e.g. crabs, mussels, corals) develop,
zygotes and larvae, in the water column before settling on the sea floor.
Reaching an appropriate habitat is critical in determining the distribution and
abundance of adults, which make-up marine communities. It has recently been
shown that underwater sounds may be an important cue used for marine fish and
invertebrate larval in this process, yet the relevant acoustic patterns and
associated larval responses remain largely unstudied. Therefore the goal of the
research is to understand the nature of underwater sound in larval ecology. This
will be done by characterizing an estuarine soundscape and determining how sound
variation affects the settlement of invertebrates. The researcher will use
larval oysters and clams, and the soundscape of estuarine habitats as a model
system, results to date have established that oyster reefs are acoustically
distinct from adjacent soft bottom habitats, and that these reef sounds enhance
oyster settlement in laboratory experiments. This Doctoral Dissertation
Improvement Grant project specifically seeks to expand upon these recent
laboratory results by conducting field experiments to test if the apparent
larval responses to habitat-related sound operate in the natural environment to
shape settlement patterns. Building knowledge of the behavioral responses of
marine larvae to bio-physical variables such as sound, and the resulting
distribution and abundance patterns of marine organisms is central to improved
understanding of marine biology. This work also highlights a potential
biological implication of marine noise pollution and may elucidate previously
untested benefits of soundscape diversity, ultimately leading to healthier and
better-managed ocean and estuary ecosystems.