* 1210328
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Scalable phylogenomics at the species level: a novel target-gene approach to tracing the global diversification of prorhynchid flatworms (Platyhelminthes)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Gonzalo Giribet, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 12/31/2014
* USD 15,000.00

The prorhynchid flatworms are a diverse and abundant group of predatory
microscopic invertebrates living in humid soils and freshwaters on all regions
of the globe. However, as is the case with most animals showing small body size,
simple anatomy, and cryptic habitats, their biodiversity has gone almost
entirely unstudied by modern biologists; unnamed species may outnumber the 29
species known to science by the hundreds, and their evolutionary relationships
are essentially unknown. This thesis research aims to combine worldwide sampling
of new and known prorhynchids with the collection of genome-wide DNA sequence
data from many dozens of species to arrive for the first time at an unbiased
picture of their global diversification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The purpose of
this dissertation improvement grant is to support the development of a novel
method to cheaply sequence hundreds of genes from arbitrarily large numbers of
organisms, which will contribute to an ongoing revolution in the way biologists
analyze the evolutionary relationships of closely-related species, the leaves of
the tree of life. Applying this method to prorhynchids, and showcasing these and
other microscopic invertebrates to undergraduate students and community members
(in collaboration with a local science education organization), will serve to
further engage both scientific and public interest in such organisms, the
largest and simultaneously least-understood components of global animal
biodiversity.