* 1210591
* Dissertation Research:   Age-Structured Foraging Models for a Diving Mammal: Incorporating Developmental Constraints into Habitat Use Decisions
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* James Estes, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* emilia martins
* 09/30/2015
* USD 15,000.00

While it may seem like a matter of simple choices, feeding is a complex event
with many potential trade-offs. Current theory predicts that the goal of
foraging is at least impart to maximize fitness, reproduction. However, to do
this an individual must not only obtain food it must also avoid cost, such as
being eaten itself. This means that foraging involves significant trade-offs.
Therefore, to understand these types of trade-offs it is necessary to examine
feeding within the boarder contexts of ecological, developments, and
physiologically, as well as, behavioral conditions. Young animals have different
skills than adults, and also they may have different constraints. The goal of
this study is to develop a model that can address these factors using the data
on diving capacity, habitat, and foraging behavior across different age groups
of sea otters. The data do not involve direct manipulation of sea otters,
instead they rely on using data being obtained form the US Geological Survey
that has tagged sea otters already. The results form this research should have
boarder application to general foraging models for other species and will
provide practical information on habitat requirements that can be used in the
conservation and management of sea otters. The results will also be made
available to the public through the Monterey Bay Aquarium.