* 1210833
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Evaluating likelihood-based fossil-calibraition methods and timing of repeated incercontinental dispersal in a fossil-rich clade of Boraginaceae
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Bruce Baldwin, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 04/30/2014
* USD 14,890.00

Fossils are routinely used as the most defensible method for calibrating
phylogenetic hypotheses to absolute time. Calibration is often required before
ideas can be tested, such as timing of a prehistoric event or rate of change of
a trait. This project examines a fossil rich plant group, the Cryptanthinae
(Boraginaceae), to test two recently proposed but untested methods for
incorporating fossils in phylogenetic analyses. After evaluating these methods,
the resulting time-calibrated hypothesis of phylogenetic relationships will be
used to examine the New World amphitropical disjunction, a distribution pattern
seen in the Cryptanthinae and many other groups of plants that is likely the
result of long-distance dispersal by birds between North and South
America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project will result in three main
contributions to science. First, evaluation of novel methods for incorporating
fossil data into phylogenetic studies will benefit all future studies using
fossil data. Importantly, these methods can be generalized to any study using
morphological data. Second, New World amphitropical disjunction is common yet
understudied. This study will test current hypotheses regarding this
biogeographic pattern. Finally, this project will generate a hypothesis of
relationships in the Cryptanthinae that will inform taxonomy and conservation in
this large and ecologically important plant group.