* 1210570
* Dissertation Research: The influence of resource gradients on soil bacterial communities in a simple ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* John Barrett, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 06/30/2014
* USD 14,999.00

Modern molecular techniques have greatly increased our ability to identify
bacteria. This has made it possible to investigate what controls the
distribution of microbes and the composition of microbial communities, and to
address fundamental questions about the roles that microbes play in essential
ecological processes. Although current research is contributing to the
recognition of geographic distribution patterns of microorganisms, the
application of well-developed macroecological theory may provide insight to
mechanisms underlying these patterns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The influence of
resource availability on soil bacterial communities will be examined within the
McMurdo Dry Valleys of Antarctica. This region contains environmental gradients
of nutrients, water, and salts which are predicted to strongly influence these
simple, bacteria-dominated communities. Soil samples from 12 sites representing
a natural gradient in above-ground production by moss and algae were collected
in December 2010. DNA-based fingerprinting techniques applied to those samples
revealed variation in bacterial community structure. Six of these soils will be
resampled in 2012 and sequenced using both DNA- and RNA-based techniques to
assess how bacterial community composition and metabolic activity are affected
by resource availability. In addition, soil moisture and organic matter content
will be experimentally manipulated to examine their interactive effects in
structuring soil bacterial communities and their influence on microbial
activity. This project will contribute to a greater understanding of mechanisms
structuring bacterial communities and how this, in turn, may influence rates of
ecosystem processes mediated by soil microorganisms. RNA-based methods also
represent a novel approach for determining the active diversity of bacteria, a
technique with potential value for investigating bacterial communities in all
soils where a large proportion of the microbial community may be inactive.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will impact a broader audience by engaging
undergraduate students in primary research and through interaction with both
GK-12 outreach and an Antarctic study abroad programs currently operating at
Virginia Tech.