* 1210655
* Dissertation Research: foraging decisions and social learning in a Neotropical bat
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Patricia Jones, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Cushing
* 03/31/2014
* USD 14,385.00

This project focuses on how animals integrate information from many sources to
make decisions about what to eat. One source of information about food types
comes from observing the behavior of others. Information acquired by observing
other individuals (social information) often influences animal foraging
decisions. Environmental variation is another type of information that often
requires animals to include novel prey in their diets, and social information
about the quality of novel prey may be crucial for foraging success and
survival. Little is known about the conditions under which animals use social
information to access novel prey. This proposal describes two behavioral
experiments to determine when frog-eating bats use social observation to learn
novel prey cues. The Neotropical fringe-lipped bat, Trachops cirrhosus,
localizes frogs by approaching their calls, and can learn to approach novel cues
by observing other individuals foraging. This project will examine how foraging
success affects learning about novel food types. The investigators will train
undergraduates from diverse backgrounds in methods for conducting behavioral
experiments. Preliminary results indicate that bats use social information
selectively in combination with information gained from personal experience.
Social learning has long fascinated biologists because it is the basis of
culture, which is so central to human behavior. To understand the potential for
animal culture, it is necessary to know when animals use social observation to
learn novel behaviors.