* 1210630
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Development and Evolution of Iridescent Colors in Feathers
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Matthew Shawkey, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2014
* USD 14,884.00

How do complex structures originate and diversify through evolutionary time? Our
research will address this question using the iridescent colors of feathers,
which are the brightest and most diverse found in nature. These colors are
produced by optical interference, similar to that producing rainbow colors in
soap bubbles, from biological tissue (keratin and melanin-containing organelles
called melanosomes) that is precisely organized at the nanometer scale. Because
the colors produced result from the size and shape of these organized
structures, minute changes can produce dramatically different colors, making it
an ideal system for the study of the evolution of complex morphologies. We
propose to investigate two crucial aspects of this system: first, how does this
meticulous organization take place? We have evidence that these structures self-
organize as a consequence of physicochemical interactions during feather
development when the concentrations of keratin and melanin are high. We will now
test this hypothesis by quantifying the expression of genes regulating these
processes during feather development. Second, how can these structures be
modified to produce novel colors? We will investigate this question in African
Starlings, a group of birds with several modifications to their melanosomes that
allow them to interact with light in even more complex ways. Using modern
comparative methods, we will investigate the role of these innovations in the
diversification of color and the patterns of speciation within this group.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By studying how these complex structures originate as a
result of small genetic changes, and how they can then be modified to produce
novel colors, our research will provide new insights on the evolution of
innovations that shape the diversity of life, and may provide inspiration for
new self-assembling nanostructures with applications in fiber optics and
coatings. Our project will rely on international and multi-institutional
collaboration, which will continue to involve undergraduates and students from
under-represented groups in the US and Latin America, who will be engaged in all
stages of this cross-disciplinary study.