* 1210437
* Materials World Network: Nanostructuring and Phase Transformations in Beta-Ti Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Enrique Lavernia, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 08/31/2016
* USD 360,000.00

Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at the University of California at
Davis, USA (UCD) and the Ufa State Aviation Technical University, Ufa, Russia
(USATU) will investigate the influence of nanostructuring on the phase
transformations and mechanical behavior in beta-Ti alloys. A variety of
materials synthesis and processing techniques including mechanical alloying by
cryomilling, spark plasma sintering (SPS), equal-channel angular pressing (ECAP)
and high pressure torsion (HPT) will be implemented to synthesize nanostructured
beta-Ti alloys. Fundamental information generated will be used to establish the
relationship between nanostructuring characteristics, thermal stability, phase
transformations, and mechanical response in beta-Ti alloys. Microstructure
characterization studies using advanced diagnostic techniques (i.e., SEM, TEM),
will provide an understanding of the effect of the mechanical alloying, SPS and
severe plastic deformation (ECAP/HPT) processing on nanostructural features, and
furthermore understanding of fundamental phenomena (e.g., thermal stability,
phase transformations and mechanical behavior) associated with nanostructuring
in beta-Ti alloys. Mechanical behavior will be studied to establish the
relationship between nanostructural features and mechanical response (i.e.,
elastic modulus, strength, ductility) in nanostructured beta-Ti alloys.
Implementation of in-situ SEM and TEM mechanical characterization will provide
direct observation of the dynamic deformation and microstructural changes in
nanostructured beta-Ti alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Ti alloys are of scientific and technological interest, and
in particular nanostructured beta-Ti alloys may exhibit a high strength with low
elastic modulus, which are very attractive for biomedical applications, for
example. The collaborative research program will contribute towards the
establishment of a fundamental understanding of the science of nanostructured
beta-Ti alloys, as well as providing insight into the fundamental relationships
that link alloy composition, microstructure and processing history of
nanostructured alloys with mechanical behavior. The novel approaches to be
implemented, based on complementary expertise and resources between University
of California at Davis, USA (UCD) and the Ufa State Aviation Technical
University, Ufa, will generate comprehensive information that is currently
lacking for understanding of the relationship between nanostructuring, phase
transformation and mechanical behavior in beta-Ti alloys and beyond. This, in
turn, will ultimately impact the development of Ti materials with potential for
applications in the biomedical, aerospace, and automotive industries. The
research activities will help nurture intellectual collaborations and academic
exchanges through mutual visits, in particular with participation of students at
the graduate and undergraduate levels between UCD and USATU. This international
collaboration will also enrich UCD's outreach program and will involve regional
universities, colleges, and K-12.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported
by the Metals and Metallic Nanostructures program and the Office of Special
Programs, Division of Materials Research.