* 1210704
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Effects of Climate-Induced Changes in Generalist Predators on the Structure and Function of Arctic Food Webs
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Justin Wright, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2015
* USD 14,999.00

With forecasted changes in climate, it is necessary to understand how organismal
adaptations to climatic drivers fit into a broader ecological context. Changes
in artic ecosystems are of particular significance because this region is
experiencing the fastest rate of climate change on the planet. Moreover, the
soils of the arctic tundra store large amounts of organic matter that could be
released as carbon dioxide and methane through decomposition by the microbial
community. Faster rates of decomposition in the Arctic could result in positive
feedbacks on global climate change. The composition and activity of the
microbial communities that are responsible for decomposition are affected by
invertebrates in the soil, which are themselves are regulated by predators such
as spiders. In other ecosystems, cascading effects of spider predation have been
found to indirectly inhibit decomposition. If this also occurs in the Arctic,
spiders could provide an important ecosystem service by slowing the release of
carbon from tundra soils. This project uses an experimental manipulation of
spider density and temperature to examine how the relationship between spiders
and their prey affects rates of microbial decomposition in the arctic tundra.
Results will provide new insights into the potential feedbacks between global
climate change and local changes in community structure and function.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The Co-PI (Amanda Koltz) is dedicated to furthering opportunities in
science for students from diverse backgrounds. For this project, she has worked
with and trained four undergraduate students, three of which are women, and one
of whom is of African American and Native American descent. In Alaska, Koltz has
worked with rural and Alaska Native high school students from The Rural Alaska
Honors Institute. She will also host a K-12 teacher (PolarTREC Program) in
Alaska for the 2012 field season in order to provide the teacher with an
opportunity to participate in hands-on field research and help bring arctic
science back to the classroom.