* 1210588
* Materials World Network: Gradient-Enabled Ferroic Phenomena: Tunable Metastable States, Roto-Flexo, and Transport Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Long-Qing Chen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 07/31/2018
* USD 750,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The functional properties of ferroelectrics and
ferroelastics, materials with built-in polarization and elastic distortion
states in their crystal structure, respectively, are typically reliant on their
response under uniform spatial elastic and electric fields, e.g., switching,
piezoelectric, and electro-optic responses. There is also a rich range of
ferroic phenomena arising under gradient fields, which receive much less
attention. This project is based on two new discoveries/ideas initiated by the
US/Ukraine team: New highly tunable metastable states and roto-flexo phenomena.
Strong gradient fields created at and in the proximity of domain walls can
result in local phase transitions that lead to new bulk polar phases not
normally expected in classic textbook ferroelectrics, and even in non-polar
ferroelastics. In all oxide interfaces with oxygen octahedral tilts, the
creation of a polarization (up to 1-10 microC/cm2) is predicted through a
rotostriction-flexoelectric product effect that can significantly impact the
interface charge transport. Using optical second harmonic generation microscopy,
Raman microscopy, scanning probe microscopy, nanoscale X-ray diffraction
imaging, z-contrast scanning transmission electron microscopy, analytical
theory, phase-field modeling, and first principles theory, this collaborative
team explores these new phenomena. Broadly speaking, the US team (Pennsylvania
State University, Oak Ridge National Labs, Argonne National Labs) conducts
experimental research and performs phase-field simulations, and the Ukrainian
team (National Academy of Sciences, Ukraine) focuses on developing the
theoretical framework.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: This project can potentially lead to new highly tunable,
large piezoelectric response lead-free materials useful for precision motion and
sensors. Gradient couplings at interfaces can lead to two-dimensional electron
gas systems of great current interest for next generation high-speed
transistors. This project also develops cutting-edge quantitative microscopy
tools and advances theoretical modeling by simulating flexoelectric and other
gradient effects. The NSF award provides funds to energize and sustain an
international research team, which started in 2007. It funds undergraduate and
graduate students to work and collaborate in a global context, supports extended
visits across the Atlantic by PIs and students, furthers interactions between a
university (Penn State), national labs (Oak Ridge and Argonne) and international
collaborators (NAS-Ukraine), supports outreach activities through K-12, and
provides research opportunities for women and underrepresented groups.

This project is supported by the Electronic and Photonic Materials program and
Office of Special Programs, Division of Materials Research.