* 1211809
* CNH-Ex: Land, Water, and Territory: A 3,000-Year Study of Niche Construction and Cultural Evolution in the Tikal National Park, Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Christopher Duffy, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/29/2016
* USD 249,871.00

This project will focus on the long-term spatial and temporal dynamics of land-
use management, agricultural decision making, and patterns of resource
availability in the tropical lowlands of Central America. The project will
combine diachronic environmental simulation with analysis of historic settlement
patterns and environmental surveys to address a series of long-standing
questions about the coupled natural and human history in the Central Maya
lowlands, with special emphasis given to the UNESCO world heritage site of Tikal
in the Maya Biosphere Reserve. The researchers will examine changing patterns of
land, water, population, settlement, and political history for a 3,000-year
period using climate, soil, and hydrologic modeling and time-series spatial
analysis of population and settlement. The critical period of the study, 1000 BC
to AD 2000, begins with dispersed settlements accompanied by widespread
deforestation and soil erosion. Population size and density grew rapidly for 800
years, while deforestation and erosion rates declined. This period was also
characterized by striking evidence of political evolution, including the
construction of monumental architecture, hieroglyphic carvings detailing wars
and alliances, and the construction of a defensive earthwork feature that
signaled political territories, and possibly delineated natural resource
boundaries. Population decline and steady reforestation followed until modern
migration into the region. Building on previous research by these and other
researchers in the region and comparative research completed at Palenque,
Mexico, these researchers will model the 3,000-year history of the region,
comparing land and water availability to population distributions and examining
what is known about political history. The researchers also will analyze the
spatial patterns of land and water availability under simulated conditions of
drought, thereby addressing modern issues of migration and water availability as
they studying the possible impact of climate events on the cultural history of
the Ancient Maya.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to
understanding long-term environmental change, agrarian decision making,
settlement patterns, and critical issues facing smallholder agrarian
communities. The project will enhance understanding of one of the most
compelling landscape narratives of coupled human and natural history, the rise
and fall of the Maya in the lowland tropical forest of Central America. The
project will explore a new approach for studying these issues by integrating
coupled climate, soil, and hydrologic modeling with traditional anthropological
research methods. The project also will provide excellent field and laboratory
education and training opportunities for postgraduate, graduate, and
undergraduate students from anthropology, engineering, soil science, and
landscape architecture. This project is supported by the NSF Dynamics of Coupled
Natural and Human Systems (CNH) Program.