* 1211597
* Numerical Methods for Large Scale Liquid Crystal Director Models and Analysis of Electric-Field-Induced Instabilities
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Eugene Gartland, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2017
* USD 180,169.00

The research supported by this award is concerned with the analysis and
numerical modeling of problems that arise in the basic and applied physics of
liquid crystals. Specifically, this award will support research in two
interrelated areas: (1) development of more efficient numerical methods for
characterizing the equilibrium orientational properties of liquid crystals in
the large-scale regime (three space dimensions) and (2) refined analysis of the
nature of the coupling between liquid crystal orientational order and electric
fields. The most commonly used models for liquid crystals at experimental and
device scales are macroscopic continuum director models, which model local
average orientation in terms of a unit-length vector field (the "director
field"). The principal investigator will use techniques from numerical linear
algebra and numerical optimization (saddle point problems, nullspace methods,
reduced Hessian methods, preconditioning) to develop efficient solvers that deal
effectively with the pointwise unit-length constraint associated with
discretizations of such models, for which current approaches are inadequate in
large-scale settings. Most liquid crystal devices and experiments utilize
electric fields to control liquid crystal order, and the interaction between
liquid crystal orientation and local electric field poses both numerical and
analytical challenges (due to coupled equilibrium equations, free energies
failing to be positive definite, and anomalous behavior of instability
thresholds). The principal investigator will develop a variationally based,
unified stability framework capable of providing computable local stability
criteria for numerical solutions (in the discretized setting) and also capable
of explaining anomalous instability thresholds (in the continuum setting).

Liquid crystal materials exist in a complex fluid phase that exhibits
orientational order of molecular axes at the microscopic level, just like a
crystal. Virtually all of their material properties are anisotropic, that is,
they are direction dependent (unlike ordinary liquids which look and behave the
same in all directions). The orientational properties can therefore be coupled
to a variety of external fields (electromagnetic, optical, temperature
gradients, acoustic waves, etc.). The well-known use of liquid crystals in
optical displays makes use of this behavior. However, the special properties of
these materials make them useful in a much wider range of technological
applications, including also drug delivery systems, soft actuators, biosensors,
and others. Scientific computing is widely used in this area to optimize the
performance of devices, to analyze experiments, and to validate the theory that
is used to describe such devices. This award will support the development of
advanced computational techniques for the numerical exploration of equilibrium
orientational properties of large, complicated, modern liquid crystal systems
associated with realistic devices and experiments, especially those involving
coupled electric fields. Special attention is given to the nature of the
coupling between the liquid crystal order and an applied electric field and to
electric-field-induced instabilities of orientational order, which underlie the
functioning of most devices and for which a deeper understanding is needed. The
research will be carried out in collaboration with interdisciplinary and
international partners, and it will impact applications and technologies using
liquid crystals through improved performance analysis tools and techniques for
interpreting experiments. The impact is expected to extend to the numerical
modeling of ferromagnetic materials such as magnetic films used in hard drives,
where models with similar features arise.