* 1211187
* Self-Assembly of Nanoparticles from Evaporating Drops and Liquid Films: Science, Engineering and Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2011,06/30/2016
* Daniel Attinger, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ying Sun
* 06/30/2016
* USD 208,001.00

Have you ever wondered at the variety of self assembled deposit structures that
can be obtained by evaporating liquids containing nanoparticles on top of a
solid substrate. Deposit shapes vary from rings around a coffee drop, to
hexagonal cells and fractal patterns. An interdisciplinary team of Columbia
University scientists will study the related fascinating multiscale physics,
using a combination of experimental, theoretical and numerical techniques. The
team has the following skills: multiphase flow (Attinger, PI), colloids
(Somasundaran), pattern recognition (Chang) and open-source computational fluid
dynamics (Spiegelman). The complex self-assembly of nanoparticles will be
studied by using first physical principles to explain the resulting
selfassembled patterns (what we call a top-down approach), and by identifying
features in the patterns that are signs of specific basic laws or transport
rules (bottom-up approach).

Intellectual Merit:

Experiments will involve the spotting of microdrops of complex fluids on various
substrates, fluorescence microscopy and laser profilometry to scan the three
dimensional deposits. The first intellectual merit will be to describe with a
phase diagram the self-assembly of nanoparticles during liquid evaporation on a
solid substrate. The use of a phase diagram in that context is novel and allows
a simple but powerful comparison of the magnitude of competing transport
phenomena, such as evaporation at the wetting line, Marangoni recirculation,
electrostatic and van der Waals forces, buoyancy, and dielectrophoresis. The
phase diagram will provide an insight and an overview of the complex interplay
between multiphase processes, influenced by the geometry of the liquid drop or
film: fluid mechanics, heat transfer, mass transfer, colloidal interactions.
Second, an available proprietary 2D-axisymmetric numerical code with a moving
mesh able to very accurately track the free surface will be extended to 3D (see
Chandra collaboration letter). This will allow the simulation of a wider ranges
of boundary conditions, permitting the consideration of thin films and complex
geometries. Explaining the self-assembly of nanoparticles from evaporating drops
and liquid films from first principles is a challenging approach, given the
multiple transport phenomena and time/length scales. Therefore, we will also
develop a bottom-up approach based on pattern recognition of selfassembled
features. We will test the hypothesis that the patterns tell us the about the
physics that created them.

Broader Impact:

The proposed research will deliver innovative solutions to pattern nanoparticles
on solid substrates, with applications in organic electronics and patterning of
biomolecules for biosensors. Methods to increase printing resolution by two
orders of magnitude (see Sonoplot letter), and to pattern uniform layers of
particles will be investigated. The pattern recognition algorithms developed in
this proposal will be tested to identify biomolecules (see Zenhausern letter)
and enhance the accuracy of bloodstain pattern analysis, in collaboration with
forensics expert MacDonell (see collaboration letter). Also, the 3D code
developed in this proposal will be distributed freely as an open-source code,
allowing every interested scientist to study problems involving drop and film
transport phenomena such as drop impact, drop evaporation, film drying. Funding
will support one graduate student.