* 1211668
* CNH:   Cooking Up Clean Air:   Scaled-Up Air Quality and Health Impacts of Clean Cookstoves in Ghana
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Michael Hannigan, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,475,000.00

Nearly half the world?s population, mostly in the developing world, cooks over
open flames on a daily basis. This releases greenhouse gas and exposes people to
toxic emissions that contribute to respiratory disease. In Ghana and other
countries in the "meningitis belt," emissions from cooking have been linked to
meningitis. We hypothesize that widespread use of efficient, or "clean",
cookstoves - which produce less smoke than open fires even while burning the
same available materials - will reduce people's exposure to toxic emissions,
improve health outcomes, and improve regional air quality. To test this
hypothesis, we will introduce cookstoves into households in northern Ghana. In
addition to determining whether they do, in fact, improve air quality and health
outcomes, we will explore the social and economic factors that encourage or
discourage cook stove use, and consider the impacts of climate change. Our
methods combine 1) a randomized experiment intended to increase use of efficient
cookstoves; 2) social surveys to measure effects on cooking behavior and self-
reported health outcomes; 3) collection of physical data to measure the impacts
on emissions and air quality; 4) integrated modeling of the relationships among
cooking practices, air quality, climate variability, respiratory illness and
bacterial meningitis; and 5) simulations of emissions and climate change
scenarios and their potential impacts on regional air quality and health
outcomes over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our results will enhance understanding
of the social and physical systems that shape air quality in the African Sahel
and particularly in northern Ghana, contribute valuable observations in a part
of the world where observations are sparse, and empower communities in Africa.
The work will provide quantitative knowledge that can be used to develop novel
strategies to control the spread of meningitis in the face of future threats.
Our results will also shed light on the interactions among human behavior, air
quality, climate variability, exposure, and health outcomes, and how future
changes in these factors may combine in Africa and other areas. Affordable and
effective instrumentation developed and applied as part of this project will be
tested and available for use in areas around the globe. Further, we will develop
novel university curricula and train African and American university students in
data collection. Finally, our participatory epidemiology approach, in which
community members help measure air quality and report disease, will empower
local communities that do not have access to vaccines. Ultimately, we will work
with communities to generate scenarios in which realistic changes in cooking
practices interact with climatic processes to produce improvements in air
quality that reduce the burden of respiratory illness and bacterial meningitis
in the African Sahel.