* 1211802
* CNH-Ex: Shifting Land Use and Forest Conservation: Understanding the Coupling of Social and Ecological Processes Along Urban-to-Rural Gradients
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Lucy Hutyra, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2017
* USD 244,720.00

This interdisciplinary research project will focus on understand the complex and
coupled socioecological processes that shape the structure, function, and
transformation of forested landscapes across urban-to-rural gradients. The
dynamics of forest cover and the ecosystem services they provide are shaped by
the land-use and management decisions of thousands of individual landowners and
the land-use planning and conservation actions of towns and environmental
organizations. The researchers will examine shifting land use and forest-
conservation practices across an urban-to-rural gradient between Boston and
central Massachusetts. They will combine new data collection through focus
groups, a mail survey, interviews, and archival research with existing
ecological and spatial data to meet four research objectives: (1) to
characterize the patterns of conservation and land-management practices along
the urban-to-rural gradient over the past 30 years; (2) to compare the influence
of land use and management on key attributes of forested ecosystems and the
provision of ecosystem services along the urban-to-rural gradient over the past
30 years; (3) to analyze the ways in which socioecological processes have shaped
conservation and land-management practices; and (4) to characterize the strength
of coupling among human development, conservation, and ecosystem services.

This project will advance basic understanding of the interactions among human
development, conservation, and ecosystem services across urban-rural gradients.
In particular, it will shed light on the ways and degrees to which social and
ecological processes are coupled and if and how these differ along the gradient.
The project will uncover ways in which increasing development alters the
possibilities for conservation, carbon sequestration, and the provision of other
ecosystem services from forests by changing biophysical characteristics and by
changing the relationship between people and their surroundings. The project
also will illuminate the importance of ecosystem characteristics and services in
shaping conservation and land-management practices relative to other social,
political, and economic factors. Such understanding will enhance the capacity
for conservation efforts and the protection of ecosystem services in urban,
suburban, and rural areas in and beyond the study region. The project will
provide education and reference material to community leaders who will transfer
the information to other landowners and decision makers. The project also will
facilitate the exchange of conservation information across the urban-to-rural
gradient and strengthen the collaboration between the Harvard Forest Long-Term
Ecological Research (LTER) program and the Boston Urban Long-Term Research Area
Exploratory (ULTRA-Ex) program. This project is supported by the NSF Dynamics of
Coupled Natural and Human Systems (CNH) Program.