* 1211848
* Collaborative Research:  Tropical Variability in a New Generation of Coupled Climate Simulations with Explicitly Resolved Convection
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2011,07/31/2016
* Cristiana Stan, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2016
* USD 299,794.00

Research is conducted on simulations performed with the superparameterized (SP)
version of the Community Climate System Model (CCSM, version 3), or SP-CCSM. The
atmospheric component model used in a coupled climate model typically uses a
parameterization for convection, in which the effects of convection are
estimated without actually resolving the convection. In superparameterization,
the parameterization is replaced by a cloud resolving model at each point in the
model's horizontal grid. In this way the climate model gains some of the
benefits of a global cloud resolving model without the enormous computational
expense of running such a high-resolution (7km or less) nonhydrostatic model
over the globe. Based on a 20-year simulation performed as preliminary work, SP-
CCSM produces a better tropical simulation than CCSM3, including improvements in
the periodicity of El Nino/Southern Oscillation events, reduction in the
classical double-ITCZ bias, and a more credible simulation of the Madden-Julian
Oscillation (MJO).

Two research objectives are addressed in this research: first, SP-CCSM and its
component atmospheric model are used to evaluate the roles of surface fluxes,
air-sea interactions, and small-scale convective processes in producing MJO
events. This research also considers the mechanisms through which the MJO
affects the Asian summer monsoon. Second, the work seeks to understand the
effect of the MJO on El Nino/Southern Oscillation events in the equatorial
Pacific.

The work has broader impacts through its potential to forecasts of MJO events,
which have consequences for the Asian summer monsoon and weather in the United
States. Research results may also lead to improvements in the parameterization
of tropical convection in weather and climate models. In addition, the project
supports a postdoctoral researcher, thereby providing for the next generation of
scientists in this field.