* 1211517
* Qualitative dynamics in the Stefan problem with and without surface tension
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Mahir Hadzic, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2015
* USD 132,672.00

This research focuses on the free boundary problems that arise in the
description of phase transitions. One project is to develop a unified well-
posedness framework for the Stefan problem in both presence and absence of
surface tension. In the latter case, we will show how the regularity of the
boundary is naturally tied to the norms weighted by the Neumann derivatives of
the temperature. After obtaining the (singular) vanishing surface tension limit,
we will understand the long-term non-linear behavior of initially small
solutions in the absence of surface tension, combining the energy methods and
Harnack-type bounds to obtain sharp lower bounds for the time-decay of Neumann
derivatives. We also focus on the dynamic instabilities arising in the Stefan
problem with surface tension. In particular, we will try to rigorously describe
the melting rates for the cavity-filling parabolic free-boundary flows,
exploiting their connection to their natural scaling laws and developing robust
energy techniques to perform the non-linear analysis. Moreover, we will study
the continuum limit behavior of the Diffusion Limited Aggregation (DLA), a
probabilistic lattice model giving rise to various morphological patterns
associated with the ill-posed nature of the Hele-Shaw problem with external
injection. Finally, we will examine the dynamic stability of galaxies as
described by the spherically symmetric Einstein-Vlasov system, where the
associated ADM-mass will be shown to be coercive on the set of measure
preserving perturbations of galaxies with suitably small central red-shift, upon
which we will investigate the full non-linear stability.

Free boundaries are ubiquitous in the description of various physical phenomena,
such as melting, crystal growth, shocks, and nucleation. A detailed
phenomenological understanding of instabilities, morphological changes, or
stable regimes in such problems is thus of fundamental importance.The proposed
investigation of the vanishing surface tension limit will establish a rigorous
link between the micro-and the macro-scale version of the Stefan problem, while
the study of long-term behavior of solutions will reveal an intricate
stabilizing mechanism for parabolic phase transitions in absence of surface
tension. The study of melting rates for the Stefan and Hele-Shaw problem aims at
clarifying the link to their natural scaling invariances. Moreover, inspired by
the work of physicists Witten and Sander from 1980's, we will investigate the
link between the lattice probabilistic evolution mentioned above, and its ill-
posed continuum analog. DLA grows unstable patterns, that exhibit certain
statistical universality typical of crystal growth---and it presents a challenge
for a good continuum model description. The study of galaxy dynamics strives to
rigorously confirm the stability scenario conjectured by the astrophysicist
Zel'dovitch et al. back in the 1960's.