* 1211349
* ARIZONA CLUSTER REDSHIFT SURVEY (ACReS)
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Eiichi Egami, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 09/30/2015
* USD 238,605.00

Clusters of galaxies are key players in unraveling the mysteries behind galaxy
formation and evolution, and understanding such mysteries is necessary to
uncover how our Universe evolved and to learn how our own Milky Way Galaxy
began. Galaxy clusters have long been considered active sites of galaxy
evolution although the physical processes driving these transformations have yet
to be established. Recent studies have revealed that, even at large distances
from the cluster center, galaxy populations look different from those in the
field, and they raise the possibility of cluster galaxy pre-processing in
intermediate environments. Furthermore, as sample sizes have increased, the
ubiquity of cluster mergers has become apparent, a natural consequence of a
hierarchical universe where clusters represent the most massive virialized
objects. This project investigates the effects that these events may have on the
cluster galaxy population---effects that are currently not well
understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combining the recently completed Arizona
Cluster Redshift Survey (ACReS)---an extensive, stellar-mass selected, wide-
field spectroscopic survey---with existing multi-wavelength data (from X-rays to
far-infrared), this project will study the connections between a cluster's
hierarchical growth and the evolution of its baryonic components. The project's
main objectives are the following: (1) to determine each cluster's dynamical
state and correlate this with global properties of the cluster galaxy
population, (2) to probe the mass distribution surrounding the clusters by
identifying filamentary environments and by compiling a unique sample of
infalling groups around clusters, and (3) to relate infalling galaxy properties
to their local environments, thereby identifying the sites and requisite
conditions for galaxy pre-processing in a large, uniform sample of clusters for
the first time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project include
the following: (1) The investigators will create a companion web site for the
ACReS project aimed at a wide audience that highlights the use of multi-
wavelength and spectroscopic data for a deeper understanding of the Universe.
The web site will be aggressively publicized to local school teachers for use in
their classrooms. (2) The project will conduct workshops at the Mt. Lemmon
SkyCenter for K-14 teachers to bring them into close contact with astronomers at
The University of Arizona and bring the excitement of scientific discovery into
Southern Arizona classrooms, where ethnic minorities make up to 70-80% of the
student population. (3) The project will construct a database for ACReS clusters
that will be released to the community at the end of the two year period to
create a legacy for future cluster studies. (4) The principal investigator will
train undergraduates and a postdoctoral researcher.