* 1211585
* Chemical Composition Studies of Galactic Halo and Disk Populations
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2012,01/31/2017
* Christopher Sneden, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 01/31/2017
* USD 246,097.00

Dr. Sneden and his team study the chemical compositions of stars in the Milky
Way's disk and halo, which hold clues to the birth and evolution of our Galaxy.
This work combines medium to high resolution spectroscopic observations, careful
abundance analyses, and improved laboratory atomic physics data to determine
accurate abundance data for large samples of halo and disk field and cluster
stars that provide insights on the chemical evolution of our
Galaxy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analysis of large samples will provide more
statistically robust samples to understand what really has happened to build the
Milky Way's heavy element content from virtually zero to the present metal-rich
solar chemical composition. The study of Galactic chemical evolution is done
through four different but connected tasks here.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, a
new large-sample of neutron-capture elemental abundances in very metal-poor halo
population field stars is studied. This greatly expands the analyzed stellar
sample, while limiting the abundance set to four key elements that can be
detected in the spectra of very low metallicity stars. This is used to track the
range of element production that can occur in rapid-blast neutron-capture
nucleosynthetic environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second, the metallicity and
elemental abundance ratios of hundreds to thousands individual globular cluster
stars are surveyed to obtain spectra over an extremely large evolution and
luminosity range, from the cluster main sequences to the tips of their red giant
branches. In one approach, multi-object spectra with limited wavelength coverage
of hundreds-thousands of stars in a few globular clusters will be taken to check
whether consistent metallicities and abundance ratios of iron-group elements can
be obtained from all stars of a cluster. Any luminosity dependent variations
could call into question the underlying assumptions in standard chemical
composition analyses. In another approach, multi-object spectra of large
wavelength coverage of stars over large luminosity ranges in many more globular
clusters are used to test the theories of production of the light volatile
elements in these self-contained stellar systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Third, a
new survey of metallicities, CNO abundances, and carbon isotope (12C/13C) ratios
is undertaken for evolved stars of Galactic open clusters. The approach here
combines for the first time coverage of spectral features in both the visible
and infrared spectral regions , in order to obtain accurate abundances of
H-burning products in stars up and down the red giant branches of individual
clusters. These in turn provide more complete descriptions of evolution and
mixing in metal-rich disk stellar systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fourth,
continued laboratory and stellar studies of iron-group element transitions in
the Sun and in metal-poor stars are conducted to bring heightened accuracy to
basic stellar abundance analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is continued
development and free dissemination of computer codes and atomic line data to the
world-wide community of stellar spectroscopists. Emphasis is placed on
significant changes to the computer codes to perform chemical composition
analyses automatically. As part of this project, an ongoing program involving a
secondary-school educator group will be expanded, with new emphasis on remote
observing opportunities for the educators.