* 1211502
* Investigating the Chemistry of Circumstellar Material through Millimeter-wave Observations and Laboratory Spectroscopy
* MPS,AST
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Lucy Ziurys, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 05/31/2016
* USD 382,712.00

The goals of this study by Dr. Ziurys and her group are to i) continue to probe
the physical and chemical properties of circumstellar envelopes through mm-wave
observations, ii) identify new circumstellar refractory molecules through
laboratory spectroscopy, and iii) conduct more detailed observations of older
PNe to determine the extent of their molecular
composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass loss from circumstellar envelopes of
evolved stars enriches the interstellar medium (ISM) in gas, dust, and the
heavier elements that are created in these objects through nucleosynthesis. The
chemical and physical characteristics of circumstellar shells have major impacts
on the overall life cycle of dense material in the ISM, as well as Galactic
chemical evolution. The chemistry in circumstellar envelopes is quite different
from that in molecular clouds, characterized in part by refractory compounds
that are likely related to dust grain formation. Studies of circumstellar
molecules have already given insight into the stellar mass loss process. The
remnant shells of most evolved stars become planetary nebulae (PNe), whose
morphological and chemical evolution, and impact on diffuse cloud formation are
not yet well understood. About half of circumstellar envelopes are oxygen-rich,
including those of supergiants and hypergiants, and early AGB stars, but are not
yet that well studied as their carbon-rich counterparts. The oxygen rich objects
represent different stages in stellar evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Ziurys' group previously conducted an in-depth investigation of the O-rich
envelope of the supergiant star, VY Canis Majoris (VY CMa)at millimeter
wavelengths. The work here builds on this first detailed study and will be
investigate the O-rich circumstellar shells of the supergiant NML Cygnus and the
E-AGB stars TX Cam and R Leo. The envelope of the S-type star chi Cygnus will
also be studied to explore chemical changes when carbon and oxygen abundances
are about equal. These objects will be investigated via 1 mm broad-band surveys
(215 to 285 GHz), using the highly sensitive ALMA-type receiver at the Sub-
millimeter Telescope of the Arizona Radio Observatory (ARO), and the results
compared with those already obtained for VY CMa and the carbon-rich object
IRC+10216. The spectra are analyzed using radiative transfer methods, using a
code developed to account for multiple, non-spherical winds, and molecular
abundances, distributions, and temperatures will be determined. The surveys of
VY CMa and IRC+10216 have revealed hundreds of unidentified lines in these
objects, likely arising from refractory molecules. The laboratory work will
entail measurements of the pure rotational spectra of potential circumstellar
refractory compounds, such as oxides (ScO, TiOH, KO) for O-rich shells, metal
dicarbides MC2 (with M = Al, Fe, Na, Mg)which are likely species in IRC+10216,
and nitrides (MgN, AlN, and NaN) for the S-type objects. Once established, the
inventory of circumstellar gas-phase refractory molecules will be compared with
the solid state composition of circumstellar grains found in meteorites, through
a collaboration with Arizona's Lunar and Planetary Lab. Observations of a sample
of older PNe (Ring, Dumbell, M2-46) in the molecules HCO+, CS, C3H2, and H2CO
will be carried out at the ARO SMT and 12 m in order to more fully characterize
the molecular content of PNe. The proposed single-dish work is both preparatory
for and complementary to ALMA investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ziurys
group has an active program in laboratory spectroscopy centered on such unusual,
reactive species, with four working spectrometers: three direct absorption and
one Fourier transform microwave system with a laser ablation source for metals.
This work directly links observational studies with laboratory astrophysics, and
is very interdisciplinary. Graduate student training involves both astronomical
and laboratory experimental aspects, and several female students will be
participating. Dr. Ziurys is developing interdisciplinary courses in
Astrochemistry and a website illustrating basic molecular spectroscopy.