* 1211059
* SoCS: Geodeliberation: Enabling Democratic Decision-Making in Local Communities Through Place-Based Deliberative Dialogues
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* John Carroll, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2018
* USD 755,797.00

This project seeks to discover new knowledge required to support geodeliberation
in community geospatial decision-making contexts. Geodeliberation refers to
democratic deliberation (within local communities) on complex and controversial
geographically-defined problems and involves the use of geographical information
and online, asynchronous deliberative technologies. This research addresses two
key knowledge gaps. One is the lack of understanding about human information and
interaction behavior while engaging online asynchronous geodeliberation, and the
methodological challenges of supporting community-scale deliberation of complex
geospatial problems over sustained engagements. A more formidable gap is between
the desirable level of public involvement and the practical level of
participation that can be supported by the current social-technical solutions.
To address these gaps, the research applies an ethnographically-guided
participatory research approach to: (1) identify opportunities and barriers in
using geodeliberation to empower communities; and (2) investigate visual-
computational methods to enable human participation and facilitation of
geodeliberation processes. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute
to the foundations of a science of geodeliberation, including both an
understanding of key processes and a set of design techniques for social and
visual-computational support of geodeliberation. It will focus on issue-related
narratives about personal experiences, sensemaking with respect to synthesizing
disparate geo-planning views and issues, and the development of public judgment
and common ground for mutual understanding and collective action. These research
activities are integrated around a prototype - GeoDeliberator. The approach will
incorporate methods from three domains: cognitively-motivated design of visual
representations and interfaces; models of deliberative discourse and decision-
making in communities; and active facilitation of large-scale geodeliberation
towards better coherence and effectiveness.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research
addresses broader impacts of three kinds. First, this project will demonstrate
the potential of using information technology to improve civic engagement in
community-level. Second, the design research investigation of socio-technical
support for geodeliberation will provide a concrete model for local governments
across the nation. Third, this project will prepare a generation of
undergraduate and graduate students with consciousness and career potentials in
applying social-technical solutions in the practice of democratic decision-
making.