* 1211803
* Conference Support:  Increasing Participation of US Students to 7th International Conference on Micromanufacturing (ICOMM); Evanston, Illinois; 12-14 March 2012
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Burak Ozdoganlar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Zhijian Pei
* 02/28/2014
* USD 29,718.00

The overarching objective of this project is to increase the participation of US
students to advanced manufacturing research conferences. To address this
objective, this award provides financial support to partially cover conference
travel and registration to the 7th International Conference on
MicroManufacturing (ICOMM'12) that will be held at Northwestern University
(Evanston, Illinois) 12-14 March 2012. The 7th ICOMM will focus on technical
presentations and panel discussions on the processes, equipment, and systems for
fabricating miniature parts with micro-scale features. The conference will
address theoretical and applied research issues on manufacture, assembly, and
metrology of components and systems with micro-scale features. The requested
funds will fully cover the registration for up to 30 students from US
institutions, and will provide partial support to cover their travel expenses.
The intellectual merit of this project arises from the technical interactions of
the US graduate students with the academic and industrial researchers, as well
as with other graduate students working in the manufacturing field. Since many
international researchers attend ICOMM traditionally, the US graduate student
will be also exchanging ideas regarding global aspects of manufacturing science
and technology. This is critical in providing a complete education and high-
level perspective to the future industrial leaders and academicians the US
students will become.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educating the next generation of
industrial leaders and academicians is vital to the future of the manufacturing
field. Indeed, the recently-announced Advanced Manufacturing Partnership (AMP)
initiative emphasizes the need for attracting and retaining the US students in
the manufacturing field. The exchange of many new and innovative ideas during
the ICOMM conference will address this goal directly, and will have a
considerable impact to the future careers of the attending students, as well as
to the future of manufacturing science and engineering.