* 1211995
* Globular Clusters as Chemodynamical Tracers of Galaxy Assembly Beyond the Local Group
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Jean Brodie, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 08/31/2017
* USD 428,957.00

This project will carry out a detailed study of the globular cluster (GC)
populations of elliptical and lenticular galaxies in order to address key
questions in galaxy structure and formation, specifically: (i) What are the
masses, angular momenta, orbital structures, and metallicities of early-type
galaxies? (ii) What is the distribution of dark matter associated with them?
(iii) How are their inner and outer regions assembled, and are these processes
decoupled? (iv) How does their assembly depend on mass and environment? (v) Do
the observations agree with theoretical models of galaxy formation? And, (vi)
can the primordial formation sites of GCs be identified? The study will be
comprised of (1) a detailed, systematic observational survey of 25 early-type
galaxies and their GC systems out to very large galactocentric radii,
complemented with field star and planetary nebulae data; (2) dynamical modeling
to recover mass and orbital information; and (3) comparisons to cosmological
simulations of galaxy and GC formation. The project will support the work and
professional mentoring of a graduate student and a postdoctoral researcher. The
proposing team will release the data and survey results as a publicly accessible
database, and will also continue and expand their education and public outreach
partnership with the Science Buddies organization.