* 1211595
* Cluster Shocks, Winds and Turbulence: The Dynamic Interplay Between Structure Formation, AGNs and Relativistic Plasmas
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Thomas Jones, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 07/31/2017
* USD 661,815.00

Clusters of galaxies are important probes of cosmology and are key players in
unraveling the mysteries behind galaxy formation and evolution and the
development of large scale structure in the Universe. These galaxy clusters are
teeming with activity as the recurring infall of dark matter dominated halos
drives large scale winds, shocks, turbulence and entropy discontinuities in the
intracluster medium (ICM). The diffuse, hot ICM, comprising about 90% of the
normal cluster matter, carries the imprint of the recent cluster assembly
history, provides a cosmological mass metric through its
dynamical/thermodynamical state, transports metals and entropy, transforms
galactic star formation, and offers a laboratory into basic fluid and plasma
processes in low density media. Relativistic, nonthermal plasmas produced by
cluster-wide processes and active galactic nuclei (AGNs) serve as an important
tool for understanding the ICM's evolving dynamical state. Exploiting this tool
requires a rich observational base, a good understanding of the physics of the
interactions between thermal and nonthermal plasmas, and effective ways to
translate between that physics and observations. To that end, the investigators
have designed an ambitious, coordinated theoretical and observational program
that will leverage major technical advances in both numerical simulations and
telescope systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aims of this project include a much
improved understanding of (1) how large scale flows and turbulence are
established in the ICM and evolve from kiloparsec to megaparsec scales, (2) how
magnetic fields develop and then reveal and feed back to ICM evolution, (3) how
relativistic cosmic rays (CRs) are both products of and diagnostics for the
dynamic ICM, and (4) how AGN outflows physically interact with the ICM and serve
as diagnostics of local flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educationally, this project
includes training of undergraduate and graduate students in both cutting-edge
science and the development of innovative data analysis and numerical simulation
techniques. The investigators will also be active in public education, including
work with the local planetarium, K-12 science and community groups.