* 1211099
* SHF: Small: Lookahead Logic Circuits for Performance, Power, and Reliability
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Kartik Mohanram, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Hong Jiang
* 08/31/2014
* USD 314,936.00

&lt;br/&gt;Timing errors resulting from process variability, manufacturing
defects, and aging effects in scaled CMOS technologies are an important failure
mode that impact the reliability of multi-level control logic in commodity
mainstream computer systems. This project makes a case for lookahead logic
circuits based on the principles of prefix computation to address performance,
reliability, and power challenges posed by timing errors in multi-level control
logic. Lookahead logic circuits promise low-cost logic-only solutions that can
be used to (i) increase performance and/or yield by reducing logic delay, (ii)
improve logic circuit robustness to timing errors by masking them, (ii) lower
power consumption by increasing the scope of aggressive dynamic voltage and
frequency scaling, and (iv) enable more effective and targeted post-silicon
debug and online wearout prediction. The research will formalize the principles
of lookahead-based function decomposition and prefix-based computation for
multi-level logic circuits, develop logic synthesis and design solutions for
lookahead logic, and investigate its applications in the context of superscalar
and multi-threaded processor design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major impact of this
research is to enable ubiquitous low-cost highly reliable computing, by
expanding its reach to domains, where custom solutions are economically
infeasible. An integrated outcome of this project is the development of a
testbed and web-based resources to facilitate research in reliable system
design. Through course development and collaborations with industrial partners,
the research will contribute to education, community resource development and
technology transfer to industry.&lt;br/&gt;