* 1211190
* Simulating Cosmic Reionization
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Nickolay Gnedin, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2016
* USD 240,721.00

Advances in the study of cosmic reionization affect many fields, from the
thermal evolution of the Lyman-alpha forest to the properties of galaxies over a
large range of redshifts. Because the observational constraints are limited,
theoretical modeling and numerical simulation play a relatively larger part in
reionization studies than in other areas. Computational performance at the peta
scale is well matched to the needs of a realistic reionization simulation, so
that substantial progress can be expected in the next several years. The present
research will culminate in simulations that combine large computational volumes
with fully self-consistent physical modeling, providing important insights into
reionization itself and into the evolution of galaxies and Lyman-alpha emitters.
The simulation results will be compared with existing approximate numerical and
analytical schemes, to test the physical fidelity of customarily adopted
approximations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is an excellent vehicle for
the professional training of a graduate student, and the results will be useful
to a large community of scientists, from pure theorists to observers to
experimentalists. The work will also impact undergraduate education and the
general public. Visualization of such cosmological research stimulates curiosity
and that sense of discovery afforded only by the exploration of the universe.
These next-generation simulations will bring a qualitative improvement to three-
dimensional visualizations previously developed by this group and used at the
Adler Planetarium.