* 1211315
* Linear and Nonlinear Stability for Infinite-Dimensional Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Milena Stanislavova, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lora Billings
* 06/30/2016
* USD 215,157.00

The proposal focuses on the stability of waves for several models both in one
and higher spatial dimensions. The common feature of these equations is that
they can be viewed as dynamical systems on an infinite-dimensional space. These
Hamiltonian PDEs support coherent structures such as solitary waves as well as
periodic wave solutions. The PI will address open questions by developing a
systematic approach to the spectral stability of waves for second order in time
PDEs. An advantage of this method is that it treats both spatially periodic and
solitary waves, which provides a link between the well studied results for
solitary waves and the mostly open questions on periodic waves. These models are
at the frontiers of current research and present lots of challenges at the
spectral and linear stability level, but virtually nothing is known for their
asymptotic stability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI studies will provide for
better theoretical understanding of various nonlinear systems such as the beam
equation, water waves and the Klein-Gordon model. Any progress on these
questions will not only be important mathematically, but will find immediate
applications in physical sciences. The PI will train the future researches by
working with graduate and undergraduate students on the topics of the proposal.
A special freshman seminar on nonlinear waves is being designed by the PI as
part of a pilot First Year Seminar program at the University of Kansas. The PI
has worked with students from local schools and is the main organizer for
several mathematics competitions for school age kids. The students preparing for
the competitions have been exposed to applied mathematics problems and have
gained a better understanding of the role mathematics plays in modeling real
life phenomena.