* 1211359
* Metamaterials and Inverse Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Graeme Milton, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2018
* USD 1,013,390.00

The research supported by this award will explore the range of electromagnetic
properties that composite materials formed from constituent materials with
extreme properties can exhibit, at a single frequency, and over a broad range of
frequencies. Any interesting behavior that the exotic microstructures,
introduced for the first time here, are found to exhibit should motivate the
search for practical microstructures exhibiting similar interesting effects. The
project also addresses the practically important problem of placing rigorous
upper and lower limits (bounds) on the volume of an inclusion in a body using a
small number of measurements of the electromagnetic or elastic fields at the
surface of the body, focusing on the electromagnetic case in the quasistatic
regime where the wavelength of the time harmonic fields is much larger than the
microstructure and the moduli and fields are complex. Additionally, the project
introduces a new approach for estimating the volume fractions of the phases in a
two-phase composite, from measurements of the effective bulk modulus, and bulk
and shear moduli of the phases at a set of real frequencies in the quasistatic
regime. Finally the research project seeks to find corrections to the effective
moduli of composites due to the imperfectness of the interfaces between phases,
in the case where the imperfection is not too great. The formulae should
facilitate the calculation of effective moduli with imperfect interfaces given
numerical solutions for perfect interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metamaterials
are man-made composite materials with properties that are unachievable in
ordinary materials. A better understanding of the macroscopic response of such
metamaterials has widespread technological importance. There is a constant need
for new materials in the defense, automotive, aerospace, electronics and other
manufacturing and telecommunication industries. The impact of such new materials
is likely to be greatest when their properties are radically different from any
material we know. This project will help shape a picture outlining what
electromagnetic responses of materials are possible. In a second direction, for
biomedical, engineering and counterterrorism applications it is vitally
important to determine what is inside a body using non-invasive testing, and it
is better if one can say things with near certainty. The project will give
precise lower and upper limits on the volume occupied by an inclusion in a body,
or by one phase in a two-phase composite. This may have future applications to
determining the size of cancer tumors, or of voids in a body, or the porosity in
an osteoporotic bone. In a third direction, new mathematical approximations for
physical effects of imperfections at the interface between two different
materials will be developed, which are expected to be of use in the practical
design of new composite materials. The award will help train a postdoctoral
associate and a graduate student in an interdisciplinary research area.