* 1211358
* Characterizing the Molecular Gas Contents of High Redshift Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Gregory Rudnick, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 07/31/2016
* USD 318,286.00

Astrophysicists are just beginning to unravel the details of the early Universe
and the history of star formation. Because molecular gas is the fuel for star
formation, it is crucial to understand its characteristics when most stars
formed, a time when the Universe was about 15% of its current age. The aim of
this project is to test the theoretical picture of galaxy formation that makes
the robust prediction that very distant star forming galaxies have large gas
reservoirs. The principal investigator (PI) will perform a thorough
characterization of molecular gas in very distant (high redshift) galaxies. This
project involves a multi-year observing program conducted at newly commissioned
radio and millimeter interferometers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These observations
will be used to measure the ground state emission from carbon monoxide (CO) in
seven star forming galaxies in one of the most distant known galaxy clusters.
With these data the PI will derive the gas mass, gas consumption timescales,
star formation efficiencies, dynamical masses, and gas fractions, and will
increase the total available sample with such robust measurements by a factor of
three. The PI will perform a similar analysis of about 30 galaxies by targeting
a set of newly discovered high redshift over-densities. This sample size will
enable a unique study of the gas contents and the physical conditions of the gas
as a function of redshift and stellar mass. This analysis will be the first
examination of how the molecular gas contents of high redshift galaxies depend
on their environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educationally, the PI will design and
implement an outreach program at Lawrence High School. The goals of this program
are to teach research techniques, the nature of science, and the electromagnetic
spectrum. Students in this program will use data from the Spitzer Space
Telescope to measure the star formation rates of cluster galaxies. The program
will involve 20 students and span over two years. The best two students will
present their findings at an American Astronomical Society meeting. The program
will be jointly run by a physics teacher at the school, a graduate student, and
the PI. By providing opportunities for continuing education to the high school
teacher and by providing the teacher with research tools and data, this program
will become self-sustaining. The effectiveness of the activities will be
rigorously and quantitatively assessed. The PI will additionally perform
research with undergraduates, who will present their findings at an American
Astronomical Society meeting. The PI will also organize an annual meeting of
extragalactic astronomers and their students at institutes close to the PI's
institution in order to provide opportunities for the students to exchange ideas
and present their research.