* 1211132
* A Multi-platform Kinematic and Thermodynamic Study of Tornado Genesis, Structure, and Evolution
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* WENCHAU LEE, The Center for Severe Weather Research
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 07/31/2015
* USD 1,421,820.00

The need for improved understanding and development of more reliable means to
identify and provide advance warning of tornado formation are key motivations
behind the joint NSF-NOAA sponsored VORTEX2 (Verification of the Origins of
Rotation in Tornadoes) project. Field operations during VORTEX2 encompassed
multi-platform field activities providing a wealth of radar and in-situ
thermodynamic data within severe thunderstorms, tornadoes, and their supporting
environments. Following on a successful two-year multi-investigator data
collection campaign, this research effort will focus on advanced physical
understanding in three separate yet interrelated topical areas: (1)
Specification of mechanisms contributing to the genesis, intensification and
evolution of tornadoes; (2) more comprehensive description of near-surface winds
in tornadoes and their relationship to built-structure damage; and (3) improved
climatological description of tornado characteristics utilizing a growing suite
of close-up, high-resolution observations gathered via specially-tailored mobile
platforms. In the course of these studies, researchers will seek to increase
robustness of prior indications of typical tornado behavior, including what may
be a preferred scale and intensity for tornadoes, a suggested negative
correlation between vortex core size and intensity, and an apparent lack of
correlation between the strength of tornadic vortices vis-Ã -vis overlying in-
cloud circulation within parent mesocyclones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts of this effort will include improved ability to detect, warn for and
forecast tornadic events and thereby achieve decreased false alarm rates, as
well as provide information that will aid structural engineers and emergency
response communities. Collaborations will extend to multiple universities, and
thereby support career development (including degree committee memberships) for
multiple students.