* 1211914
* Quantum State Engineering and Quantum Information Processing  with Ultra-Cold Polar Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Ana Rey, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 06/30/2016
* USD 530,616.00

The intellectual merit of this project is to exploit how to take advantage of
the rich internal structure of ultra-cold diatomic polar molecules, towards the
design of a highly tunable quantum simulator/computer. Polar molecules possess a
permanent dipole moment,which can be manipulated with external fields, and which
can lead to long-range anisotropic interactions. Two dimensional and one
dimensional arrays of polar molecules trapped in optical lattices will be
considered. The main idea is to use rotational dressed states of the molecules,
which can be easily manipulated and controlled by external dc electric fields
and by continuous microwave fields, as the spin (qubit) degrees of freedom of
the quantum simulator/computer. Direct dipolar interactions, which are orders of
magnitude stronger than those achievable using neutral atoms, will be used to
coupled the spins. The goal is to investigate how to use this system to engineer
topological states of matter, to simulate models used to describe magnetism in
real materials, as well as others that may have no solid state analogs, and to
process quantum information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of this work arise,in part, from the educational and outreach aspects, including
the training of graduate students and postdocs. These students will benefit from
interacting also with experimental groups at JILA that are world-leaders in the
planned research areas. Beyond this, the investigators will continue to
contribute to community outreach programs, such as public lectures and
accessible physics articles. They will also maintain a significant level of
service to the physics community through organizing workshops, serving on review
panels, and memberships on professional committees. This project contains
interdisciplinary science involving application of the unique atomic structure
of bi-alkali polar molecules towards the design of highly-controllable quantum
simulators. These simulators are capable, on the one hand, of processing quantum
information (QI science), and on the other hand, of generating fundamental
insights into the physics of solid state systems, such as cuprate
superconductors, transition metal oxides and geometrically frustrated magnetic
insulators (material sciences).