* 1211729
* Theoretical Studies in Star Formation
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2012,01/31/2017
* Christopher McKee, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 01/31/2017
* USD 492,293.00

Dr. McKee and his group investigate star formation and its history to study the
processes governing the evolution of the universe. The star formation history
determines the structure and evolution of galaxies, and the production of the
chemical elements over time. This work addresses three central problems in the
theory of star formation. (1) The role of magnetic fields in the formation of
low-mass stars. Magnetic fields affect their formation as stars cannot from if
the field is too strong. The group uses a numerical magneto-radiative
hydrodynamic - adaptive mesh refinement code to simulate the effects of magnetic
fields on star formation. Large scale star formation in giant molecular clouds
is affected by the shape of the magnetic field in these clouds. Observations
support both hypotheses that either the field is ordered or tangled. Detailed
simulations will be compared to observations to resolve this issue. On
intermediate scales, processes during star cluster formation influences the star
formation rates and the stellar masses. Simulations that include the effects of
radiation and outflows from protostars forming out of a magnetized medium will
provide a more complete picture of star formation in clusters. One smaller
scales, magnetic fields are effective at extracting the rotational energy of the
gas in disks that have been observed around forming and recently formed stars.
Most star formation simulations to date result in either no disks at all, or in
disks that are much smaller than observed. Here high resolution simulations with
all relevant physical processes that couple the gas to the magnetic field are
carried out to address this issue. (2) The rate of star formation through cosmic
time. The evolution of disk galaxies like the Milky Way depends on the rate at
which gas accretes onto the galaxy and the rate at which this gas is transformed
into stars. Gas accretion has been determined by large scale cosmological
simulations. The PI has contributed to the development of two complementary
theories of the star formation rate. These theories will be unified and, with
simulations, extended to the case when heavy element abundances were low in the
early universe. The results can serve as ingredients for more accurate theories
of the evolution of galaxies. (3) The formation of the first stars. The very
first stars formed out of gas that had essentially no elements heavier than
Helium. When these stars exploded at the end of their lives, they seeded the
universe with the first heavy elements. The amount of heavy elements produced
depends sensitively on the mass of these stars. This mass was likely affected by
of the energetic radiation emitted by the stars as they formed, which will be
studied in the highest resolution simulations yet performed in order to
determine the mass of the first stars. This award supports a postdoctoral
researcher. The computational methodologies developed as part of this project
will be published for use by the community.