* 1211364
* Eigenvalues, geometry and instability in conservative models in applied mathematics.
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Jared Bronski, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2016
* USD 217,999.00

Most of the equations derived to model physical phenomena support some form of
special solutions such as standing or traveling waves, or other coherent
structures. These special solutions often correspond to real, observable
physical phenomena in the systems that these model equations are meant to
represent. One important aspect of this modeling is the stability of these
special solutions, as the stability of solutions determines if these solutions
are likely to be physically observed. This project is aimed at understanding the
stability and instability these coherent structures. This usually amounts to
computing the index of the operator found by linearizing about one of these
coherent structures - that is the number of eigenvalues of positive real part.
This counts the dimension of the unstable manifold to the solution, giving
valuable information on the dynamics of nearby solutions. While the emphasis of
this project is on conservative systems we consider both conservative and
dissipative systems. We use analytical, asymptotic and geometric techniques to
identify unstable eigenvalues and to count the number of such eigenvalues.

There are many mathematical models that are important for science and
engineering that support solutions in the form of traveling waves. One example
is an equation known as the Korteweg-DeVries equation, an equation which governs
the behavior of water in a narrow shallow body such as a canal. The Korteweg-
DeVries equation has solutions called solitary waves which behave just as
experience would suggest - they correspond to a quantity of water which
propagates along without changing shape. Similar equations govern the
propagation of light waves, propagation of a disturbance through a network such
as the power grid, etc. It is important to understand the extent to which these
solutions accurately model the behavior of the underlying system. This is the
question of stability, which measures how robust these special solutions are. If
a special solution like a traveling wave is stable it means that nearby
solutions behave in a similar way. This means such solutions are robust, and are
likely to be observed: if the conditions are not exactly those necessary to
produce a traveling wave but are close we expect to see a solution which is
close to the special one. An unstable solution, on the other hand, is not
robust. In order to observe these unstable solution one must produce exactly the
right conditions, which is very difficult to achieve in practice. This means
that such solutions are more of mathematical interest than of physical
importance. This project is primarily concerned with developing mathematical
techniques to understand the stability of traveling waves in a number of models
including the Kuramoto model (a model for the behavior of power networks) and
several nonlinear dispersive equations (which govern light waves in nonlinear
media, water waves, waves in plasmas and many other phenomena).