* 1211972
* CNH: Social-Ecological Complexity and Adaptation in Marine Systems
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Iain Couzin, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,498,903.00

The oceans are one of the most dynamic environments on Earth, presenting a
profound challenge for understanding the complex social, ecological, and
physical interactions that occur within them. Fishers are naturally tuned to
this complexity and meet their individual goals by targeting their efforts
towards particular locations and types of catch, and by adapting their social
interactions. Yet we - the scientific community - lack an understanding of how
social behavior and ecological dynamics are coupled. Further, these feedbacks
are largely ignored in present management approaches. We aim to fill this
knowledge gap by answering three questions: (1) How does fisher social behavior
(defined as the level to which individual fishers share information) change in
response to ecological, technological and management factors? (2) What effect
does social behavior have on fisher spatial dynamics and on the social structure
of the fishing community? (3) How can management strategies be designed to
account for the social behavior of fishers? To answer these questions we will
conduct a comprehensive research project involving data gathering and analysis,
theoretical modeling and the development of novel mathematical theory. This
project will have direct implications for agencies responsible for managing
marine resources along the west coast of the U.S. and in Hawaii, some of whom
are collaborating in the research. By increasing our understanding of how humans
using a natural resource interact with one another and how this in turn affects
that resource, the results of this study will be relevant to fields as diverse
as finance and global food security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to gather
data on the spatial and behavioral dynamics of fishers along the U.S. west
coast, in Brazil and in Fiji - three marine systems with contrasting social,
ecological, technological and management characteristics. U.S. data will come
from collaborations with the NOAA National Marine Fisheries Service, and data
from Brazil and Fiji will be obtained using economic field experiments. All
three data sources will be used to develop agent-based models that simulate both
the dynamics of fish and individual fishers. We will distinguish ourselves from
traditional modeling approaches by adopting a Complex Adaptive Systems (CAS)
perspective. With a CAS perspective the spatial dynamics of fish and fishers and
the social structure of fisher communities, along with other macroscopic
properties, emerge from processes operating at low levels of organization,
namely the actions of individual fishers and their target species. Our agent-
based models will have the CAS perspective at heart, with fisher agents able to
adapt and learn different behavioral strategies (e.g. sharing or not sharing
information). A combination of variation, fitness and reproduction will create a
selective mechanism whereby fisher behaviors converge to evolutionary stable
types. We will complement our agent-based modeling with evolutionary game theory
and investigate why certain social behaviors are evolutionarily stable in some
marine systems and not in others. Last, we will use mechanism design theory to
develop management strategies that account for changes in fisher social
behavior.