* 1211142
* CNH-Ex:   The Influence of the Size of Protected Areas on Their Ecological and Economic Effectiveness
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Seong-Hoon Cho, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 07/31/2015
* USD 249,964.00

Protected areas such as national and state parks and nature reserves play a
vital role in biological conservation. They also strongly affect human societies
because they entail economic costs and confer social benefits through recreation
and provision of natural resources. While numerous studies have focused on how
to design reserves to best conserve species and natural habitats, little
research has been done to offer guidance on how to design reserves to best
minimize costs and maximize benefits to local residents or to society more
broadly. This project will investigate how reserve design can affect both the
natural system within a reserve and the human system outside it, and how these
effects can interact to determine the net benefits of reserves to conservation
and society. The research focuses on one of the most basic and variable aspects
of reserve design, reserve size; and on protected areas in the deciduous forests
of the central and southern Appalachians, an area of high biological diversity
and extensive human use. On the social side, the project will combine
econometric analyses of land acquisitions with analyses of the conservation
goals of particular land deals and the management plans put in place to achieve
them. On the biological side, researchers will combine GIS analysis of land
cover changes within and around protected areas with ecological field surveys.
Overall, the project will examine how the costs of delivering improvements in
the ecological objectives of protected areas respond to their size.

This project is specifically intended to help policy makers and land managers
increase the economic efficiency and ecological effectiveness of protected
areas. The research will be done in close collaboration with The Natural
Conservancy, the largest non-governmental land trust in the U.S. Partnership
with this and other managerial organizations will serve to disseminate results
widely, and the project will provide partners with management tools including
geodatabases and endowment calculators. The project will also enhance the
scientific workforce by training a postdoctoral researcher, two Ph.D. students,
and undergraduate students, and by establishing a new, interdisciplinary
collaboration between young scientist early in their careers.