* 1211665
* DynSyst_Special_Topics: Correlations and Stochastic Dynamics in Suspensions of Swimming Microorganisms
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Peter Kramer, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Lora Billings
* 08/31/2016
* USD 361,658.00

The supported work will develop new theoretical and computational approaches to
describing the effective coarse-grained stochastic dynamics of noisy,
nonlinearly interacting agents in a physically well-grounded model system:
suspensions of swimming microorganisms (microswimmers). The dynamics exhibit
highly disordered behavior, with long-ranged statistical correlations observed
in direct numerical simulations. Yet most theoretical work has been based on
deterministic methods such as mean field theories for the effective behavior.
The primary goal of the supported work is to incorporate the role of noise in
the dynamics into a systematic statistical theory for the effective dynamics of
the interacting microswimmers. Two central issues to be addressed are: (1) a
rational framework for parameterizing the noise of a sampled swimmer in a self-
consistent statistical field theory, and (2) the incorporation of correlations
between microswimmers in an effective statistical field theory.

Many complex systems use interactions or communication to produce an emergent
behavior of the group. A key goal is to better understand how those interactions
can change the effective dynamics of the individuals, and thereby the group.
Examples include wide varieties of swarms of insects, colonies of bacteria,
flocks of birds, herds of animals, as well as engineered systems such as
autonomous robotic devices which communicate information and status to each
other in pursuit of a goal or target. These applications involve not only the
interaction of a large number of agents, but also typically noise in the
environment, motion, and/or communication. This grant supports research on a
model system of suspensions of swimming microorganisms (microswimmers) which has
the virtue of incorporating these central issues in a system where the governing
dynamics have a clearly defined physical basis. This facilitates the development
of the mathematical technology regarding the effective behavior of a group of
nonlinearly interacting agents with noisy features. The research is also coupled
with efforts on education and outreach. The supported graduate student will be
co-mentored by the interdisciplinary team of PIs, exposing him or her to
advanced mathematical methods, high quality computational simulations, and
practical engineering applications. This project is being used in efforts to
encourage under-represented groups through the PREFACE program at Rensselaer.