* 1211413
* Collaborative research: Turbulent cascades and regularity theory in physical scales of 3D incompressible fluid flows
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Radu Dascaliuc, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2016
* USD 142,507.00

Grujic, DMS-1212023 Dascaliuc, DMS-1211413

The investigators aim to advance our understanding of the phenomenon of
turbulence, as well as to offer new insights into the problem of possible
singularity formations in 3D viscous incompressible fluids described by the 3D
Navier-Stokes equations (NSE). The project extends their recent results
regarding existence and locality of energy cascades, and anomalous dissipation
in physical scales of the flow. The main goals are, on one hand, to present
Onsager-critical Morrey-type conditions preventing anomalous dissipation in 3D
incompressible flows and to discover a set of universal scaling laws --
reminiscent of the fundamental Kolmogorov K41 laws -- that naturally transpire
from their theory of turbulent cascades in physical scales, and on the other
hand, to present mathematical evidence of a geometric scenario closing the
scaling gap in the regularity problem, that is, of the criticality of the 3D NSE
problem for large data. The key idea is to use a new ensemble-averaging process
capable of detecting significant sign fluctuations of the physical density of
interest at the given scale. This approach is highly local in space and is
applicable to flows that do not satisfy homogeneity and isotropy assumptions. In
addition, it provides a framework for the study of geometrically coherent
structures in physical space.

In 2000, the Clay Mathematical Institute identified seven "Millennium Problems"
in mathematics, solutions to which would have a broad impact on society in the
21st century. One of these problems is the task of providing a rigorous
mathematical foundation (namely, addressing the possibilities of singularity
formations) for the Navier-Stokes equations that describe the motion of fluids.
Existence of singularities is a fundamental issue for mathematical modeling of
any real-life phenomenon. In the case of Navier-Stokes equations this regularity
problem is believed to be linked with the notion of turbulence. Despite
successes in empirical modeling and computational techniques used to study
turbulence, this phenomenon remains one of the unresolved fundamental problems
of modern physics. Any measurable progress in understanding turbulence can have
a broad impact in such areas as weather and climate modeling and engineering
applications. On one hand, suppressing turbulence is essential in designing and
engineering more efficient vehicles, wind turbines, pipeline systems. On the
other hand, enhancing turbulent mixing is desired in a variety of nano-scale
engineering designs, as well as in biomedical engineering -- one example being
more efficient drug delivery systems. The project helps advance understanding of
how to better predict and detect turbulent behavior, as well as possibly control
it. The investigators engage graduate and undergraduate students in the project
and present lectures on turbulence to local high school students.