* 1211094
* SoCS: Collaborative Research: Focusing Attention to Improve the Performance of Citizen Science Systems: Beautiful Images and Perceptive Observers
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Arfon Smith, Adler Planetarium
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2017
* USD 395,902.00

The goal of this project is to develop a next-generation socio-computational
citizen science platform that combines the efforts of human classifiers with
those of computational systems to maximize the efficiency with which human
attention can be used. Dealing with the flood of digital data that confronts
researchers is the fundamental challenge of twenty-first century research. New
techniques, tools and strategies for dealing with massive data sets, whether
they consist of vast numbers of base-pair DNA sequences or terabytes of data
from all-sky astronomical surveys, present an opportunity to establish a new
paradigm of scientific discovery, but the task is not easy. In many areas of
research, the relentless growth of data sets has led to the adoption of
increasingly automated and unsupervised methods of classification. In many
cases, this has led to degradation in classification quality, with machine
learning and computer vision unable to replicate the successes of human pattern
recognition. The growth of citizen science on the web has provided a temporary
solution to this problem, demonstrating that it is possible to recruit hundreds
of thousands of volunteers to make an authentic contribution to results,
boosting human analysis through the collective wisdom of a crowd of classifiers.
However, human classifiers alone will not be able to cope with expected flood of
data from future scientific instruments.

This research will be carried out by a partnership between computer and social
scientists, addressing research problems both in automated data analysis and
social science through systems implementation, alongside field research and
experiments with project participants. The intellectual merit of this project
lies in its contribution to advancing knowledge and understanding in multiple
domains of science. First, the work will contribute to developing new methods of
computational data analysis, initially with analysis of astronomical images, and
later extending to additional fields. Second, the project includes social
science research to test and apply theories of human motivation and learning in
an online context, which can then be applied to a broad range of social-
computational problems. By mixing human and computational elements, the planned
system has the potential to transform the application of citizen science and its
approach to data analysis.

This project will advance science while promoting teaching, training and
learning. One of the most significant broader impacts for its citizen science
activities is enabling a community of hundreds of thousands of volunteers to
participate in research, a powerful and rapidly developing form of informal
science education. By choosing the relatively generic topic of image
classification, beginning with astronomy but not limited to that field of
science, the techniques developed under this grant will be of significant value
to future investigations in similar research areas, thus enhancing the
infrastructure for research and education.