* 1211005
* The Undergraduate ALFALFA Team
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Rebecca Koopmann, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Linda French
* 08/31/2017
* USD 437,883.00

The Undergraduate ALFALFA Team (UAT), a consortium of 19 undergraduate-focused
institutions from across the United States, is conducting a multi-faceted
program of student training, faculty development, and public outreach that is
integrated into the Arecibo Legacy Fast ALFA (where ALFA refers to the Arecibo
L-band Feed Array detector) collaboration. ALFALFA surveys the local Universe
for neutral hydrogen (HI) sources external to the Milky Way using the seven-beam
ALFA receiver on the Arecibo Observatory radio telescope. It has detected more
than 20,000 galaxies, resulting in a wide range of scientific applications. UAT
students and faculty participate through several program components:

(1) The Annual UAT Workshop at Arecibo Observatory communicates ALFALFA and HI
science via lectures, observing sessions, and group work led by team faculty,
graduate and advanced undergraduate students, and Arecibo Observatory staff. (2)
Observing at Arecibo provides students and faculty with hands-on experience at a
world-class national facility. (3) Computer infrastructure ensures the success
of researchers at smaller schools. (4) Intellectually engaging research projects
are supported via a summer research program, academic year advising by faculty
mentors, and travel to meetings to present results. (5) Collaborative research
projects in coordination with the ALFALFA PIs provide students and faculty with
transformative research experiences while demonstrating the modern collaborative
model of scientific interactions.

Through the UAT program, students and faculty mentors at a diverse set of
universities, both public and private, participate directly and collaboratively
in observations at a major national observatory and analyze survey data to
contribute to the science goals of a legacy survey. The direct participation of
undergraduate students in research projects enhances their education and
intellectual development. The collaborative nature of the program, supported by
appropriate computer infrastructure and communication media, enables students
and faculty to participate effectively in data analysis and remote observing.
The program builds connections between staff at Arecibo Observatory and faculty
and students at the participating US institutions. The project develops publicly
available materials that enhance the undergraduate astronomy curriculum for both
science and non-science majors.