* 1211691
* Analysis and stability of dynamical system models over networks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Matthew Macauley, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2014
* USD 85,027.00

Discrete models are popular in a wide variety of scientific applications, such
as gene-regulatory networks, epidemics over social contact graphs, algorithms
for gene function inference, and many numerical methods. The framework of graph
dynamical systems (GDSs) naturally captures many parallel and sequential,
iterative models and algorithms in a mathematically precise way that is amenable
to rigorous analysis. The underlying theme of this proposal is the further
development of a theoretical framework and body of mathematical results of these
time-discrete dynamical systems over networks. The mathematics should be of
interest in its own right, yet help advance applications involving discrete
models and iterative computational algorithms. It will allow for better insight
into validation aspects and general properties of algorithms from computational
systems biology, which should lead to the construction of improved models and
algorithms in this field and beyond. With the current developments in scientific
computing and applications, this non-traditional area of applied mathematics is
in a keen need of further advances. Moreover, the analysis and the results
constitute natural underpinnings for the theory of stochastic GDSs, a construct
of great interest to many application areas that is gaining popularity. The
time-discrete dynamical systems over networks that the investigator studies
arise in systems biology and scientific computing from gene networks, to data
mining, to epidemiology. Not only are these systems popular as models, but many
algorithms are built on top of these models. Such algorithms are frequently
poorly understood, and algorithm validation is usually approached by way of
numerical experiments that shed little light on the fundamental analytic
properties of the algorithms. One basic question is how to relate the
constituents of the system (e.g., function type, network structure, update
mechanism) to the resulting dynamics, especially with regard to stability
analysis. In this project, the investigator will primarily focus on two specific
system aspects, function structure and update sequence. This effectively comes
down to two classes of graph dynamical systems in which the investigator has
expertise: (1) Boolean networks (synchronous), and (2) sequential dynamical
systems (asynchronous). For each of these areas, the investigator has a specific
plan for the theory to be developed, as well as a specific application from
computational systems biology in mind. For this first area, the newly introduced
concept of nested canalyzing depth of functions will be studied, and with the
application of reverse engineering gene networks in mind. For the second area,
the dependence on the update sequence and the initial states on the phase space
structure will be studied, with the goal of using this to develop quantitative
stability measures that can be applied to iterative algorithms such as gene
annotative methods.