* 1211986
* CNH:   Exploring Social, Ecological, and Hydrological Regime Shifts in the Logone Floodplain of Cameroon
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Mark Moritz, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,475,000.00

This interdisciplinary research project will focus on the impact of human
activities and climate change on African floodplains. African floodplains are an
excellent example of coupled human-natural systems because they exhibit strong
interactions among multiple social, ecological, and hydrological systems. The
intra-annual and inter-annual variations in the area, depth, and duration of
seasonal flooding have direct and indirect impacts on ecosystems and human lives
and livelihoods. The researchers will develop an integrated computer model that
simulates the dynamic couplings among social, ecological and hydrological
systems of the Logone floodplain in Cameroon. The model will allow them to
simulate the impacts of climate change scenarios and human modifications of the
landscape on the social, ecological, and hydrological systems. Fishermen in the
Logone floodplain have been modifying the floodplain's hydrology by constructing
thousands of individually owned fish canals. The cumulative effect of these
canals may equal the impact of large-scale dams. The devastating impact of
large-scale dams on African floodplains has been well documented, but what is
less clear is how smaller, slower changes like the fish canals may result in
regime shifts that have equally disastrous consequences. If the floodplain is
characterized by critical transitions, the gradual increase in fish canals may
result in a sudden and catastrophic transition equivalent to the impact of
large-scale dams. The integrated computer model will enable researchers to
examine the nature of the regime shift. The project brings together a team of
researchers from a broad range of disciplines and will use a transdisciplinary
approach to investigate coupled human and natural systems using a combination of
field research, remote sensing analysis, and modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will contribute to the sustainable management of African floodplains,
which are of enormous ecological and economic importance, by developing an
integrated computer model that will permit stakeholders to evaluate the impact
of different human activities and climate change scenarios. The project will
educate and train graduate and undergraduate students at the Ohio State
University and at Maroua University in Cameroon in quantitative and qualitative,
transdisciplinary approaches to the study and management of coupled human and
natural systems. This project is supported by the NSF Dynamics of Coupled
Natural and Human Systems (CNH) Program and the NSF Office of International
Science and Engineering.