* 1211172
* Synthesis of Vortex Rossby Wave Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2012,10/31/2016
* Hugh Willoughby, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 10/31/2016
* USD 185,875.00

Vortex Rossby Waves (VRWs) are intriguing physical phenomena whose significant
role in Tropical Cyclone (TC) dynamics has gained wide acceptance. The earliest
analyses hypothesized inward eddy fluxes of angular momentum carried by trailing
spiral VRWs that propagate upstream relative to the TC's mean swirling flow.
Development of the Asymmetric Balance theory set the stage for analysis of VRWs
in a range of physical contexts. A key concept was axisymmetrization, in which
the vorticity-conserving waves become increasingly filamented in a radially
shearing mean flow and surrender their energy to the basic state. Increasingly
realistic simulations of initially balanced Potential Vorticity (PV)
perturbations support this idea; although unbalanced thermal perturbations are
much less effective.

Intellectual Merit:

The VRW literature is, for the most part, conceptually difficult, even arcane,
and reaching the frontier of knowledge is challenging. This project will support
recasting much of the analysis in terms of numerical solutions in which the
dynamic variables are Fourier transformed in azimuth and time with their radial
(and often vertical) structure is computed using a tridiagonal solver. In this
formulation, each Fourier component has fixed circumferential wavenumber and
apparent frequency relative to the ground. Propagating VRW solutions are
confined to an annular waveguide encompassing radii where the waves' Doppler
shifted frequency lies between the Rossby wave cutoff frequency and zero.

This approach is much simpler conceptually than piecewise continuous or WKB
analytical solutions. Intermittently forced asymmetric VRW wavetrains are
simulated by representing the forcing with a Fourier series in time.
Paradoxically, the largest eddy angular momentum convergence in these
calculations spans the locus of forcing even though most of the wave
filamentation occurs near the Rossby wave critical radius tens of kilometers
outside the eye. In general agreement with previous work, the simulated waves
have inward and upstream phase propagation, but outward group propagation and
inward eddy fluxes of angular momentum. This approach will be extended to
baratropically unstable profiles and resonant instability of coupled VRWs and
gravity waves. It will also be used to address the unresolved roles of standing
VRWs and wave-wave interactions in idealized vortex motion studies.

Broader Impacts:

The project is designed to advance the science by reexamination and deepening
understanding of the properties of vortex Rossby waves in the context of the
numerical solutions and by making idealized simulations widely accessible. The
new insights into convectively forced VRWs are an example. Extending this
approach to unstable profiles, instability coupled with resonant gravity waves,
and vortex motion promises to further elucidate these phenomena. Each of the
studies is a manageable thesis topic for Florida International University
graduate students. The conceptual simplicity of the numerical solutions will
facilitate interpretation in terms of VRW concepts. All of the simulations will
be coded as well documented MATLAB m-files and posted on the web with
appropriate supporting documentation. Key outcomes will be publication journal
articles, many with student first authors, and of an accessible review article
as the project nears completion.