* 1211064
* SoCS: Achieving the Interpersonal Function of Affect in Human-Machine Collaboration
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2012,01/31/2017
* Peter Carnevale, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 01/31/2017
* USD 700,000.00

Displays of anger or joy can profoundly shape the behavior of those around us.
This project brings a functionalist perspective to the study of such influences
on human decision-making. Rather than treating affective displays as mere
manifestation of internal experience, they can be viewed as strategic other-
directed signals that facilitate social goals, for example by conveying specific
internal beliefs, desires and future intentions. The project explores the theory
of "reverse appraisal" as a framework for explaining and computationally
modeling this social process. Specifically, this theory will be used to unpack
the mechanisms by which affective displays influence outcomes in social dilemmas
and negotiations. This functional analysis also informs the design of human-
computer and computer-mediated collaboration systems. The project uses a
framework based on "virtual confederates" - i.e., anthropomorphic computer
characters - to study social affect. It builds on reverse appraisal's insight
that what matters is the information (function) not the display in itself (form)
and studies how the social functions of affect apply to systems that extend
beyond virtual humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. The project promotes
synergies between social and computational sciences: it contributes to
understanding the psychology of how affective expressions impact people's
decisions in social, economic and daily life; and, it advances the state of
human-computer systems for collaboration in practical domains such as
negotiation, and has implications for designing collaborative computer-mediated
systems. The research results in new tools -- virtual confederates -- or
studying social processes, which will be offered freely to the scientific
community. Finally, the project supports research and mentoring activities for
graduate students and postdoctoral scholars towards a multidisciplinary
specialization in affect and decision making.