* 1211581
* Characterization of Binary and Triple Systems in the Near-Earth, Main Belt, and Trans-Neptunian Populations
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Jean-Luc Margot, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Faith Vilas
* 07/31/2017
* USD 405,379.00

The Principal Investigator (PI) and supported graduate students will conduct a
study to characterize binary and triple systems in the near-Earth object, main-
belt asteroid, and trans-Neptunian object populations, with the goal of
constraining the nature, origin, and evolution of minor planets. The proposing
team will conduct ground-based observations using a variety of observational
techniques, including direct optical imaging, adaptive optics imaging, radar
imaging, and light curve observations. The specific objectives are (1) to
measure the physical properties of minor planets, including masses, sizes, and
densities, which will constrain thermal and mechanical properties as well as
interior structure; (2) to test theories for the formation of binaries and
subsequent evolutionary processes, including tidal evolution, radiative
evolution, collisional evolution, and collisionless interactions mediated by
gravity; and (3) to infer constraints on the compositional and thermal
characteristics of the early Solar System, and on the current distribution of
volatiles. The team anticipates a detailed characterization of several near-
Earth multiples, several main belt multiples, and at least one trans-Neptunian
multiple during the project. The supported graduate students will gain expertise
in observation planning, observing techniques, calibration, analysis,
astrometric measurements, statistical and numerical methods, and scientific
communication. A collaborative research environment (wiki) serving the community
of radar observers will be developed. The team will actively engage in public
outreach with presentations at various events and teacher workshops, and plans
to disseminate exciting results to the public through social media.