* 1211308
* Particle Astrophysics with Neutrinos and Weakly Interacting Dark Matter: Borexino and DarkSide
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Laura Cadonati, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 07/31/2016
* USD 576,000.00

This award provides base support for the particle astrophysics program at the
University of Massachusetts, Amherst to participate in the Borexino solar
neutrino experiment and the DarkSide project for the search of weakly
interacting particle dark matter (WIMPs) in our galaxy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solar neutrinos have played a crucial role in the
experimental confirmation that neutrinos have mass and oscillate. Since data
acquisition started in 2007, Borexino has reached its design goal and measured
the flux of mono-energetic 7-Beryllium solar neutrinos with enough precision to
test the predictions of current solar models. After a scintillator purification
campaign in 2011, Borexino is in a new phase of solar neutrino physics with the
goal of measuring the entire solar neutrino spectrum. A precise knowledge of
solar neutrinos will allow us to understand how the sun and other stars work,
test the MSW-LMA neutrino oscillation paradigm and search for deviations from
it. Borexino will possibly resolve an open question on the metallicity of the
Sun's core, an important piece of information with which to study the evolution
of larger stars in the universe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DarkSide-50, a dual-phase
time projection chamber scheduled to come online in late 2012, will prototype
design solutions for background free multi-tonne detectors with liquid argon as
active target for WIMPs. A null observation would exclude some of the current
leading dark matter candidates. A positive detection would begin to give answers
to one of the big scientific unknowns of our times. DarkSide-50 will run with 50
kg of argon depleted more than 100-fold in the radioactive 39-Argon isotope. The
DarkSide-50 Argon cryostat is surrounded by a compact, liquid scintillator
neutron detector and immersed in the Borexino Counting Test Facility (CTF) water
tank instrumented and operated as a Cherenkov muon veto. The Borexino and
DarkSide collaborations have a significant overlap in personnel and technical
and operational resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The Borexino
and DarkSide projects provide excellent opportunities for the training of
graduate and undergraduate students in applications of software and hardware
development, and fundamental physics. The techniques developed for Borexino and
Darkside-50 can more broadly benefit technology relevant for medical imaging,
nuclear non-proliferation and geology.