* 1211701
* An All-Sky Radio Survey for Millisecond Pulsars, Exotic Binary Systems, and Transients
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Maura McLaughlin, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2017
* USD 468,634.00

This award will support an ambitious high time resolution survey of the entire
sky visible with the Green Bank Telescope. The primary science driver for this
experiment is to discover millisecond pulsars to add to the NANOGrav (North
American Nanohertz Observatory for Gravitational Waves) pulsar timing array for
gravitational wave detection. The survey will also discover exotic binary
systems, transient pulsars, and other classes of transient sources. Roughly 20%
of the sky has already been covered in the first phase of this survey, with 11
new pulsars discovered through processing 5% of these data. Simulations suggest
that the full survey will discover 50?100 millisecond pulsars and about 200
normal pulsars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The direct detection of gravitational waves
is one of the foremost goals of modern physics and may offer unique insights
into galaxy formation, the early stages of the universe, and even cosmic
strings. Finding new, high-precision millisecond pulsars to add to pulsar timing
arrays will facilitate the principal goals of this project. The survey will
likely detect pulsars in exotic binary systems which will provide tests of
general relativity and probe extreme density nuclear physics. The survey will be
sensitive to transient signals that will permit exploration of the full range of
pulsar intermittency and discover completely new astrophysical phenomena.
Furthermore, all of the new pulsars discovered will be useful for improving our
understanding of the properties of the nearby, local pulsar population. With
support from this award, this group will create undergraduate fellowship
programs at West Virginia University and the University of Virginia that will
allow students to participate in survey observations, processing, and follow-up.
These programs are expected to increase retention of students in science and
engineering majors and offer both undergraduate and graduate students peer-
mentoring opportunities.