* 1211156
* Flutter Analysis and Control for Elastic Structure in Axial Air Flow: Applications to Palatal Flutter and Energy Harvesting
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Marianna Shubov, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2016
* USD 184,956.00

The objective of this project is to carry out a detailed analysis of a
mathematical model of an elastic solid structure (a long thin rectangular plate)
interacting with an axial air flow (a flow parallel to the plate?s axis), and
based on the results of this analysis, to investigate the problem of a flutter
control for the structure. The dynamics of the plate is governed by a system of
two coupled hyperbolic partial differential equations known in aeroelasticity as
the Goland model. The airflow, which is a small perturbation of a stream
parallel to the main plate's axis, is assumed to be inviscid, potential,
isentropic, and subsonic. The dynamics of the airflow is governed by the Euler
hydrodynamic equation. Owing to the above physical assumptions, the Euler
equation can be reduced to a single three-dimensional linear hyperbolic equation
for the perturbation potential. This equation is coupled with the system of
structural equations by a set of specific boundary conditions: (a) the flow-
tangency condition, (b) the Kutta-Joukowski condition, and (c) the far-field
condition. The goals of the project include the following: (a) asymptotic,
spectral, and stability analysis of the model, (b) analysis of possible flutter
control mechanisms, (c) generalization of linear model to the model involving
nonlinear structural equations (the Dowell-Hodges model) and investigation of
flutter as limit cycle oscillations. The model has two major practical
applications: (a) flutter of a soft palate (the palatal flutter) resulting in
snoring and sleep apnoea, (b) piezoelectric power harvesting. The project is a
continuation of the PI's 12-year work on asymptotic, spectral, and stability
analysis and on flutter control for aircraft wing
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Examples of solid structures interacting with an
air or fluid flow include: aircraft wings and tails, suspension bridges,
electric power lines, walls of blood vessels and bronchial airways, etc. The
phenomenon that unites all the examples is flutter, i.e., sudden chaotic
vibrations of the structure, which occur when the speed of the air or fluid flow
reaches certain critical value called the utter speed. The project deals with
theoretical analysis of a recently developed mathematical model of an elastic
solid plate in an axial air flow (an air flow parallel to the plate's main
axis). An experimental and computational investigation of the model has already
begun in the scientific community. However, an importance of theoretical
analysis is obvious: it can provide new insights and is necessary for a design
of flutter control mechanisms. The axial flow case is more challenging than a
normal flow case (the flow is perpendicular to the plate?s main axis), which
occurs in all aircraft wing models. One of the two major applications of the
model is medical, which deals with palatal utter: uncontrolled vibrations of a
soft palate resulting in snoring and even sleep apnoae. Currently, treatments
involve surgical procedures and designing anti-snoring devices. The second
application is a newly emerging area of piezoelectric energy harvesting from
utter vibrations. The goal of this research direction is to develop a new
technology for providing alternative sources of electric power and/or recharging
storage devices such as batteries or capacitors. The concept has ecological
ramifications in reducing the chemical waste and potential monetary gains by
significantly reducing maintenance cost.