* 1211179
* Reaction-Diffusion Front Speeds in Chaotic and Stochastic Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Jack Xin, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2017
* USD 419,691.00

Reaction-diffusion front propagation in fluid flows appears in many scientific
areas such as particle transport in convection, turbulent combustion and wild
fire spread in winds. We aim to carry out mathematical analysis and computation
on prototype equations to gain fundamental understanding of the highly
nontrivial effects of flow on transport. Significant amount of asymptotic and
numerical work in this direction has been accomplished in recent years when the
flow lines (streamlines) are either well-structured (regular motion) or fully
random (ergodic motion). The often encountered yet less studied case is when the
streamlines consist of both regular and stochastic motions, while neither one
takes up the entire phase space. An example is the Arnold-Beltrami-Childress
(ABC) flow, a class of three dimensional incompressible mean zero periodic flow
with chaotic flow lines. The research program is to study large time front
speeds of reaction-diffusion-advection and Hamilton-Jacobi equations in various
ABC flows with chaotic and stochastic streamlines in channel domains orin the
entire space. A measure of the amount of disorder in the streamlines is given by
the phase space volume occupied by the points on the Poincare sections. The
project combines analytical and computational approaches to study the dependence
of front speeds on the degree of chaos, nonlinearities, and correlation with
effective diffusion, a related transport property. Front speed variational
formulas and corrector equations are used to reduce the original nonlinear
dynamical problems on unbounded spatial domains to a principal eigenvalue or
Lyapunov exponent (growth rate) problem on a finite spatial domain. Related
educational activities, postdoc mentoring, and data management are also
planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carrying out the proposed work will advance our
understanding of material transport in disordered flows arising in nature, and
generate broad impact to the science and engineering of pollutant transport,
forest fire spreading, internal combustion engine with power efficiency and low
waste gas emission to name a few. The mathematical and numerical methods
developed in the project are potentially estimation and consulting tools for
resolving complex real-world problems.They may aid decision makers to act timely
to minimize damage from fire hazards and pollutants, and help manufacturers
improve energy efficiency in engine design for green environment. The results
and data generated in the project will also benefit educators in curriculum
development and course offerings, which in turn stimulates more US students to
pursue higher degrees in science, technological, engineering and mathematical
disciplines.