* 1211256
* Topics in stochastic processes and mathematical finance: counterparty risk valuation and hedging, Markov consistency and Markov copulae, and dynamic performance assessment indices
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Tomasz Bielecki, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2015
* USD 344,306.00

Bielecki&lt;br/&gt;DMS-1211256&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator and his
colleague continue development of new mathematical methods for risk management
in complex stochastic dynamical systems, such as financial markets. They
consider problems in three areas. The first is mathematical modeling for
financial risk management, with application to hedging, valuation, and
management of counterparty credit risk (CCR). Here they develop mathematical
tools for evaluating and managing counterparty risk embedded in a large variety
of over-the-counter contracts. The valuation and hedging of CCR in credit
default swaps and interest rate swaps, which are essential for the financial
industry, are studied and new analytical tools are developed for this purpose.
The second area involves applications of stochastic analysis to investigation of
dependence between Feller-Markov processes. The investigators study dynamic
"copula" problems with regard to Markov processes: given N one-dimensional
Markov processes, construct a multivariate Markov process such that each
component is also Markovian in its own filtration, and such that its law agrees
with the law of the original Markov process. The third area deals with
mathematical modeling of dynamic performance assessment indices with
applications to conic finance. New applications of convex analysis, probability,
and L0-module theory are developed to study dynamic Performance Assessment
Indices. Dynamic performance assessment indices are measures of performances of
a given activity in a random environment. They apply this theory to conic
finance for the purpose of computing acceptable bounds for arbitrage-free bid
and ask prices in illiquid markets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigator and
his colleague develop methods to analyze and manage risk in financial markets.
By viewing markets as stochastic systems whose behavior changes in time, they
can bring to bear concepts from dynamical systems, probability, and stochastic
systems. They aim to take into account the provisions of recent legislation,
such as the Dodd-Frank act of 2011, and the provisions of the Basel III
regulations. Outcomes of the project contribute to increasing the efficiency and
competitiveness of financial institutions (both government and private), by
effectively controlling the counterparty risk and, by extension, the systemic
risk in financial markets. The study of dynamic performance measures and
assessment indices in particular provides new tools beyond the classical Value
at Risk or Sharpe Ratio for measuring the risk and performance of a given
financial institution (or portfolio). Results are useful for market
participants, including regulators and government agencies. The project includes
the training of graduate students in stochastic analysis and its application to
financial markets.