* 1211683
* RUI: The Survey of HI in Extremely Low-mass Dwarfs (SHIELD)
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2012,01/31/2017
* John Cannon, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 01/31/2017
* USD 295,659.00

Precisely how galaxies initially form and how they change throughout their
lifetimes are among the least understood problems in astrophysics. Many projects
are centered on unraveling these mysteries. This project aims to characterize
the gaseous and stellar components of extremely low-mass dwarf galaxies, which
is critical for our understanding of the processes by which gas is converted
into stars in shallow gravitational potential wells. The project will conduct a
comprehensive, multi-wavelength survey of 12 extremely low-mass galaxies
selected from the recent ALFALFA (Arecibo Legacy Fast ALFA [Arecibo L-band Feed
Array]) catalogue. The cornerstone of this project's survey is deep atomic
hydrogen (HI) spectral line imaging of all 12 galaxies with the recently
expanded Jansky Very Large Array (JVLA), an NSF-funded facility. A rich suite of
supporting observations with various facilities (including the GALEX satellite,
the Hubble Space Telescope, the Spitzer Space Telescope, the WIYN observatories,
and the Kitt Peak National Observatory) will allow the exploration of multiple
science themes that are critical to our understanding of galaxy
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the principal investigator (PI)
has set out to address the following questions: (1) What properties change
between mini-halos, very low-mass dwarfs, and more massive systems? (2) What
fraction of the mass in low-mass dwarfs is baryonic? (3) Is the character of the
star formation process different in very low-mass
galaxies?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educationally, the PI will engage undergraduate
students in forefront research. This education and training will target three
student populations at Macalester College. The first target population is the
upper-level physics and astronomy major enrolled in the Observational Astronomy
course; these students will obtain a rigorous theoretical background in radio
astronomy techniques and exposure to research-based learning via their
involvement with this project. The second target population is the summer
research associate, typically a rising junior or senior physics and astronomy
major who will work on the data acquired for this project. These 10-week
appointments allow students to obtain a deep immersion in astrophysical research
and prepare them for the challenges of graduate study. The third target
population is the post-baccalaureate research associate. This increasingly
popular career track allows students to spend a year engaged in full-time
research after the completion of their undergraduate studies but prior to
entering graduate school. The "post-bac" attains a unique educational experience
while assuring the forward progress of the science program. Undergraduate
students at all levels will disseminate science results to the community by
presenting at topical meetings and by publishing in the astrophysical
literature.