* 1211968
* CNH-EX: Monsoon Harvests:  Assessing the Impact of Distributed Storage Tanks on the Vulnerability of Subsistence-Level Agriculture in Tamil Nadu, India
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Craig Just, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 08/31/2016
* USD 249,919.00

The overall objective of this project is to better our understanding of the ways
in which rainwater harvesting tanks (ponds) are able to enhance water storage
and increase groundwater recharge in water-scarce agricultural areas of Tamil
Nadu in southern India. The intent is also to enhance our knowledge of the role
that these tank irrigation systems play within the village communities that
depend on them, especially with respect to minimizing social, economic and
environmental vulnerability. To achieve these goals the project team will access
a variety of data sources, obtaining information about climate, land-use, the
number of tanks and their locations, water governance systems, groundwater
depletion, the amount of water contributed by the tanks, and labor markets.
Areas in Tamil Nadu in which tank irrigation systems have declined over the
years will be identified and compared with areas where use of the tanks has
persisted. To understand the water-storage dynamics associated with the tanks,
the project team will place water level sensors in an identified series of tanks
that will provide continuous data regarding water storage throughout the monsoon
and dry seasons. It is hypothesized that the ecological and economic benefits
provided by these tanks, when adequately maintained and with effective community
governance structures, can make these subsistence-level farming communities less
vulnerable to variations in the region's yearly monsoons, especially in the face
of climate change and rapid groundwater depletion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Madurai region of southern Tamil Nadu, India, faces issues of acute water
scarcity, making extensive irrigation systems necessary. As the areas under
cultivation in Tamil Nadu have grown in recent decades, so has the demand for
irrigation water. With this growth, groundwater supplies have become
increasingly depleted. As such, the need for a more sustainable means of
providing irrigation water is now being acknowledged. A promising trend in water
management has been to reassess and revive the use of older, local-scale
irrigation practices that utilize tank systems. These tanks, which are,
essentially, small reservoirs used for local rainwater harvesting, collect water
for both surface water irrigation and groundwater recharge, and have been a
source of irrigation and drinking water in India for thousands of years. The
current project will focus on improving our understanding of the dynamics of
water storage and groundwater recharge associated with these small irrigation
systems, and the importance of the systems to the associated villages. This
project will lead to a better understanding of the ways in which traditional
rainwater harvesting practices can increase access to both drinking and
irrigation water in regions of acute water scarcity. As 800 million people
worldwide live in regions where water scarcity issues are an ongoing problem,
the greater understanding that is gained in India with regard to rainwater
harvesting and groundwater recharge will inevitably have cross-cultural value
and potential application to a range of regions, from sub-Saharan Africa to the
southwestern United States. The research carried out in this project will lay
the groundwork for additional explorations of local-level water management
systems and institutions in a variety of cultural contexts.