* 1211494
* Ship Operations - R/V Langseth
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2012,10/31/2018
* David Goldberg, Columbia University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rose Dufour
* 10/31/2018
* USD 53,885,188.00

Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory is awarded funding to carry out peer-reviewed
NSF scientific sea-going operations on Research Vessel Marcus G. Langseth
(Langseth) for CY 2012. In 2012 the R/V Langseth has six science programs
planned, encompassing the 195 scheduled operating days. All six NSF science
projects will require a seismic capability. One program is a combination of
seismic and piston/multi-coring, which will be a first for the Langseth. This is
a five-year cooperative agreement, and funding for each year of the agreement
will be negotiated and is dependent on the number of days at sea in support of
NSF-funded research. R/V Langseth operates as a UNOLS ship, adhering to the
UNOLS safety standards and NSF inspections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Merit &lt;br/&gt;The Langseth provides the U.S. academic community an improved
multi-channel seismic (MCS) capability. The ship is able to deploy multiple
hydrophone arrays and linear sound source air gun arrays, which improve the
quality and reliability of data acquisition. This unique imaging capability
enables scientists to tackle a wide range of marine earth science problems.
Along with this special capability we are seeking to develop an enhanced
general-purpose capacity, which can be used to conduct research in support of
various marine science disciplines in locations around the world. &lt;br/&gt;The
unique capabilities of the Langseth improve the efficiency, quality and
reliability of multichannel seismic data acquisition for the US academic
community, enabling the widest range of problems in marine earth sciences to be
tackled with substantially improved imaging capability. Although the seismic
capability of this vessel is the primary focus for scientific programs
investigating the deep earths structure, general oceanographic and marine mammal
investigations in little-explored parts of the earth will provide an insight
into local and global environmental conditions affecting earths climate and the
living resources of the sea. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;The Langseth, in common with the other ships in the UNOLS Fleet, is
more than just an instrument for the collection of scientific data. It is a
learning tool, a university educational facility that allows young earth
scientists to learn the hands-on aspects of their trade. The 2012 Ship
Operations program provides an opportunity to collect new, higher resolution
data in unexplored areas, which will add significantly to our understanding of
fundamental problems in the earth and ocean sciences, including climate change
and natural hazards, such as earthquakes and tsunamis. Outreach efforts include
ship tours and community outreach through L-DEO sponsored activities that
feature the Langseth.