* 1211675
* RUI: Investigating Central Configurations in the N-Body and N-Vortex Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Gareth Roberts, College of the Holy Cross
* Standard Grant
* Lora Billings
* 06/30/2016
* USD 137,234.00

The goal of this project is to further develop the study of central
configurations, an important and active sub-field of celestial mechanics. A
central configuration is a special set of positions where the force on each body
due to gravity points in the opposite direction of that body's position vector
(with respect to the center of mass). Finding a central configuration involves
solving a complicated system of nonlinear algebraic equations. Central
configurations are important since they lead to families of homographic and
homothetic solutions in both the N-body and N-vortex problems. Specific aims of
the project include classifying five-body co-circular central configurations,
studying relative equilibria in the four and five-vortex problems, using
symmetry to simplify the study of central configurations for special choices of
the masses, analyzing the linear stability of the corresponding relative
equilibria, and describing certain symmetric families of solutions. These topics
will be explored using a combination of analysis and modern and computational
algebraic geometry.

The N-body problem concerns the motion of celestial bodies (stars, planets,
asteroids, even spaceships) interacting under their mutual gravitational
attraction. Although inherently a mathematical discipline, applications to
astronomy and spacecraft transport are plentiful. For example, the recent
astronomical discovery of an asteroid at a ``Trojan point'' in the Earth-Sun
system came centuries after the mathematical work of Lagrange on three-body
central configurations. The N-vortex problem is a widely used model for
understanding vorticity evolution in fluid dynamics. Some of the most important
types of solutions in these problems are periodic in nature, returning to their
initial configuration after some fixed amount of time. Among this class of
solutions are simple, rigidly rotating orbits, known as relative equilibria,
where the size and shape of the configuration is unchanged throughout the
motion. Locating a relative equilibrium requires first finding a central
configuration. Analyzing the structure and stability of relative equilibria
leads to a greater understanding of the complexities in the full problem. In
celestial mechanics this study is useful for plotting spacecraft trajectories
and for discovering inexpensive methods of exploring space. In addition,
locating stable solutions provides key information about the orbits astronomers
and other researchers expect to see in the universe. An important priority of
the project is to mentor, support and collaborate with undergraduate researchers
interested in the field.