* 1211087
* Particle Packing Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,10/31/2016
* Salvatore Torquato, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 10/31/2016
* USD 303,000.00

This award will support work on fundamental aspects of particle packing
problems. There are many open questions that will be pursued. Can sphere
packings with a diversity of density and disorder be identified in d-dimensional
Euclidean space? What are the densest packings of spheres in dimension greater
than three? What are the densest packings of nonspherical objects in two and
three dimensions? Can random packings ever fill space more densely than ordered
packings (implying disordered or ``glassy" ground states)? For non-tiling
nonspherical particles, can an upper bound on the maximal density be derived
that is always strictly less than unity? Specifically, the following seven
general areas will be explored: (1) jammed sphere packings with anomalously low
densities; (2) identification of growing length scales in the approach to the
glass transition; (3) dense spheres packings in three-dimensional space with a
size distribution; (4) jammed disordered polyhedron packings; (5) maximally
dense packings of nonspherical particles; (6) maximally dense sphere packings in
high dimensions; and (7) studies of jamming on the unit sphere in various space
dimensions. Among other activities, this award will be used to support the
research of graduate students seeking their Ph.D.
degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Packing problems, such as how densely solid
objects fill space, have fascinated people since the dawn of civilization, and
continue to intrigue scientists because of their connection to a host of
problems that arise in the physical sciences, mathematics, engineering and
biology. While optimal packing problems are intimately related to solid states
of condensed matter, disordered sphere packings have been employed to model the
glassy state of matter and granular media. Dense packings of nonspherical
particles in low dimensions are relevant to problems in materials science and
biology. Sphere packings in high dimensions is of importance in communications
theory. Pure mathematicians have a longstanding interest in packing problems.
This is a multidisciplinary project that links the applied mathematics,
statistical and condensed-matter physics, materials science, engineering,
biology, communications, and pure mathematics communities. Important scientific
advances and practical outcomes that could potentially emerge from the proposed
research include a deeper understanding of the nature of low-temperature states
of matter (e.g., crystal ground states, the glass transition and the mysterious
occurrence of disordered ground states), granular media, mechanically stable
low-weight network solids, identification of new alloy crystal structures and
new high-pressure phases of matter, and insights concerning the manner in which
biological cells or organelles pack.