* 1211896
* Mathematical Problems at the Interface between Materials Science and Biology: Polyelectrolyte gels, Devices and Physiological Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Maria-Carme Calderer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2016
* USD 389,766.00

This award will support interdisciplinary research in mathematics, condensed
matter physics, continuum mechanics and biology. A main theme of the work is the
study of forces in living systems. The PI will take the point of view of
materials science, and analyze, first, semi-flexible, biopolymer systems. These
are anisotropic polyelectrolyte gels and consist of directionally biased and
electrically charged elastic networks holding fluid with ions. The project
starts out woith the question how the combined elastic anisotropy (modeled as in
the case of liquid crystal elastomers), electrostatic and short range Van-der-
Waals interactions may explain phenomena such as the negative Poynting effect in
semi-flexible polymers. The next stage of the research consists in modeling the
interstitial tissue. This is a polyelectrolyte gel sustaining large, rod-like
protein structures that make the network anisotropic. One main goal is the
modeling of edema, in order to explain the large forces that confine the excess
fluid in the interstitial tissue of patients. The mathematical problems are
formulated as systems of partial differential equations stemming from mixture
theory. Specifically, these consist of the time-dependent equations of liquid
crystal elastomers coupled with Stokes problems for fluids, and with the Nernst-
Planck equations for ions. The new research will partially follow previous work
on isotropic polyelectrolyte gels by the PI and coauthors, but new mathematical
and modeling tools have to be developed. These new tools will also be applied to
modeling the dynamics of cancer cells on fiber tissue. The research will be
collaborative, involving the PI and faculty members from mathematics, physics,
bioscience and engineering, as well as industrial partners, together with
postdocs and graduate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will support research aimed at the study of forces that hold living
structures together. The PI will focus on modeling interstitial tissue that
connects organs, vessels and bone. In particular, the research will try to
understand the physical principles underlying the trapping of unusually large
amounts of liquid in the interstitial tissue, a condition known as edema. The
work, jointly carried out with researchers at the Kidney Institute of the
Medical School of the University of Minnesota and with a Minneapolis biosciences
company, may help motivate the search for new therapies. These models will also
support research on cancer cell dynamics, with the goal of modeling
biomechanical aspects of the onset of tumor nucleation. The award will support
collaborative research involving faculty members from mathematics, physics,
bioscience and engineering, together with undergraduate students (math, physics
and biosciences), postdocs and graduate students.