* 1211797
* CNH:   Urban Disamenities and Pests:   Coupled Dynamics of Urban Mosquito Ecology and Human Systems Across Socioeconomically Diverse Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Rebecca Jordan, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,429,437.00

This project will test whether urban social and economic decay and urban
infestations of mosquitoes feedback upon one another and, if so, how to break
this vicious cycle. Research in Baltimore, Maryland, will examine whether
features of urban decay such as population decline, abandoned lots, and
unmanaged refuse promote mosquito production and whether this in turn
discourages care for and use of the outdoor environment by residents and
exacerbates urban decay. Comprehensive sampling in three focal neighborhoods
will quantify the association between the abundances of mosquitoes and the
physical and socio-economic status of neighborhoods, and how mosquito exposure
influences resident support for and participation in outdoor activities and
urban revitalization. Experiments will identify activities that best support and
motivate resident-led strategies to control mosquitoes. Specifically,
researchers will: 1) assess the quality and quantity of positive and negative
social and environmental features in each neighborhood ; 2) quantify mosquito
abundance and identify mechanisms that facilitate winter survival; 3) measure
resident knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors associated with controlling
mosquito breeding habitat and personal exposure; and 4) test the efficacy of
education and active citizen-science interventions in changing mosquito control
behaviors of residents and their perceptions about neighborhood greening
projects. Results will increase understanding of coupled human and pest dynamics
in an urban context and provide fundamental information for translating
ecological theory in urban ecosystems and developing socio-ecological theory for
sustainable advances in urban greening and public health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coupled human-mosquito dynamics are an important model for
developing new socio-ecological theory on human-pest interactions, improving
urban quality of life, and engaging broader community participation in
neighborhood revitalization. Despite over a century of organized and often
sophisticated efforts to control mosquitoes, nuisance complaints persist and
mosquito-borne diseases are a persistent and growing concern in urban
communities across the globe. The need for personal responsibility in managing
urban pests at the scale of individual parcels is increasingly viewed as the
better route to mosquito control in urban and suburban settings. This work
investigates this socio-ecological system, integrating expertise and theory from
community ecology, geography, education, and environmental justice. The research
is designed to include community leaders and residents at all stages of data
collection, interpretation, and dissemination, as well as in brainstorming
remediation strategies. The project will train graduate and undergraduate
students, including members of under-represented groups, use social media to
recruit and involve citizen scientists and community members, and partner with
city and state agencies and a community-based foundation.