* 1211284
* PIF: Quantum Monte Carlo Methods for Non-Equilibrium Dynamics of Interacting Quantum Many-Body Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,10/31/2015
* Anders Sandvik, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 10/31/2015
* USD 345,000.00

In this project, novel computational and theoretical approaches to the dynamics
of quantum many-body systems are investigated. The central idea is that quantum
quenches using essentially arbitrary evolution protocols in imaginary time can
be carried out numerically using modified versions of existing quantum Monte
Carlo (QMC) algorithms. We develop two algorithms: (i) In non-equilibrium QMC
(NEQMC) simulations, the final state of a system after a Hamiltonian evolution
in imaginary time is computed. (ii) In the quasi-adiabatic QMC (QAQMC) method,
expectation values along a full time-path are obtained simultaneously, using a
product of a large number of evolving Hamiltonians (instead of the standard
exponential time evolution operator). Key to the utility of these approaches are
theoretical insights into how the imaginary-time information is related to real-
times dynamics. Specifically, scaling behaviors as a function of a quench
velocity (or a generalized velocity in the case of nonlinear protocols) in the
neighborhood of a quantum-critical point are investigated. Susceptibilities
characterizing non-equilibrium dynamics are also obtained, including the
geometric tensor characterizing the state space. These theoretical ideas are
developed in parallel with the QMC algorithms. Several applications to test the
methods and demonstrate their uses are considered, including quantum phase
transitions in transverse-field Ising models and Heisenberg-type spin models, as
well as quantum spin glasses and other disordered systems. Quantum annealing
protocols of interest in the context of quantum computations and other
applications of adiabatic or quasi-adiabatic evolution of quantum systems are
also investigated. In addition, some of the ideas developed within the context
of quantum systems are also applied to classical many-body dynamics, e.g., to
obtain improved ways of computing the dynamic critical
exponent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the greatest challenges of contemporary
theoretical physics is how to compute (predict) the dynamical evolution of
systems of a large (macroscopic) number of interacting microscopical particles.
Examples of such systems include the electrons in a solid or confined "clouds"
of atoms cooled to ultra-cold temperature. These particles obey the laws of
quantum mechanics, which makes computations of their behaviors extremely
difficult, especially as regards their evolution in time (quantum dynamics).
Even with today's supercomputers, there are no generally applicable numerical
algorithms useful for solving this class of problems within reasonable time (the
computation time typically scaling exponentially with the number of particles in
the system). This project is centered around an idea to partially circumvent
these problems for some classes of important quantum systems. Using a
mathematical trick of "rotating" the time dimension in the complex plane to the
imaginary-time axis, certain well known simulation algorithms for quantum
systems in equilibrium can be modified to solve the evolution as a function of
imaginary time. In parallel with the development of these computational tools,
related theoretical work is conducted in order to obtain precise relationships
between real and imaginary time dynamics. The systems under investigation are of
interest, e.g., in the fields of quantum magnetism (magnetism at the electronic
scale) and ultra-cold atoms, and it can be expected that the results can have
impact also broadly beyond these systems (as the quantum dynamics problem is of
very general interest in physics), e.g., in quantum computation (currently
researched computers based on quantum-mechanical principles). The graduate
students involved in the project receive training in cutting-edge scientific
computation and theoretical physics.