* 1211067
* Research in High Energy Physics on the CMS Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Neeti Parashar, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 05/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

The objectives of Purdue University Calumet's high energy physics program are to
maintain its active participation in the Forward Pixel Detector subsystem for
CMS and to continue its activities in important physics tasks undertaken by the
group at the LHC Physics Center (LPC) at Fermilab. The program of effort
includes coordination of the Forward Pixel detector operation and the
establishment of stable mode data-taking and tracker validation for this
subsystem at 8TeV beam energy at the CERN Large Hadron Collider, using the
Remote Operations Center (ROC) also located at Fermilab. In parallel with this
operations effort, the group, as part of the upgrade effort, will continue to
develop the forward pixel geometry for the CMS Forward Pixel Upgrade and, as the
details are finalized, will incorporate the new geometry into the framework of
CMS tracking software. In the area of physics analysis, the group is working on
essential aspects of simulation studies in the b-tagging group at LPC and CMS,
and on physics analyses in W decays and W production.

The Group has a very strong commitment to undergraduate education and research,
and the campus is strategically located in northwest Indiana, thereby impacting
a broad range of students, particularly from underserved communities. The
Principal investigator serves as outreach coordinator for the Purdue University
Calumet Physics Department. Hers is the largest research group in the Department
and, correspondingly, has the largest number of students working on research
projects. Additionally the group has built strong connections with teachers in
northwest Indiana region and is in the process of starting at QuarkNet Center.