* 1211047
* SoCS: Towards Micro-Volunteerism: From Citizen Sensor to Citizen Participant
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Eric Paulos, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2016
* USD 750,000.00

This project will design new models of social participation and volunteerism
through mobile device platforms, with a focus on citizen science. Micro-
volunteerism is a newly emerging design territory for volunteering on the order
of seconds or minutes. This research will develop a flexible new framework for
citizen science based mobile tools to study this novel and largely unexplored
social model of citizen participation and volunteerism. Through a series of
research studies and design interventions, it will explore challenges and
opportunities for leveraging this crowd sourced just-in-time volunteering social
participation framework.

These efforts contribute toward a series of open research themes in the field of
citizen science such as: a subscription based model for campaigns, flexible
sensor and data collection techniques that adapt to context, diverse sensing
strategies, models for participatory sensing and participatory analysis, and
citizen data debate mechanisms. Also studied will be the effect of novel
contribution models, badges and rewards, narrative and storytelling, and other
methods for improving participation, contribution, motivation, and usage. The
research is designed to allow citizens to easily develop and deploy citizen
science based mobile collaborative campaigns, often leveraging low-cost sensing
and ubiquitous technologies to facilitate real, positive environmental change.

The everyday world can become a living laboratory where citizens play a new and
active role in facilitating scientific research aimed at exposing the dynamic
interactions between people and the natural ecosystems and improving overall
human health and well being. This research departs from typical sampling and
collection techniques, and hypothesizes that while traditional scientific
methods and models play a vital role in understanding the complex dynamics of
our world, everyday non-expert citizens with sensor equipped mobile phones have
the potential to expand the model of how scientific research is conducted. This
approach also stands counter to traditional "smart computing" strategies, and
instead develops a vocabulary of technologies and experiences to promote human
curiosity that serves to scaffold individuals and communities towards a new
understanding of our world. Citizen science is also positioned to synergize a
new cooperative and collaborative approach to problem solving across a variety
of expert practitioners such as computer scientists, engineers, social
scientists, atmospheric chemists, environmental health organizations, urban
planners, local and national governments. Successful citizen science projects
can achieve positive societal change and produce a more participatory and
transparent democracy with improved public understanding of our environment and
urban ecology.