* 1211330
* Inverse Problems for Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2021
* Michael Vogelius, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2021
* USD 557,106.00

The proposed work has four major goals. (1) The first goal is to further advance
the work concerning cloaking-by-mapping. Particular emphasis will be placed on
the physical relevance of the proposed meta-materials (used for the cloak), and
on the potential for improvement in the relative cloaking rates of the
approximate schemes. In the context of physical relevance, the goal is to study
meta- materials that satify the socalled Kramers-Kronig relations (which
naturally emerge from causality considerations). Initially these studies will
focus on materials, which are governed by the socalled Drude-Lorentz model. It
is also planned to perform a careful study of the similarities between the
technique of perfectly matched layers (PML) and cloaking-by-mapping. (2) The
second goal is to better estimate the presence of inhomogeneities, in particular
their volume fraction, from the response to multiple boundary loads. The aim is
to extend earlier low volume fraction results, obtained for small number of
boundary measurements (n measurements in n dimensions). (3) The third goal is to
study the uniqueness and stability of an inverse problem, in which one seeks to
identify a (nonlinear) current flux from a single (Neumann) boundary
measurement. The associated boundary value problem is motivated by the equations
of magnetohydrodynamic equilibria. (4) The fourth and final goal is to study
static and dynamic problems associated with corrosion and oxidation modelling.
These studies will range from the construction of explicit solutions, to the
study of boundary blow-up, and criteria for finite time blow-up vs. existence
for all time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are significant
possibilities for broader impact. In the area of "cloaking-by-mapping", the kind
of results, one can expect to obtain, will be extremely useful in determining
the degree of "near invisibility" that is in practice achievable, given
(physically relevant) limitations on the meta-materials, used to construct the
cloaks. One can well imagine an interplay between the type of results expected,
and the actual physical construction of approximate invisibility cloaks. The
work on the estimation/detection of small inhomogeneities has already led to the
development of algorithms of use in flaw detection and medical imaging. The
improved bounds, for volume fractions, will have similar potential applications.
While the studies of the identifiability of the electric flux in the context of
magnetohydrodynamics will be mostly theoretical, it is clear that the study of
stability properties, and of the benefits of using additional line-integral
measurements, could have very practical applications in terms of the control of
plasmas in Tokamak devices.