* 1211476
* An experimental approach to the prediction of complete millimeter/submillimeter spectra at astrophysical temperatures: applications to confusion limited astrophysical observations
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Frank De Lucia, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2017
* USD 588,540.00

Dr. de Lucia and his team address the problem of the large incompleteness of
millimeter and submillimeter (mm/submm) astrophysical catalogs. Theoretical work
and laboratory spectra are needed to make optimal analysis of the data from ALMA
and other mm/submm observatories. The work here aims to complete the
spectroscopic survey of 8 "weed" molecules in the ALMA early science bands and
to develop a database that will reduce the number of unidentifiable lines in
astronomical spectral surveys. It is a continuation of previous work that is
based on analyses of about 1000 intensity calibrated mm/submm spectra taken over
a range of temperatures for each molecule. The accuracy of the results is
validated by studying eight major interstellar weeds. The previous results
revealed the incompleteness is the astrophysical data base and the researchers
provided theoretical explanations to show the incompleteness as a function of
source temperature. The objectives of this work are to develop a new approach
for the characterization of mm/submm molecular spectra. Characterization of the
complete spectra is done through analysis of the measured temperature dependence
of intensities, together with quantum mechanical analyses for subsets of the
spectra used for reference. Including the intensity calibration of complete
spectra will substantially improve spectral catalogs and help to address the
astrophysical "weed and clutter" problems in millimeter and submillimeter
spectroscopy. As part of this project, graduate students are trained in
experimental millimeter and submillimeter spectroscopy, and in developing
methods for archiving and disseminating the results.