* 1211853
* Interpretation of Galactic Chemical Evolution Surveys
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* David Weinberg, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2017
* USD 261,437.00

Dr. Weinberg and his team develop and apply modeling methods to interpret
measurements of radial velocities and multi-element chemical abundances from
large spectroscopic surveys of tens or hundreds of thousands of stars. Such
studies are necessary to improve our understanding of the physical processes in
galaxy formation and galactic chemical evolution. The primary focus for near-
term applications is to use data from the Apache Point Observatory Galactic
Evolution Experiment (APOGEE) survey, which is a follow-up survey of the Sloan
Digital Sky Survey (SDSS-III). This survey will measure precise radial
velocities and multi-element chemistry (about 15 elements per star) for about
100,000 red giant stars in all regions of the Milky Way. Other target data sets
include the Sloan Extension for Galactic Understanding and Exploration survey
(SEGUE, another follow up survey to SDSS), and the Radial Velocity Experiment
(RAVE) survey of the solar neighborhood, but also data from other large surveys
planned in the future .The research employs three complementary modeling
approaches: Analytic chemical evolution models that incorporate radial mixing
and dynamical processes, N-body/hydrodynamic simulations that model growth of a
galaxy disk either in isolation or in the presence of accreting satellite
galaxies, and simulations of galactic disk formation from fully cosmological
initial conditions. The growing disk simulations use the Gasoline code, which is
also used in the cosmological runs, but gas is added to the disk as a prescribed
function of radius and time. This approach provides controlled simulations that
can isolate the effects of specific physical processes, and realize distinct
scenarios that can be used to distinguish processes such as galactic bulge
formation by secular evolution versus formation through minor mergers. The
investigators will develop and apply the technique of Principal Component
Abundance Analysis (PCAA) to characterize any correlated variations of elemental
abundances in large stellar data sets. The PCAA tool will be a valuable tool for
understanding systematic effects and statistical errors in the APOGEE chemical
abundance data and for characterizing its multi-dimensional measurements in
compact form. This and other tools are likely to increase the impact of the
SDSS-III data sets. For example, by applying these tools to the interpretation
of APOGEE and other data sets, the investigators can address questions about the
origin of the Galactic thick disk, bulge, and stellar halo, and the history of
chemical enrichment and migration of stars within the thin disk. The PCAA and
data-model comparisons are used to analyze the distribution of stellar chemical
compositions as a function of metallicity and spatial location, and to
characterize the level of chemo-dynamical substructure in different components
of the Galaxy. This can constrain the importance of satellite perturbations and
mergers, and by identifying the principal patterns of enrichment and rare
outliers from these patterns, one can gain insights insight into the key
pathways of stellar nucleosynthesis. Graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers are involved in this project and will be trained in developing and
applying theory, observation, and statistical analysis tools to problems in
Galaxy formation and evolution.