* 1211844
* Malt 90: A Molecular Multi-Line Survey of High-Mass Star-Forming Cores
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* James Jackson, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2015
* USD 499,270.00

Dr. Jackson and his team work on the US portion of the Millimeter Astronomy
Legacy Team 90 GHz Survey (MALT90). MALT90 is a large systematic molecular line
survey of dense cores and exploits the capability of the ATNF Mopra 22 m
telescope for fast mapping and simultaneous imaging of 16 molecular lines near
90 GHz. This large, international project surveys molecular line emission from
thousands of dense molecular cores which were also identified by the ATLASGAL
870-micron dust continuum survey. These molecular lines probe the physical,
chemical, and evolutionary state in dense molecular cloud cores, which represent
the early stages in the formation of high-mass stars. The target cores span the
complete evolutionary ranges from pre-stellar cores, to protostellar cores, and
on to H II regions. &lt;br/&gt;This work processes and verifies the survey data.
In addition, the PI and his team will determine the kinematic distances and
Galactic distribution of dense cores, which probe the Milky Way's spiral
structure and compare the extragalactic molecular line-infrared luminosity
correlations with those in Galactic cores. Two graduate students will work on
this research as part of their PhD theses. The survey data are available to the
public via the CSIRO ATNF Online Telescope Archive (AOTA). MALT90 will have
broad impact within the community as a valuable resource for dense core studies.
It will provide a huge, important database and will identify dozens of
interesting targets of high-mass star-forming core for follow up observations
with ALMA. &lt;br/&gt;Boston University is building an interdisciplinary team of
astronomers, educators, and journalists to work closely with Lowell Observatory
and Discovery, Inc. A major outreach mission will be Boston University's
participation in the Lowell Navajo-Hopi program, which sends astronomers to 5th
grade classrooms in Navajo-Hopi schools. One aim is to extend this program to
the Boston Arts Academy and other Boston Public Schools. ATNF has an active
public outreach program, and the PI will share program concepts and content
materials between Lowell/Boston University and ATNF/MALT90 to advance public
outreach on an international scale. The program has a strong international
component and produce new scientific synergies between US, Australian, British,
German, French, and Japanese astronomers.