* 1211121
* Conference:  International Travel for Students and Postdocs to attend the 12th Congress of the International Soc. for Dev. and Compar. Immunology, July 9-13, 2012, Fukuoka, Japan
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Louise Rollins-Smith, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Mary Beth Saffo
* 04/30/2013
* USD 15,000.00

The project will support travel for Students and Postdocs to attend the 12th
Congress of the International Society for Developmental and Comparative
Immunology (ISDCI), in Fukuoka, Japan, July 9-13, 2012. Attendance at this
congress will provide a rich learning experience in the field of Developmental
and Comparative Immunology for developing scientists by enabling them to
interact directly with international leaders in the field. The society will
benefit from the influx of new talent and new ideas. Broader impacts include the
following training benefits for students and postdoctoral fellows: 1) the
experience of presenting their data at an international meeting for the first
time; 2) the opportunity to meet and talk to other scientists with common
interests in comparative immunology and the veterinary sciences; 3) the
opportunity to receive feedback on their research from leaders in the field; 4)
the opportunity to meet possible future mentors and collaborators; 5) the
opportunity to experience an important function of the Society and to
participate in this collegial and supportive community of scientists. While much
scientific communication now occurs via electronic media, there is no substitute
for one-on-one interactive communication made possible at an international
meeting of this kind. It will foster future collaborations between young
scientists based in Asia, Europe, Australia, and other parts of the world.