* 1211070
* Traveling and standing waves in liquid-vapor phase transitions and related problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Xiao-Biao Lin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2016
* USD 272,000.00

This proposal studies phase transition waves in liquid aerosols, including one-
dimensional traveling waves and three-dimensional spherically symmetric standing
waves. These waves can be subsonic, supersonic or transonic; the PI aims to
characterize all possible wave patterns, completing a partial list obtained by
Fan, Lin and Wechselberger. The proposal also studies some related problems:
phase transition and chemical reaction waves in porous media, stability of KPP-
type waves in large bounded domains, multi-front wave patterns described by a
concatenation of simple traveling waves, and numerical methods for computing
traveling waves.

The main goal of this proposal is to study the liquid-vapor phase transition in
liquid aerosols, suspensions of fine liquid droplets in a gas, such as the
gasoline-air mixture in the fuel injection nozzle of a combustion engine
cylinder. The PI will investigate evaporation waves in conical nozzles as models
of evaporation of fuel in injection nozzles of gasoline engines. Understanding
the parameter regime for the existence and stability of such waves is important,
and can help achieve a well-mixed fuel and air ratio before ignition, which in
turn will help improve the fuel efficiency of the engine and reduce emission of
carbon monoxide and hydrocarbons into the environment. In addition, the PI will
study some related problems on phase transition that have applications to fuel
cell batteries and oil recovery processes.