* 1211874
* Collaborative Research:  Observations and Theory of the Most Powerful Gravitational Lensing Telescopes
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Ann Zabludoff, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 07/31/2018
* USD 288,186.00

A great mystery of the Universe is how the first stars and galaxies formed.
Astrophysicists can virtually look back in time by examining some of the most
distant galaxies in the Universe, whose light has taken billions of years to
reach Earth. Detailed, careful study of these very distant galaxies is critical
to understanding how the first stars and galaxies formed. Unfortunately, it is
very challenging to identify these galaxies. This project aims to use a new
technique that exploits gravitational lensing by foreground clusters of galaxies
that magnify these distant galaxies, making them easier to
detect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigators' (PIs') new theoretical
framework for analyzing multiple-lensing planes reveals that there are mass
distributions consisting of multiple structures along the line-of-sight and
large integrated masses that produce a many-fold increase in the number of
lensed z &gt; ~7 sources, particularly at the faint end of the galaxy luminosity
function. These beams are effective because they create significant
magnification over a large area, or high etendue. Cosmological simulations
suggest that they are rare but identifiable by choosing lines-of-sight with the
highest integrated luminosities of galaxies that trace the densest structures,
i.e., luminous red galaxies. The PIs have now identified 40 such lines-of-sight
in the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS). Spectroscopy of the first seven confirms
that they are likely the most powerful gravitational lens telescopes in the sky.
This project will use a comprehensive observational and theoretical program to
enable highly efficient ground- and space-based follow-up surveys for lensed z ~
7 to 10 sources. Using galaxy spectroscopy and lensed arc imaging to constrain
each line-of-sight mass distribution, coupled with theoretical modeling to
generate a precise lensing magnification map, the PIs will place the first
limits on the faint end luminosity evolution of the most distant
galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will advance the training of graduate
students at The University of Arizona and Rutgers University by allowing them to
work with senior personnel on forefront observational analyses and theoretical
modeling. Co-PI Zabludoff is involved in The University of Arizona's Women in
Science and Engineering (WISE) chapter, where she discusses her research in
their workshops for teenage girls. She will also talk about astronomy research
and careers with members of the Tohono O'odham Nation and with students in local
schools. Co-PI Keeton is the Faculty Director of the Aresty Research Center for
Undergraduates at Rutgers, a privately-endowed center that supports
approximately 200 student research projects each year. This project will enhance
the infrastructure for research and education via the co-PI's partnership,
advance the teaching of faculty and the training and learning of students,
broaden the dissemination of knowledge through the public release of the lens
modeling software, and may increase the participation of underrepresented women
and Native Americans through outreach.