* 1211877
* CNH-Ex: Ecology, Culture, and Outcomes: Linking Human Perceptions and Socio-Ecological Thresholds for Ecosystem Restoration (ECO-Link)
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2013
* Christopher Anderson, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 02/28/2013
* USD 249,082.00

Effective ecosystem management requires an integrated research approach to
determine the links between human and natural systems. To fill this gap, ECO-
Link is assessing the social and ecological thresholds and feedbacks that
influence efforts to manage the invasive North American beaver and restore
riparian forests in southern South America?s Tierra del Fuego Archipelago. We
hypothesize that a current lack of local participation in ecosystem management
initiatives is influenced by broken incentive structures that do not account for
feedbacks between the underlying beliefs about ecosystem service delivery and
their impacts on social well-being. The thresholds that separate inaction from
action in environmental stewardship can be overcome by explicitly integrating
these underlying beliefs and impacts into to the design of effective incentive
programs. We will use a suite of approaches to test our hypothesis by i)
studying the perceptions and beliefs of nature held by landowners and other
stakeholders, as well as the processes and influences that facilitate or
constrain decision-making and action; ii) examining the potential for incentive
programs to improve participation in ecosystem management; iii) quantifying
associated ecosystem services before and after beaver control and reforestation
efforts; and iv) integrating perceptions, incentives, and ecosystem services
across a large landscape under various land tenures in Chile and
Argentina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Introduced to the Tierra del Fuego Archipelago
in 1946, the North American beaver is responsible for the largest landscape-
level change to these southern Patagonian forests since the retreat of the last
glaciation. The beaver's expansion has caused widespread deforestation and
hydrological changes to entire river ecosystems, and since 2006, Chilean,
Argentine and U.S. institutions have been collaborating to confront the issue.
It is clear, however, that halting the spread of this ecological damage and
restoring watersheds will require a large-scale, integrated management plan
involving private and public landowners. Incentive programs are being considered
to explicitly encourage behavioral changes in private landowners with the goal
of positive environmental outcomes. In Tierra del Fuego, which is shared between
Argentina and Chile, understanding local landowners' perceptions of the links
between invasive species and ecosystem services is critical to designing an
effective program that promotes participation and environmental stewardship
across international institutional boundaries. By focusing on important research
questions at the nexus of ecology, culture, and outcomes of management actions,
ECO-Link is playing an important role in efforts to restore and protect the
southern Patagonian forests of South America?one of the world's most cherished
wilderness areas.