* 1211235
* CNH:  Agroecosystem-Based Climate Resilience Strategies in the Blue Nile Headwaters of Ethiopia
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Belay Simane, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,793,406.00

This project analyzes climate change impacts, adaptation opportunities, and
associated risks for communities of the Blue Nile headwaters (BNH) region in
Ethiopia. Here, climate change is defined to include gradual changes in the
average conditions and evolving patterns of climate variability, such as extreme
events, on the interannual to decadal timescale. Climate change may affect
hydrology, land quality, crop yields and diversity, as well as altering existing
social and economic systems. The project will evaluate all impacts at the level
of the agroecosystem. The agroecosystem is the intersection of a climatic
ecological zone with a set of land management and cropping practices that derive
from geographic, ecologic, economic, and cultural conditions. Adaptation is a
function of internal adaptive capacity, rate of change, potential for informed
investment, and socio-cultural and biophysical constraints. In order to address
coupled adaptation processes in a comprehensive manner, we will generate
probabilistic agroecological scenarios based on patterns of past climate
variability and social response (1980-2010), projected future climate impacts
and response (2010-2040), household-level analysis of adaptation capacity in BNH
communities, and conduct interactive planning sessions in which information on
projected risks and uncertainties is used to inform climate adaptation
decisions. We will partner with community members participating in a network of
Climate Innovation Platforms, allowing us to assess how probabilistic
projections of change derived from state of the art climate, crop, and
hydrological models can be integrated into adaptation planning. In turn, this
allows us to assess how adaptive actions might maximize resilience - the ability
to withstand or recover from climate-induced stress - and break the coupled
cycle of land degradation and poverty that affects the region today.

This work will examine issues at the core of food security, and water security,
and stability in the Nile region. The Blue Nile Headwaters are a vital water
tower of Africa, giving rise to a river that is the lifeblood of downstream
populations in Sudan and Egypt. Within the headwaters region itself, however,
connected processes of low investment capacity and land degradation drive a
cycle of depressed agricultural yields and persistent poverty, making the region
especially vulnerable to climate change impacts. This cycle is reinforced by the
dramatic interannual climate variability experienced in the region, and there is
reason for concern that conditions will deteriorate in coming decades - both
because climate change may bring more frequent drought and more intense rains
and because land use pressures are increasing under rapid population growth.
These changes have implications for food and water security throughout the
region. However, the same coupling of natural and human systems that currently
reinforces poverty in this region also offers opportunity. Vulnerability to
climate change is determined by the magnitude of that change, the sensitivity of
human and natural systems to change, and the capacity of communities to adapt in
ways that reduce impacts. The proposed research approach combines best-available
scientific tools for monitoring and projecting climate impacts with an
unprecedented community-driven evaluation of potential adaptation strategies
across a physically and culturally diverse landscape. As such, the study will
advance understanding of how vulnerable communities can best make use of
uncertain climate projections for future planning. More generally, the
development of climate impacts scenarios at the level of the agricultural
ecosystems represents a new approach to climate impacts analysis that will be
broadly applicable in the U.S. and elsewhere.