* 1211460
* RUI: Dynamic UC HII regions in Sgr B2: Flickering and Ionized Flows
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Christopher De Pree, Agnes Scott College
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2016
* USD 201,886.00

Dr. De Pree and his team at Agnes Scott College perform observations with the
Expanded Very Large Array (EVLA) to study massive star formation. In particular,
they investigate radiation flux variations during massive star formation in HII
regions (i.e., regions in the interstellar medium in which hydrogen is mainly
present as ionized atoms). Massive stars drive processes that enrich the ISM in
chemical elements and significantly impact the evolution of galaxies. The Sgr B2
region is one of the most source-rich massive star forming regions in the Milky
Way. It contains many morphologically diverse HII regions, and the number of
unusual broad line sources make it an ideal laboratory for testing theories of
ultra-compact HII region evolution. Recent high-resolution, radiation-
hydrodynamic simulations indicate that dense, rotating, accretion flows that are
required to form massive stars quickly become gravitationally unstable. This
changes the amount of trapped ionizing radiation and the sizes of the associated
ultra-compact HII regions. The orbits of dense clumps and filaments near newly
born massive stars thus may irregularly trap and expose their ionizing
radiation. These objects are optically thick at a wavelength of 2 cm and thus
size variations are also expressed as flux changes. Hence over time, a resulting
HII region "flickers" in size between being hyper-compact and ultra-compact
throughout the main star accretion phase, rather than monotonically expanding.
The accretion flow continues for a period ten times longer than the free
expansion timescale for an HII region, and the model can address why ultra-
compact HII regions do not more rapidly expand and dissipate. It could also
explain the observed distribution of morphologies. &lt;br/&gt;The Sgr B2 region
contains 49 regions that can be imaged at 1.3 cm wavelength, and 25 of these
hyper-compact HII regions have physical diameters less than 5000 Astronomical
Units. Dr. De Pree and his team will use the EVLA to reimage this large sample
of ultra-compact HII regions to: (1) Determine the frequency and magnitude of
ultra-compact HII region flux and size fluctuations over about a 20 year time
baseline (since 1989) (2) Constrain and test the theoretical models, (3) Observe
recombination lines with the improved spectral resolution and bandwidth of the
new EVLA correlator, and characterize line profiles and velocity gradients, and
(4) Examine the dynamics of sources with especially broad or multiply peaked
line profiles. &lt;br/&gt;The EVLA has the spatial and the spectral resolution
to properly examine the Broad Line Recombination Objects in the crowded Sgr B2
region. Whether or not flickering is detected, these observations will provide
the highest resolution, most sensitive radio image of this prototype massive
star forming region, and the reduced data will be made publicly available. The
EVLA observations will provide a definitive test of the flickering UC HII region
model and will be the first attempt to make time-domain (20 year baseline)
observations of a large sample of ultra-compact HII regions.&lt;br/&gt;Agnes
Scott College, with a 30% African American student body is the only women's
college in the Southeastern Association for Research in Astronomy (SARA)
consortium, and the Physics and Astronomy Department has a record of success in
sending women on to graduate work and careers in the sciences. Dr. De Pree and
his group are engaged in the well-established outreach program at Bradley
Observatory at Agnes Scott College which is connected to area K12 institutions
and hosting over 1500 students each year.