* 1211055
* Lab Astro for Studies of the Synthesis of Fe-group Elements
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* James Lawler, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 07/31/2016
* USD 292,165.00

This award will provide continuing support for the Wisconsin Atomic Transition
Probability (WATP) program. The project includes the completion of very precise
and accurate transition probability measurements of Titanium. These measurements
will include the very important weak lines with low excitation potential in Ti
II. Such lines sample the majority of the titanium in the photospheres of stars.
Similar measurements will subsequently be extended to cobalt, nickel, and
vanadium. Emission branching fractions will be measured using available spectra
from a Fourier transform spectrometer and new data from a recently developed 3 m
focal length vacuum echelle spectrograph. Radiative lifetime measurements will
be performed on atom/ion beams using a WATP program time-resolved laser induced
fluorescence experiment. Systematic uncertainties on these iron-group
measurements will be 5% or less with high confidence. Collaborating astronomers
will apply this lab data to determine highly reliable relative iron-group
abundances in (old) metal-poor stars.

The research effort will include the training of undergraduate and graduate
students. The project is expected to aid in the interpretation of future large-
scale spectroscopic surveys of metal-poor stars in the outskirts of the Milky
Way.