* 1211244
* Symplectic embeddings and packing maps, their contact analogues, and other classic symplectic problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2012,06/30/2017
* Olguta Buse, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2017
* USD 117,490.00

The PI proposes to conduct research on topological aspects of symplectic and
contact manifolds using recent developments in the theory of J-holomorphic
curves. In one direction, continuing previous work in collaboration with R.
Hind, the PI will investigate symplectic embeddings of domains and related
symplectic packing questions, with an eye for proving a general packing
stability property. Related problems to study are several possible estimates of
symplectic capacities. A second project, with D. Gay, will describe
3-dimensional contact analogues of 4-dimensional ellipsoid embeddings. An array
of 3-dimensional contact techniques will be used with possible applications to
the 4-dimensional symplectic embedding questions. In a third objective the PI
continues previous work using J-holomorphic curves techniques to pursue
topological aspects of symplectomorphism groups of manifolds such as ruled
4-dimensional surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In contrast with classical
geometries, symplectic geometry is predominantly built around the notion of area
(of two dimensional symplectic submanifolds). Embedding and packing questions
are fundamental rigidity questions originally motivated by Hamiltonian dynamics,
and the quest for recurrence properties of Hamiltonian automorphisms. Answers to
such packing questions will guide our understanding of symplectic spaces. Due to
their very computational nature, these problems have the possibility of
involving students in guided computer experimentation.