* 1211793
* Mass Distribution Within Spiral Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2012,06/30/2017
* Theodore Williams, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 06/30/2017
* USD 406,701.00

As astrophysicists expand their knowledge of the formation and evolution of the
Universe, tying large-scale cosmological galaxy formation scenarios to the
measured and inferred details of individually observed galaxies has become
increasingly feasible. This project is an integrated program of observational
and theoretical studies designed to determine the distribution of both dark and
luminous matter within a large sample of spiral galaxies and to compare these
measurements with the predictions of galaxy formation in the concordance
cosmological model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the wide-field spectroscopic
imaging Fabry-Perot instrument on the Southern African Large Telescope, the
investigators propose to obtain high-resolution velocity maps of the galaxies,
supplemented with more extended but lower resolution 21-cm maps from the Jansky
Very Large Array (VLA) and, later, MeerKAT (Karoo Array Telescope). Combined
with optical and near-infrared surface photometry, these data will be the basis
for measurement of the total mass distribution within each galaxy. Stellar
population synthesis estimates and detailed hydrodynamical modeling will
determine the separation into baryonic and dark matter components. Extensive
N-body simulations will test the stability of the models, sharpening the
determination of the separate contributions of luminous and dark matter. After
correction for the gravitational compression by the baryonic disk, the density,
concentration, and circular speed of these halo models will be compared to the
expected values derived from cosmological simulations. Discrepancies may suggest
ways to improve and extend the physics in the galaxy formation simulations. A
new analysis tool will measure non-axisymmetric patterns of motion in the two-
dimensional kinematic maps of the galaxies, leading to a determination of the
shapes of the dark halos. The investigators will also use Fabry-Perot
observations of stellar absorption lines in early-type barred disk galaxies to
determine the bar's rotation speed. As dynamical friction with the halo slows
the bar's motion, this measurement will yield another constraint on the halo
density in these galaxies. Sharpened by dynamical constraints, estimates for the
mass-to-light ratios of galaxies aim to refine the poorly-known relation between
mass-to-light and broad-band colors of disk
galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educationally, the proposing team will
disseminate their results to the broader community through public lectures and
in New Jersey schools. They will involve undergraduate and graduate students in
their research and mentor them in their professional development in the
sciences.