* 1211937
* Laboratory Studies of the Magneto-Rotational Instability in a Plasma
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Cary Forest, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2015
* USD 255,000.00

AST-1211937&lt;br/&gt;Forest&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project begins the first
ever study of the magnetorotational instability (MRI) in a plasma experiment.
The MRI is potentially very important in plasma astrophysics, but it has only
been studied theoretically, numerically, and in a limited fashion in liquid
metal experiments as a substitute for plasma. The MRI studies planned here will
be carried out in the Plasma Couette Experiment (PCX), a novel experiment that
both confines and stirs a hot plasma, with the parameters necessary for
observing the MRI. Accretion is a fundamental process in astrophysics whereby
interstellar gas and plasma collapse into rotating disks around a central,
point-like accreting object. There must be a mechanism that causes disk matter
to lose orbital energy, transport angular momentum outward, and fall into the
central object. The MRI is a leading candidate for this mechanism, based on
theory and numerical simulations. This study builds on the recent excitement
caused by liquid metal experiments to investigate the onset conditions for the
MRI. A plasma experiment has several advantages over a liquid metal experiment,
including that most naturally occurring accretion disks are made up of plasmas,
that it allows larger and more realistic magnetic Reynolds numbers, and that it
permits independent adjustment of the viscosity and the conductivity. The PCX
has recently demonstrated high speed, MRI-stable Couette flows, and this work
will 1) search for signs of the MHD instability, 2) compare results with
numerical simulations; 3) measure the effective momentum transport of the
saturated instability; and 4) identify physical effects which are plasma
specific and beyond the standard magnetohydrodynamics
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PCX experiments will have broad impact on all
flow-driven MHD problems and will continue a strong connection between
laboratory plasma physicists and astrophysics facilitated by the NSF Center for
Magnetic Self-Organization in Laboratory and Astrophysical Plasmas. This award
supports a single graduate student to carry out the proposed experiments, with
partial support for technical staff and student supervision.