* 1211680
* New CO(1-0) Survey of Nearby Galaxies: Evolution of Molecular Gas and Star Formation in Galactic Disks
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Jin Koda, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Benacquista
* 06/30/2017
* USD 424,175.00

A longstanding problem in astrophysics is to understand how galaxies form and
develop throughout their lifetimes. Such understanding is necessary to uncover
how our Universe evolved and to gain insight into the origin of our own Milky
Way Galaxy. One important aspect of understanding galaxy formation and evolution
is to develop detailed theories of star formation. As star formation occurs in
giant molecular clouds (GMCs) within galaxies, astrophysicists study the
formation and evolution of GMCs. With unprecedented high quality and high
resolution data, this study will explore the evolution of GMCs and consequent
star formation in galactic disks, and it will critically and quantitatively
reconsider the standard picture of gas evolution in galaxies, specifically the
one driven by stellar feedback. The study enables for the first time a census of
GMC populations in substantial spiral galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will also serve as a prototype for research with the Atacama Large
Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA) (a new international facility funded in
part by the National Science Foundation), which will resolve the internal
structure of GMCs in nearby galaxies and routinely produce images of molecular
gas and star formation in very distant galaxies. For this project the
investigators will use observations from their new CO survey of nearby galaxies
with the Combined Array for Research in Millimeter-wave Astronomy (CARMA) and
the Nobeyama Radio Observatory 45m telescope (NRO45), a survey that is nearly
complete. The investigators will release to the astronomical community the CO
data of nearby galaxies from CARMA and NRO45, and they will also release the
software for the combination of interferometer and single-dish data developed
for the survey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigating team also plans
educational and outreach activities that involve building a radio interferometer
for a hands-on astronomical laboratory course and disseminating the course
materials to other schools. Because the concept of interferometry is challenging
to master, developing such a hands-on laboratory course is crucial to the
education of the next generation of radio astronomers for the ALMA era.