* 1211713
* Modeling & analysis of nematic films: Flow-substrate interactions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Lou Kondic, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2017
* USD 401,381.00

This award will support analysis and simulation of new mathematical models
governing nematic liquid crystals (NLCs) in two situations of widespread
industrial and basic scientific interest: (1) free surface spreading, and (2)
behavior of a film of NLC (with and without an applied electric field) between
two closely-spaced surfaces whose properties may be modified by interaction with
the NLC. Each problem is relevant to applications in the manufacture, design and
use of NLC-based displays, where a thin sandwich of NLC between plates is
subjected to an applied field, to control the molecular orientation of the NLC,
which in turn controls the optical properties. In free-surface spreading of a
film of NLC over a rigid substrate, it is known that instabilities can manifest
spontaneously under certain circumstances. A mechanism for these instabilities
has been identified, but several issues remain to be resolved. (i) Any model
with strong anchoring conditions on the director at both substrate and free
surface requires regularization as an apparent contact line is approached. The
investigators will study possible regularizing mechanisms, including relaxation
to the isotropic state, and molecular scale van der Waals' (vdW) interactions
(which must be relevant in the vicinity of an apparent contact line). (ii) The
role of different defect/disclination types on spreading and stability will be
considered in detail. Preliminary study of idealized defects within 2D films
suggests that they do not significantly affect global dynamics. However, more
general models are needed to draw firm conclusions. 3D defects of various
topological types will be incorporated into our spreading model and their
influence on spreading properties and on possible instabilities will be
analyzed. (iii) The models will be extended to the case of spreading over soft
polymer substrates. The behavior of NLC between confining polymeric plates is
relevant for applications related to a new generation of Liquid Crystal Display
(LCD) devices with soft flexible bounding surfaces. How such surfaces affect
device behavior will be studied, with a particular focus on the effect of
'director gliding', where anchoring properties at a polymer interface can change
over long timescales when the NLC exerts a stress on the surface. These models
will be used to investigate suitable LCD device designs.

The award will support the study of problems that are directly relevant to the
manufacture, design and use of Nematic Liquid Crystal (NLC)-based microdisplays.
The basic operating unit of such displays (a pixel) is a simple sandwich of NLC
between transparent plates, across which an electric field can be applied to
effectively control the optical properties of the layer. The investigators will
study basic problems of how NLC films behave between two closely-spaced
polymeric surfaces. Such polymeric surfaces have economic potential as the basis
for a new generation of flexible electronic displays. The award will support
theoretical investigations, leading to the development of robust predictive
models, that complement experimental investigations. The project will have
significant educational impact, providing experimental and theoretical modules
for advanced undergraduate training in a capstone course in applied mathematics.
A Ph.D. student will be trained in research and will also serve as laboratory
assistant for the capstone course, gaining valuable mentoring experience and
developing his/her experimental skills.