* 1211640
* RUI: Non-linear dynamics in fluid networks
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* John Geddes, Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Lora Billings
* 05/31/2016
* USD 168,621.00

Complex dynamic behavior has been observed or predicted in a number of different
fluid flow networks, both man-made and natural, at a variety of scales. Some
examples include the flow of blood through the microcirculation, the flow of
droplets through microfluidic devices, the flow of magma through lava tubes,
refrigerant flow in cooling systems and water flow in solar steam generators.
While the physics differ, the underlying phenomena are often similar. In all of
the examples above it is difficult to predict and determine the distribution of
different phases or constituents within the network. Complexity in a network
with many inter-connections containing unusual fluids (such as blood in the
microvasculature) may seem unsurprising. However, even the simplest networks
with ordinary fluids can demonstrate extraordinary behavior. This proposal seeks
to develop and verify a new general theory for describing phase distribution
within and the dynamical behavior of fluid networks. The proposed work takes a
building block approach, fully describing the behavior of simple network
elements and then adding complexity in a systematic manner. The theoretical
study is closely integrated with an experimental track which will verify the key
predictions of the theory. Without the experimental data, it would be impossible
to map the mathematical theory to specific physical
manifestations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network fluid dynamics have been studied
theoretically and computationally for approximately 20 years, yet few general
statements about network behavior exist. The prevalent approach has been direct
simulation which does not allow for the key parameters to be understood in a
systematic way. Further, key predictions have never been tested in experiment.
This proposal overcomes these limitations and will develop a new general theory
for network fluid dynamics which is rooted in experiment and will describe the
equilibrium and dynamic behavior of the network in a general manner such that
results can be easily translated to specific physical systems. Finally, the work
will be conducted at an undergraduate college with undergraduate students
playing a central role in the research.