* 1211687
* High Dimensional Data Representations: Compressed Sensing, Randomized Row-Action Methods, and Quantization
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Alexander Powell, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2016
* USD 163,431.00

This award will support research on mathematical methods for signal
representation and signal reconstruction in high dimensional problems. The
project investigates randomized row-action methods as a tool for high
dimensional signal recovery problems. Row-action algorithms are often well
suited for large problems since they involve low complexity iterations that
scale well in high dimensions. Moreover, the online nature of row-action methods
is suitable for streaming data applications where one sequentially obtains
access to individual parts of the entire system. Randomization is an essential
tool for enabling row-action methods to yield provably fast and accurate
results. The project will investigate randomized row-action methods for high
dimensional applications such as signal reconstruction from frame coefficients,
reconstruction from quantized samples, and sparse approximation. The project
also studies the complementary problem of how to digitally encode information
when high dimensionality places an enormous burden on physical devices,
computational resources, and data storage. The project analyzes and designs
efficient and robust analog-to-digital conversion algorithms for finite frames,
compressed sensing problems, and ultra wideband interleaved sampling in non-
synchronized environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The enormous size of modern
data sets poses fundamental challenges to the ways in which data is analyzed,
digitized, processed, and represented. Disparate problems such as computerized
tomography, hyperspectral imaging, radar, and phase retrieval can involve signal
classes that are so high dimensional that classically designed methods become
impractical. This award will support the development of mathematical techniques
to provide digital signal representations and signal reconstruction algorithms
for emerging classes of high dimensional problems. The challenges of high
dimensional data require approaches that go beyond linear signal representations
and which are able to efficiently take advantage of nonlinearly structured
signal classes and capitalize on very modest oversampling. A typical scenario
occurs for high dimensional data such as streaming HD video that have
information content of intrinsically lower dimension such as relatively few
moving shapes. The analysis and algorithms in this project will apply broadly to
modern signal processing techniques such as ultra wideband communications,
compressed sensing problems, consistent reconstruction, analog-to-digital
conversion and sigma-delta quantization. The award will support graduate student
training, and graduate students will be involved in the project.