* 1212095
* Composition of Stars in the Galactic Bulge and Inner Disk
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Robert Rich, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

The origin and chemical evolution of the Galactic bulge/bar remains an unsolved
problem. The Bulge Radial Velocity Assay (BRAVA) has found that the radial
velocities of stars across the bulge are consistent with an N-body bar model.
Yet over the same volume, a gradient in the chemical composition of stars is
observed. If the bar was created via a purely dynamical process, no abundance
gradient should be present. Maybe the bulge is a pseudo-bulge, and has an
extended formation history, but evidence from both the turnoff age and abundance
ratios of stars in the bulge are consistent with an old bulge that formed early
and rapidly. Several studies now suggest that the bulge consists of multiple
stellar subpopulations of differing age, metallicity, kinematics, and spatial
extent. Studies continue to disagree on whether the abundances and kinematics of
stars in the bulge are correlated. There is also the possibility that the
disintegration of massive proto-clusters built the Galactic bulge.
&lt;br/&gt;Within the last few years, high resolution spectroscopy of highly
magnified, lensed bulge subdwarfs revealed what appears to be a stellar
population that is metal rich, and 2-7 Gyr old- considerably younger than is
inferred for the bulge field population from the analysis of color-magnitude
diagrams. Two recent spectroscopic studies also suggest that the bulge is
similar to and perhaps part of, the thick disk. Although there is no kinematic
evidence for a 'classical' bulge at galactic latitudes below 8 degrees, infrared
color-magnitude diagrams and some spectroscopic studies find evidence for a
bulge-like population at high galactic latitude. &lt;br/&gt;Dr. Rich and his
collaborators conduct a survey of the heavy elements across the inner bulge and
bulge globular clusters to securely relate the bulge to the thick disk or the
halo. Comparison of the composition of field and globular cluster stars helps to
address whether the bulge formed from disintegrated globular clusters. Another
part of this work is to undertake high dispersion spectroscopy of red giants at
galactic latitudes above 20 degrees to assess whether the formation history of
this population differs from that of the inner bulge. The research results are
disseminated via refereed papers, colloquia, scientific meetings, and public
lectures.