* 1212325
* Matrix estimation under rank constraints for complete and incomplete noisy data
* MPS,DMS
* 06/30/2011,05/31/2014
* Florentina Bunea, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2014
* USD 220,263.00

The central goals of this proposal are:(a) to provide methods for the estimation
of matrices of unknown rank from both completely and incompletely observed noisy
matrices, using rank regularized risk minimization and (b) to establish novel
oracle type risk bounds for the matrix estimates and the rank estimates, under
minimal assumptions. The difficulty of the problem of recovering the underlying
target matrix from an observed noisy matrix is that the number of independent
parameters is large relative to the number of observations. Special attention is
given to multivariate response regression models. There is an interesting
resemblance between matrix estimation under low rank assumptions and estimation
in general regression models under sparsity assumptions, but matrix models pose
different mathematical and computational challenges.

High dimensional data arranged in matrix format are increasingly common in many
scientific disciplines such as genetics, medical imaging, engineering,
psychology and neuroscience. The matrices containing observed data in these
areas tend to have high rank due to the presence of noise, but the signal matrix
underlying the data may have significantly lower rank. Ignoring this in any
inferential procedure may lead to poor recovery of the target, with severe
repercussions on the interpretation of the results. Instances of targets that
must be recovered with the highest possible precision include: faces against
background, ensembles of genes that are associated with a disease, brain
structures associated with cognitive processes, to name just a few example. Some
of the challenges associated with the analysis of such data can be met via the
methodological and theoretical study of the problem of matrix estimation under
rank constraints. A second problem, which is substantially more difficult, is to
perform the same task when only partially observed noisy matrices are available.
Systematic investigation of these two problems is the focus of this proposal.
The usefulness of these techniques will be immediately disseminated to the
scientific community by applying them to data obtained from a study of the
effects of HIV on brain structure and functions. Free software that implements
the developed methodology will be made available on the web in a readily
implementable form.