* 1212282
* Crisis in K-16 STEM Education: A Regional Conference to Promote Local Solutions to a National Problem
* EHR,DRL
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2014
* Edmund Gordon, Rockland Community College
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 01/31/2014
* USD 119,967.00

Miller-McNeill 1212282

This award is for the funding of a regional conference study the future of
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) education, the impact
of underrepresented and disadvantaged groups with regards to STEM, and STEM job
growth and workforce development in a regional, as opposed to a national,
context. The project brings together regional K-16 stakeholders (teachers,
administrators, policy makers, community college and four-year college faculty)
with STEM education experts to address the major challenges and opportunities in
supporting outstanding local programs that prepare students for STEM college-
level study and careers, with a special emphasis on preparing under-represented
populations. It is designed to bring together researchers and educators from the
lower to mid-Hudson River Valley region of New York to layout the contours of
current K-16 STEM practice, particularly from the point of view of what efforts
are not working, why they are not working, and how to make these efforts work.
The project is a partnership with Rockland Community College and CEJJES
Institute. Approximately 150 participants from area schools and colleges in New
York are expected to attend, representing approximately 200,000 K-12 public
schools and 100,000 college students in a region where STEM-related industries
are a prominent and growing influence.

The overarching goal of the Conference is to promote regional strategies that
will enable this generation of learners, especially those from under-represented
groups, to take their place in 21st century STEM careers. It is suggested that
such a gathering of individuals and groups concerned with STEM education, as
proposed in this project, would address four key questions: (1) How are
knowledge and skill requirements for college-level study and careers in STEM
changing the preparation needed for K-16? What changes need to be made with
respect to curriculum, teachers and teaching, laboratories and access to
resources, and in-school and out-of-school learning to improve the regional STEM
outcomes? What strategies and practices can be adopted to support and advance
STEM education throughout the region? (2) What are effective strategies for
advancing the academic success of under-represented groups in STEM and how can
they be successfully implemented in this region? (3) How does changing context
for STEM education impact the knowledge and pedagogical skill requirements
needed for being an effective K-16 STEM educator? What pedagogical strategies
are best suited for teaching 21st century STEM skills? How well are teachers'
professional development needs being met? What are some strategies for ensuring
that the region?s teachers have access to the STEM professional development they
need? (4) What are some current models of regional school/community/college
partnerships for strengthening the K-16 STEM pipeline? How do these models
address regional needs in ways that school districts cannot respond on their
own? What solutions would be a good fit for this region? What unique ways in
which Community Colleges and other share educational resources, serve as a STEM
resource for students in middle school through college? What are the
implications of this strategy for other regions concerned about K-16 STEM
education?

Regional strategies offer a viable and scalable model for addressing K-16 STEM,
especially when they reinforce the availability of services and support that
would go beyond the reach of individual school districts. As a result of
conference activities, the project will create and maintain a conference website
with video capture of key elements of the presentations, conference procedings
and information and materials collected. The website will also be available for
shared resources, scholarly papers, and the facilitating of future dialogue.