* 1212319
* STTR Phase I:  Adaptive Miniaturized Ultrawideband Antenna
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* John Volakis, Wang Electro-Opto Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,711.00

This proposed Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase-I project aims at
an adaptive ultrawideband miniaturized antenna with the capability of real-time
adaptation to changes in mobile operating environments. The research addresses
an apparently insurmountable technical problem epitomized by the recent call
dropping problem of smart phones resulting from its contact with the user's
hand, which disrupted the antenna function. Other examples are body-worn
wireless devices with disrupted RF links due to environmental changes that
detune their antennas. To maximize spectral efficiency, it is desirable that the
antenna has switchable impedance and pattern that smartly adapt, in real time,
to the changing multipath environment in the mobile RF link with enhanced
diversity gain. This is a complex and difficult multi-disciplinary problem.
Although research in this general area has been fairly active, these efforts
have not yet led to a practical solution. The proposed approach builds on unique
high-performance, miniaturized, ultrawideband, conformal antennas and body-
wearable smart (adaptive) antennas, toward a solution that can be integrated
into a small platform such as a smartphone. The research team starts with an
innovative design having impedance and radiation characteristics more amenable
to algorithms, switching circuits, miniaturized reconfigurable filters, and
matching networks, etc.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is enormous. Wireless
communication has been one of the most successful technology innovations in
modern history, and antennas play a key and central role. Wireless has broad and
deep global social and economic impacts, from rich countries to the poorest
nations. It has become a critical component of societies, ranging from consumer
applications to public safety and national defense. Thus, efficient use of the
limited radio spectrum in the air has become a national priority, as evidenced
by the recent National Broadband Plan and the President's Wireless Innovation
and Infrastructure Initiative. Global annual sales of wireless systems and
subsystems for on-platform and standalone applications are estimated to be over
10 billion units, including those for 66 million automobiles and over 1 billion
cellphones. For most applications, the proposed antenna will have enabling
advantages in performance, cost, etc., to greatly enhance spectral efficiency.
Therefore, success of the proposed research will have deep, pivotal, and far-
reaching impact in wireless technologies. Societal impact will be increasingly
significant with the growth of wireless, having antennas as its
centerpiece?since wireless is already an indispensable part of life for five
billion people, with millions added each year.