* 1212404
* RAPID: Oceanographic Instrumentation: R/V CAPE HATTERAS 2011 Rapid Response ADCP
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Lillian Govoni, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 01/31/2013
* USD 82,152.00

This proposal requests an Ocean Surveyor 150 kHz vessel mounted ADCP for the R/V
Cape Hatteras. The current unit onboard the ship failed and per diagnostic
testing through the manufacturer, Teledyne RDI, it was determined that the ADCP
would need to be replaced. Additionally, this was confirmed upon consultation
with University of Hawaii. The Cape Hatteras schedule includes a cruise for
Michael Gregg, ORS, from October 31 through November 17 in which a vessel
mounted ADCP is critical to their research. There are also at least two
scheduled cruises on board the Cape Hatteras for 2012 in which an ADCP is a
required piece of equipment. The equipment requested will allow the ship to
continue providing ocean scientists with accurate and reliable
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt; The principal impact of
the present proposal is under criterion two, providing infrastructure support
for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support
of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo
separate review by the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition,
maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded
researchers from any US university or lab access to working, calibrated
instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research, and
expanding the base of potential researchers.