* 1212270
* Collaborative Research: Preparing Lattice QCD for Accelerated Computing and Future Algorithms
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Volodymyr Kindratenko, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2017
* USD 228,000.00

The nature of high performance computing is undergoing rapid change with the
advent of general purpose GPU-accelerated architectures. These changes open new
opportunities for scientific discovery at a much reduced capital and energy
cost, but to exploit them, new algorithms and methods are required.

This project supports the collaborative development and implementation of GPU
(Graphical Processing Unit) codes and innovative algorithms for the numerical
simulation of the strong interactions of quarks and gluons, namely quantum
chromodynamics (QCD), on a lattice. Specifically, this project supports the
development of CUDA (parallel coding model from NVIDIA)-based code modules and
OpenMP threading that can be used with the MILC [Multiple Instruction (and
Multiple Data) Lattice Calculation] code. This 200,000-line code suite is used
by several research groups around the world and supports some 100 million core-
hours of computing at NSF and DOE national centers and laboratories mostly on
conventional supercomputers. Our code development will allow improved
performance on GPU clusters and on computers such as Blue Waters at NCSA that
contain both GPUs and conventional multicore processors. Performance models
developed will guide the performance tuning and help to plan future calculations
and should also be of value in studing the effectiveness of exascale
architectures.

Interpretation of many of the experimental results in particle physics is
currently limited by lack of theoretical understanding. This reduces our ability
to determine parameters of the Standard Model and to find evidence for physics
beyond the Standard Model through precision experiments. The calculations that
are enabled are thus important for the interpretation of many experiments in
elementary particle physics. Some of these experiments at Fermilab, Cornell, and
at SLAC have been completed. Others such as in Beijing, Geneva, and Japan are
still running.

We have publicized previous work on code development and performance modeling by
presentations at appropriate conference and publication. We will continue to do
so for the current work in order that others can benefit from our methodology
and innovations. The MILC code is widely used in benchmarking by several high-
performance computing centers. This in turn has led to several vendors
contacting us regarding performance of our code on their current and future
chips. Thus, having GPU-accelerated code available in MILC could help in the
evaluation of or co-design of future high-performance computing architectures.

Finally this project will contribute to the professional education and training
of future scientists via the participation of postdoctoral reseachers.