* 1212559
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Reconstructing Ancient Maya Cuisine Across Time and Space: Macro and Microbotanical
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Clarissa Cagnato, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2014
* USD 25,197.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Gayle Fritz, Ms. Clarissa Cagnato will conduct
archaeological excavations at three sites in Northwestern Pet√©n, Guatemala - an
area that remains one of the least investigated in the Maya region. During the
2012 and 2013 field seasons through the recovery and analysis of macro- and
microbotanical remains the researcher will seek to address issues regarding the
subsistence of the ancient Maya populations that occupied the area during the
Classic period (AD 250-900). Two of the main goals are to reconstruct the
subsistence strategies, and to determine how variations across time and space
relate to broader social and political changes. Ms. Cagnato's research uses
multiple techniques to address these questions, including analysis of plant
macro-remains (those visible to the naked eye), and microscopic plant remains in
the form of starch grains, together with analyzing the residues left behind on
ceramic vessels.

While the benefits of paleoethnobotanical approaches in archaeology are
recognized, few systematic studies have been applied in the Maya region.
Therefore, the subsistence strategies and choices of the ancient Maya
populations are still not well understood, and this project will be the first in
the immediate region. In order to maximize the understanding of food practices
through time and space, the research will focus on investigating areas of food
processing (kitchens) and food disposal (trash pits) from three sites: La
Corona, El Peru-Waka, and El Achiotal. These sites will provide key information
about plant consumption and how it may have changed through time, as they were
occupied at different time periods, and each has its own intricate political
history of alliances and war. The research will aid in understanding the varying
patterns of food consumption across time and space. It also seeks to address the
resource management strategies and use of the natural environment, an important
topic to conservationists today.

This intensive paleoethnobotanical study will contribute not only to a better
understanding of the past, but also addresses more contemporary topics, namely
conservation and environmental management. Moreover, the continued presence of
archaeological research in the region provides support for local workers, and
deters looting of the site and exploitation of the fragile tropical forest. The
results from this project will be published in peer-reviewed publications and
presented at conferences and symposia in both Guatemala and internationally.
These efforts will highlight the importance of using multiple lines of
paleoethnobotanical analysis in archaeological research, and provide a starting
point for future scholars of the ancient Maya. The research will foster
international collaboration between Guatemalan and US students.