* 1212460
* Collaborative Research: The Einstein Toolkit -- An Open-Source General Relativistic Multi-Physics Infrastructure for Relativistic Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Christian Ott, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2015
* USD 83,000.00

This award supports the development of the Einstein Toolkit. The Einstein
Toolkit is an open-source suite of computational tools that enables
interdisciplinary research in numerical relativity, general relativistic
astrophysics and gravitational wave physics, and takes advantage of the emerging
generation of petascale supercomputers and new cyberinfrastructure technologies.
The work supported by this award adds to the Einstein Toolkit transformative new
technology in adaptive mesh refinements and general relativistic magneto-
hydrodynamics, thus boosting simulation capabilities and unlocking new modeling
frontiers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The computational infrastructure provided by
the Einstein Toolkit has a broad positive impact on the gravitational physics
and astrophysics communities. By publicly providing state-of-the-art modeling
capabilities that otherwise would stay proprietary, the Einstein Toolkit
maximizes the science return of funds invested in basic research. The numerical
codes in the Einstein Toolkit support the quick realization of transformative
computation and data-driven science stimulated by innovators entering the field.
Furthermore, the Einstein Toolkit ensures the sustainability of simulation codes
in numerical relativity by providing a straightforward mechanism for the
migration of software to new cyberinfrastructure and technologies.