* 1212167
* Models and Asymptotics of Non-equilibrium Steady States in Driven Diffusive Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Nicholas Ercolani, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2016
* USD 226,000.00

This award will support the analysis of non-equilibrium steady states (NESS) in
driven diffusive systems. Physical systems of interest in this general class are
typically modeled either deterministically by diffusive nonlinear evolution
equations or stochastically by certain types of Markov processes. The NESS
referred to here differ from the equilibria of linear dynamics or the invariant
measures of detailed balance in that the non-equilibrium steady states exhibit
phase separation (often driven by boundary dynamics), spontaneous symmetry
breaking and/or long range correlations away from critical transitions. Specific
contexts to be explored include the strong bending regime of striped pattern
formation, spatial random partitions, and random matrix ensembles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-equilibrium steady states are typical for a number of
physical systems and models, including defect condensation in pattern forming
systems driven far from threshold, classical molecule formation, a system of
interacting Bose particles, shaken granular gasses, infinite allele models,
network formation by preferential attachment or rewiring, stochastic growth
models and two-dimensional quantum gravity. The award will support research
approaches on the behavior of such systems that uses deterministic (non-random)
as well as stochastic (random) techniques.