* 1212823
* SBIR Phase I:  Minimizing Vehicle Aero Drag with Optimized Deturbulators
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Sumon Sinha, SINHATECH
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will cost effectively
optimize the integration of Sinhatech's patented flexible-skin Deturbulator with
vehicle drag-reducing wind deflectors, aircraft wings and airfoils. The
Deturbulator is a passive flexible-skin large-eddy breakup device for mitigating
turbulent mixing in separated flows. Sinhatech?s recently developed self
aligning Deturbulator-enhanced wind-deflector (DEWD) aero-drag reducing retrofit
has demonstrated 9-16% fuel economy increase on some trucks and vans. Market
acceptance will require speeding up current test-and-modify Deturbulator
installation optimization. The impediment has been a lack of cost effective CFD
tools capable of modeling the Deturbulator. A joint effort with Mississippi
State University has just demonstrated that user specified limits on mixing
lengths in a turbulence model can mimic Deturbulator induced flow modifications
in an efficient RANS code. In Phase-1 detailed wind-tunnel measurements on a
DEWD will guide development of universal mixing-length modification rules based
on easily quantifiable features of the Deturbulator and the flow-field. This
procedure will also be verified against experimental data from a Deturbulator
treated low-speed airfoil. Flight performance tests with Deturbulator treated
wings have yielded 18% increase in lift to drag. CFD guided optimization will
enable designing extreme lift-to-drag airfoils and wings and virtually
streamlined vehicles with uncompromised functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proader potential/commercial impact of the proposed project will immediately
enable 5-10% fuel saving and greenhouse gas emission reduction by inexpensively
streamlining trucks and automobiles without impacting
functionality.&lt;br/&gt;Optimized Deturbulators payback in 2-3 months compared
to 24-months for competing aero-retrofits, creating a $3-Billion market.
Deturbulator treatments can enhance commercial realization of currently evolving
fast, short takeoff and landing high-endurance zero-emission battery powered
aircraft with acceptable payload capacity and range. Beginning with enabling
tactical UAV platforms capable of providing round-the-clock low altitude
surveillance, an estimated $10 billion market, this will revolutionize the $3
Trillion commercial aviation industry at all levels. This includes 20% or more
fuel savings and emission reduction for long haul jet transport by applying the
treatment to wings, stabilizers and high bypass turbine engine fan blades and
propeller blades. The project will also enable a similar approach for enhancing
wind-turbine blade efficiency and fatigue life, improving wind-power?s cost
advantage for more accessible sites. It can provide an order of magnitude leap
in maximum speed, endurance or fuel savings over aggressive laminar flow wing
designs or competing surface treatments like riblets which strive to reduce
turbulent skin friction.