* 1212339
* New Redox Tags For Bioorganometallic Chemistry and Electrode Modification
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* William Geiger, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program the
Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms (CSDM) Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor William Geiger and his group at the University of Vermont
are seeking to identify new directions in the application of organometallic
redox tags to medical imaging and to surface science. It takes advantage of the
one-electron oxidation of strongly IR-active "piano-stool" tags bonded to
molecular substrates or to conducting surfaces through their cyclopentadienyl
(Cp) or cyclobutadiene (Cb) rings. Before or after tagging, one or more carbonyl
ligands can be substituted by donor ligands using "redox switching" to
manipulate both the chemical and physical effects of the tag, including E1/2
potential, IR frequency, lipophilicity, and topology. A key goal is to provide
to the chemical and biological communities a molecularly broadened toolbox of
organometallic redox tags having a dramatic IR spectroscopic signature, allowing
redox and IR imaging even at the cellular level. Anodic oxidative studies will
be carried out for compounds in which MCp(CO)3 (M = Mn, Re) groups are tagged to
tamoxifen as a model to allow, for the first time, imaging of both the location
and redox state of organometallic tags in biological systems. Covalent
attachment of piano-stools to electrodes will also be carried out for the
purpose of providing entry to a molecularly diverse set of strongly IR-active
organometallic monolayers. Piano-stool compounds anchored via cycloadditon click
attachment to carbon will be characterized using advanced surface analysis
methods in collaboration with the Energy Materials Center at Cornell University.
Unprecedented studies of CO-substitution rates, ion-pairing effects, and
monomer/dimer equilibria in organometallic monolayers will be carried out,
increasing our understanding of the reactivities of surface-bound
organometallics. Success in the proposed research could lead to the basis of a
new approach to cell imaging, one in which the redox state of a molecular tag
can be followed as a function of time and place. The proposed innovative
organometallic electro-grafting methods will broaden the molecular possibilities
for chemically-modified conducting surfaces, and the ways in which they may be
applied to needs in catalysis, corrosion, composite materials, sensors, and
energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strong collaborations with ENS Paris and with
Prof. Jannie Swarts and other students and faculty at the University of the Free
State in South Africa will provide an aspect of international outreach to the
program. Expansion of the pool of underrepresented groups will be addressed
through Project SEED internships at the University of Vermont (UVM) and by
inclusion of African-American or Hispanic summer research interns at UVM
recruited from either Chicago State University or the University of New Mexico.