* 1212360
* High Efficiency Multimode Quantum Memory Using Atomic Frequency Combs in an Optical Cavity
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Mingzhen Tian, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2017
* USD 258,146.00

Quantum memory that faithfully stores and retrieve quantum states is a basic
building block for quantum repeaters in long-distance quantum communication.
Among the existing approaches to implementing quantum memories, the atomic
frequency comb (AFC) in rare-earth ensemble is identified for its outstanding
potential, which includes memory efficiency up to 100%, high fidelity, long
storage times up to seconds, a large time-bandwidth product for a high bit rate
up to gigabit/s, multi-mode capacity, a large range of operational wavelengths,
and being solid-state with a relatively simple setup using off-the-shelf
components. Achieving high efficiency is the corner stone to fully realize theis
potential. Currently, the two major obstacles preventing optimal efficiency are
the low absorption length and poorly-formed spectral and spatial structures in
the AFC. In this NSF supported project, two novel schemes are combined to solve
the problems: employing a low finesse optical cavity to boost the absorption
length, and using various temporal, spectral and spatial configurations to
optimize the AFC structure. The main efforts will focus on understanding the
physics and developing critical enabling techniques in preparing the AFC in
rare-earth ensembles and in the storage/retrieving process. We plan to use
thulium ions doped crystals as prototype materials to develop and test the
schemes. The resulting methods and techniques are expected to be applicable to
similar rare-earth ensembles.

The supported project will have broad impact in advancing quantum information
science and technology. The project aims at great advances in quantum memories
towards practical devices, which will find applications in both long-distance
quantum communication and distributed quantum computation. The investigation
will also lead to better understanding of quantum theory, such as decoherence,
entanglement, and quantum no-cloning theorem. Education is an important
component in this project. The efforts focus on cultivating a new generation of
scientists and engineers in quantum information-related fields and contributing
to the diversity of the scientific workforce. An on-line quantum mechanics
course will be developed for high school science teachers so that our K-12
school system will be better prepared to introduce quantum concepts to students
at young age. Undergraduate and graduate students will be recruited to the field
by introducing new developments in the quantum information frontier into
existing quantum mechanics courses, and by providing students research
opportunities in the project.