* 1212946
* Student Support for Central States Section of the Combustion Institute 2012 Technical Meeting, April 22-24, 2012 in Dayton, OH
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Jamie Ervin, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 03/31/2013
* USD 5,000.00

1212946&lt;br/&gt;Ervin&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks partial support for
student participation in the 2012 Central States Section of the Combustion
Institute Biennial Technical Meeting. This meeting is a forum where combustion
researchers from academia, federal government, and industry gather to discuss
the newest developments and research in combustion science and technology. The
meeting will be hosted by the University of Dayton on April 22-24, 2012 in
Dayton, OH. The topics that will be covered at this meeting include combustion
fundamentals (e.g., soot and NOx formation), applications (e.g., gas turbines),
and enabling research for combustion (e.g., diagnostics and computational
techniques).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: In view of the increasing
role of combustion in efficiently using energy resources as well as the strong
dependence of CO2 and other emissions on combustion processes, it is vital that
combustion researchers from across the United States meet together to present
and discuss relevant concepts and technologies. It is believed that the proposed
activity is of high intellectual merit due to the anticipated quality of the
presentations. Thought provoking discussion generated in this meeting in the
areas of sustainable combustion, alternative fuels, combustion diagnostics, and
innovative combustion concepts will lead to the formation of new
ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impacts: This meeting is a tremendous
opportunity for graduate students to interact with leading researchers in the
field of combustion from academia, federal government laboratories, and
industry. This meeting will not only serve as a venue for the discussion of the
newest developments in combustion science and technology but also as a chance
for graduate students to form long-term collaborations. In addition, the meeting
will permit students to discover new research activities that they may pursue in
the future. The meeting will serve as an important component of graduate student
education and will assist in the development of the next generation of
combustion scientists and engineers.