* 1212124
* CNH:  Enhancing Resilience of Coastal Ecosystems and Human Communities to Oceanographic Variability:      Social and Ecological Feedbacks
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Fiorenza Micheli, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,349,569.00

This project will study the capacity of natural systems and human communities to
adapt to environmental change. The research program will specifically
investigate the impacts of oceanographic variability on coastal marine
ecosystems and human communities of the Pacific coast of Baja California,
Mexico, and the influences of local and global feedbacks on the resilience and
adaptive capacity of these systems. Researchers will (1) characterize coastal
oceanographic variability and the patterns and drivers of low-oxygen, or
hypoxic, events; (2) assess the impacts of variability, particularly hypoxic
events, on nearshore species, ecosystems, and fisheries, and compare these
impacts with those of past ENSO events; (3) assess the cultural, social, and
economic variables that influence the responses of local communities to these
impacts, particularly their willingness and ability to invest in local
conservation and adaptation; and (4) assess the willingness of selected groups
of U.S. citizens to support these local conservation efforts and determine what
factors influence such contributions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As in a number of
other coastal regions, the ecosystems and fisheries off Baja California have
been heavily affected by extreme events driven by climate. ENSO events caused
significant declines in key resources during 1982-83 and 1997-98, and recent
episodes of low oxygen in the California Current region resulted in high
mortality of ecologically and commercially important marine species. A better
understanding of the capacity of humans and fisheries to adapt to oceanographic
variability will help show how to mitigate the social and economic impacts of
increased variability due to climate change and growing pressure on natural
resources. For example, this project will help allow us to anticipate the
occurrence and effects on fisheries of low-oxygen events off western North
America, and to design marine reserves so as to buffer them. By examining how
the local effects of uncertainty in the ocean can spread more widely in society,
the project will lead to broader adaptation strategies. The project will also
train undergraduate and graduate students to integrate social and ecological
studies, a vitally needed skill in an increasingly crowded world.