* 1212573
* EAGER: Synergistic Influences of Oscillating Pressure and Growth Factor on Chondrogenesis in a Novel Centrifugal Bioreactor
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Bernard Van Wie, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Theresa Good
* 05/31/2016
* USD 231,395.00

1212573/ Van Wie&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cartilage regenerative medicine for
osteoarthritis will be advanced signifi-cantly by improved fundamental
understanding at the cellular level of the complex interplay of mechanical and
biochemical stimuli needed to create healthy cartilage. The central hypothesis
posed by these investigators is that optimal differentiation of human
mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) occurs via exposure to bioactive molecules
combined with physical stimuli that promote membrane N-cadherin de-pendent
cellular junctions. The researchers investigate our hypothesis using a unique
continuous centrif-ugal bioreactor (CCBR) in this industry-university
collaborative EAGER project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The strength of this research program is the collaborative
interface between biology, engineering and technology. WSU engineers will
provide the novel bioreactor and AFM analytical technology, and REGN scientists
will provide genetics and cell biology expertise. The research is : 1) to grow
and differentiate hMSCs in the CCBR; 2) to determine the addi-tive and
synergistic influences of multiple stimuli on chondrogenesis; and 3) to
establish the relative contributions and synergistic impacts of various stimuli
on mRNA upregulation and expression of proteins responsible for signaling
pathways and mechano-transduction mechanisms responsible for heightened
chondrogenic differentiation of hMSCs. The work could yield potential commercial
application for autologous chondrocyte tissue culture systems for regenerative
implants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact:&lt;br/&gt;Teaching &amp;
training: Presentations will be given on synergistic stimuli on chondrogenesis
at REGN, and annual NIH Protein Biotechnology Training Program symposia;
Representation: A U.S. woman and/or minority PhD student is being recruited to
join the pro-gram through an anticipated NSF Graduate Research Supplement;
Infrastructure: A new CCBR will be developed capable of imparting multiple
stimuli for mechanotransduction studies; Dissemination at AIChE and ACS meetings
and in technical journals; Societal Benefits: The work is expected to have long-
term impact on regenerative cartilage repair and other tissue culture
applications that impact human health.