* 1212843
* 12th National Conference on Science, Policy, and the Environment: Environment and Security, Washington, DC
* GEO,GEO
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Peter Saundry, National Council for Science and the Environment/CEDD
* Standard Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 03/31/2013
* USD 30,000.00

This award to The National Council for Science and the Environment (NCSE) will
support the 12th National Conference on Science, Policy and the Environment on
the theme ?Environment and Security.? The conference will be held January 18-20,
2012 at the Ronald Reagan Building and International Trade Center in Washington,
DC. Over 1,100 participants from higher education institutions, government,
civil society organizations, research and policy organizations, business,
international organizations and governments are expected to attend. How we
address national security in the 21st Century is expanding, reflecting global
environment pressures that pose challenges to the well-being and resilience of
both human society and the natural environment. The Environment and Security
Conference will address how environmental factors impact both national and
personal security with a focus on five interconnected themes: climate disruption
and security, energy security, water security, environment and public health
security and food security. The conference program will feature six keynote
presentations, six plenary roundtables, 23 symposia and 25 interactive breakout
workshops. Over 200 distinguished thought leaders, scientists, federal agency
officials, policy experts and international authorities will speak at the
workshops.