* 1212692
* Synthesis and Coherent Vibrational Laser Spectroscopy of Putative Molecular Constituents in Secondary Organic Aerosol Particles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Regan Thomson, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2016
* USD 444,890.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Chemistry Division at the
National Science Foundation supports the research of Professors Regan J. Thomson
and Franz M. Geiger both from Northwestern University who will focus on
developing new chemical, spectroscopic, and physical measurement tools to
further our understanding of the chemical composition of organic aerosol
particles. Research enabling the chemical analysis of secondary organic aerosol
(SOA) particles will enable subsequent understanding of parameters important in
predicting cloud properties related to climate science. These properties rank
among the least understood atmospheric processes in the climate system. This
project will combine expertise in synthetic organic chemistry and coherent
vibrational spectroscopy to do the following: 1. Synthesize pinene-, carene-,
and isoprene-derived organic model compounds necessary for understanding and
predicting the formation, properties, and fate of SOA particles; 2. Perform the
first definitive structural confirmation of the molecular constituents that are
thought to be present within and on SOA particles using coherent vibrational
spectroscopy; and, 3. Benchmark the results to those obtained from SOA particles
collected in Southern Finland, the central Amazon Basin, and the Harvard
Environmental Chamber. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to integrating the
proposed research activities with meaningful involvement of students and junior
investigators via the Science Engagement Institute at Northwestern University,
this project will bridge important knowledge gaps that currently curtail the
molecular understanding of SOA particle formation. Isotope editing of the
species to be synthesized will allow for the definite assignment of vibrational
spectra of terpenes and their derivatives, which is important for fundamental
theoretical and experimental spectroscopic studies of these fascinating
compounds. In addition, the project will make available to the scientific
community chemical compounds in pure form that have not previously been
synthesized and analyzed.