* 1212575
* New Multireference Models for Strongly Correlated Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Laura Gagliardi, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2015
* USD 242,000.00

Laura Gagliardi of the University of Minnesota is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
division to develop new multi-configurational quantum chemical models that will
expand the range of their applicability. A new method called SplitCAS, which
will reduce the computational costs of solving the Configuration Interaction
secular problem inherent in Complete Active Space SCF, CASSCF, will be developed
and implemented. The basic idea is to apply partitioning techniques to a CASSCF-
type wave function in order to split the active space into a principal and an
extended part. With this splitting it is possible to treat, at the same time,
dynamical and non-dynamical electron correlation effects and address chemical
problems where the active space required is too large to be handled by the
conventional CASSCF method. Some specific chemical problems to be studied
include novel multi-metallic systems for small molecule activation and efficient
reactions that split water to generate molecular
oxygen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The computational tools developed in this project
have applications to a diverse range of research areas including catalysis,
sustainable chemistry, and alternative energy. This research will disseminate
science, algorithms, and computer code. Moreover, Professor Gagliardi is active
in trying to attract young women in science and in academia. She organizes
seminars with the aim of addressing those challenges faced especially by women
who want to undertake a scientific career.