* 1212576
* BREAD:  Engineering Broad-spectrum Resistance Against Multiple Geminiviruses and Cassava Brown Streak Viruses Using Synthetic Trans-acting Small Interfering RNA (tasiRNA)
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Stephan Winter, Delaware State University
* Continuing Grant
* carlos vallejos
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,088,929.00

PI: Vincent Fondong (Delaware State University)&lt;br/&gt;Co-PIs: Oumar Doungous
(Delaware State University), Kone Mongomake (Delaware State University), Stephan
Winter (German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures Braunschweig,
Germany)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cassava is an important staple food crop to more
than 500 million people worldwide, most of whom live in sub-Saharan Africa. In
tropical and subtropical regions of Africa, the cassava crop is infected by
viruses belonging to Geminiviridae and Potyviridae families, which are the two
most important plant viruses in the world. Members of the Geminiviridae family
cause the cassava mosaic disease while the Potyviridae cause the cassava brown
streak disease. So far, seven virus species of the Geminiviridae family and two
species of the Potyviridae have been identified across Africa. These viruses are
increasingly occurring in mixed infections, causing synergistic interactions
that result in severe symptoms and almost total crop loss. Currently, control of
these viruses is through the use of resistant plant varieties coupled with
various management strategies. However, transfer of resistance using
conventional breeding is limited by several factors including lack of useful
genes in core cassava germplasm collections, heterozygosity and allopolyploidy,
irregular flowering, and low fertility rates. Thus, although classical breeding
efforts have proved to be instrumental in developing virus resistant cassava
varieties, it is complicated and slow, and is unlikely to provide a lasting
solution to the fast spreading virus disease pandemics. This emphasizes the need
for the development of new approaches to contain these viruses. The goal of this
project is to design synthetic trans-acting small interfering RNAs (tasiRNAs)
from conserved regions of cassava viruses with the capability of targeting
members of virus families causing cassava diseases across Africa. TasiRNAs have
been shown to be efficient in targeting RNA transcripts, including virus
transcripts, and is thus a potentially powerful tool for the control of plant
viruses. Because synthetic tasiRNAs of greater than 21 nucleotides are
sufficient to efficiently silence cognate genes, this technology provides an
unprecedented opportunity to target many viruses using small transgene
constructs. This approach is more efficient than the current strategy based on
long hairpin transgene constructs, which are unstable and are characterized by
inefficient spread of the siRNA to appropriate targets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute significantly to cassava
virus control efforts in Africa. The project will also provide unique training
opportunities in molecular biology to two African co-PIs who will use the
technologies in their home institutions. Two postdoctoral researchers and six
undergraduate students will be trained in the project. Anticipated outcomes
include transgene constructs and DNA sequences with the potential to control
cassava viruses. Results and materials generated from this research will be
accessible to the scientific community through the Delaware State University
website (http://www.appliedplantbiotech.com/index.html) and at the Co-PI website
in Germany (http://www.dsmz.de/).