* 1212645
* Surface Chemistry Studies with Cluster Ion Beams
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Nicholas Winograd, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2017
* USD 800,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Nicholas Winograd and his group at Pennsylvania State
University focus on elucidating the fundamental aspects of the interaction of
energetic particles with solids, with the goal of advancing the utility of
secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) experiments. Results from this research
should find materials characterization applications in such diverse fields as
polymer science, astrophysics, drug discovery, organic electronics, organic
photovoltaics and molecule-specific imaging. The emergence of cluster ion
sources such as C60 has opened unique opportunities in molecular depth
profiling. In this situation, the layers of a molecular solid are removed by the
cluster source without significant accumulation of chemical damage and with a
depth resolution of less than 10 nm. This modality offers the possibility of
interrogating buried interfaces with unprecedented spatial resolution. Molecule-
specific imaging is another unique feature of SIMS, and when combined with
molecular depth profiling, yields a 3-dimensional rendering of the chemistry.
Protocols for optimizing these experiments will be developed from predictions of
computer simulations of the cluster bombardment event, and by performing
experiments on model systems where a number of parameters, such as projectile
energy and angle, can be systematically examined. A special emphasis is placed
upon characterizing gas cluster ion beams that now produce argon clusters with
more than 2000 atoms, and on searching for new H-containing species that may
enhance ionization through dynamically created pre-formed ions. The ultimate
goal, then, is to acquire a fundamental understanding of cluster-solid
interactions and to provide a new mass spectrometry-based 3-dimensional imaging
protocol that operates on the nanoscale. This new methodology should find
valuable applications to a wide range of biologists and material scientists for
characterization purposes.

The project will include participation of three graduate students who will
develop novel instrumentation for imaging and for cluster ion beams. They will
acquire skills that are designed to be valuable assets in their post-graduate
careers. Throughout this effort, dual emphasis is placed upon acquiring a
fundamental understanding of ion-solid interactions, and of utilizing this
information to advance the applications. This philosophy lends a synergism to
the program and provides a unique learning experience for those involved.
International collaboration and outreaching to high school students through the
SEECoS program are also proposed.