* 1212450
* Development of a General, Fully Relativistic, Parallelized B-Spline R-Matrix with Pseudo-States Program for Electron and Photon Interactions with Atoms, Ions, and Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Klaus Bartschat, Drake University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2016
* USD 185,669.00

The purpose of this project is to further develop a general and effective, fully
relativistic computer code for electron and photon interactions with atoms,
ions, and molecules using the B-spline R-matrix (BSR) method. This innovative
approach has significant advantages over the standard suite of R-matrix codes,
mostly developed over the past four decades in Belfast and currently used
worldwide. Specifically, the excellent numerical properties of a B-spline basis
allow for high computational accuracy, and the ability to employ non-orthogonal
sets of term-dependent orbitals allows for compact configuration expansions.
During the current funding period, the existing computer code will be fully
parallelized, and a new suite of general atomic structure codes will be
developed, which directly use the B-spline as an improved interface to the BSR
collision codes. Furthermore, a parallelized B-spline code to solve the close-
coupling equations in the outer region will be developed, and a pilot version of
the BSR program to treat time-dependent processes, such as intense short-pulse
XUV laser-atom interactions, will be extended to double ionization and infrared
radiation. Finally, the potential use of the BSR method to describe electron and
photon interactions with diatomic molecules will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the project consists of
the further development of a highly successful suite of computer programs to
calculate accurate atomic data for a wide variety of electron- and photon-driven
processes. The production calculations will focus on atomic targets, for which
these data are of critical value to model the physics and chemistry of
astrophysical and laboratory plasmas, lasers, and planetary atmospheres. This
work will support many experimental projects ranging from industrial lighting
systems to fundamental research performed at next-generation synchrotrons and
free-electron lasers. The results will be presented at international scientific
meetings, and the next version of the computer code will be written up and made
available to the public. Finally, undergraduate students will be trained through
developing and testing individual modules of the package. This includes running
the code on massively parallel computing platforms provided through XSEDE
resources.