* 1212183
* CNH:  Impacts of Ecosystem Service Payments in Coupled Natural and Human Systems
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Douglas Stow, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,299,917.00

Payments for ecosystem services are incentives paid to users of natural
resources to reduce their use of these resources and the accompanying stresses
and disturbances to the natural systems that provide the resources. Although
some systems of payments have been in place for over two decades, the success of
payments in maintaining both ecosystems and human well-being has not been
critically assessed. This project will study the system of payments in
Fanjingshan National Nature Reserve in China, the habitat of the endangered
Guizhou golden monkey, Rhinopithecus brelichi. To assess effects on the
ecosystem, researchers will use remote sensing to measure change in forest cover
and use camera trapping to measure which forest areas are serving as habitat for
golden monkeys. To assess effects on the local people, researchers will combine
existing census data with extensive household surveys and participatory mapping.
Results will show how human populations, attachment to the land, decisions, and
livelihoods have changed since payments began, how the quality of the forest has
changed, and how these changes in the human and the natural systems depend on
each other and are likely to go on in the future. These findings will assess how
well payments for ecosystem services have succeeded at Fanjingshan, show how to
assess other systems of payments, and suggest how to improve the effectiveness
of payments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will help test and hone an
important tool for conservation. Previous work suggests that the benefits of
payment programs to biological conservation and local populations are usually
not sustained once payments end, because participants tend to return to their
behaviors before the program. This project will specifically examine this issue
as part of its general aim to enhance ability to plan, design, and implement
payment programs, and thus to increase the effectiveness of tax dollars in
protecting our environment. The research will educate K-12 students and teachers
in both the United States and China through mentoring and curriculum
development, feed into the development of curricula for university students, and
train future academic leaders in multiple disciplines. The project will reach
out to local indigenous populations, managers, policy-makers and the general
public, increasing understanding of how payment programs work and leading to
improvements in conservation awareness, conservation planning and design, and
policy implementation. In addition to regular presentations and publications, a
movie that documents the multidisciplinary nature of the project and a
comprehensive website will be developed to reach stakeholders at local to global
scales. All these efforts will contribute to increasing understanding about how
to conserve endangered species and associated ecosystems.