* 1212462
* Enabling Quantum Memory for Light
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Rufus Cone, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Orel
* 07/31/2014
* USD 118,596.00

A recent Physics Today article and other scientific reviews highlight the
importance of rare earth ion ensembles in the development of robust quantum
memory for light. These solid-state systems store and recall the quantum states
of light with high fidelity and have been shown to be competitive with or better
than alternative approaches. Analysis and demonstrations by international groups
have shown that rare-earth systems offer the potential to simultaneously achieve
multimode quantum storage with 90% efficiency over timescales of seconds with
GHz access bandwidths. Quantum memories that satisfy all these properties
simultaneously are critical in the race to develop quantum networks, long-
distance quantum communication and quantum cryptography, and linear optics
quantum computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses directly on the
demonstration of efficient solid-state quantum memories through development of
enabling triply ionized Thulium (Tm3+)-doped solid-state LiNbO3 optical
waveguides in collaboration with the experimental quantum communication group of
Prof. Wolfgang Tittel at the Institute for Quantum Information Science,
University of Calgary, a leader in many of the quantum memory demonstrations.
The broad goal of our work is to develop a solid-state material satisfying all
requirements for quantum teleportation of quantum states between light and
matter. In recent demonstrations of a high-fidelity solid-state quantum memory
for entangled photons by Tittel, et al. (Nature, 2011), the 2% total system
recall efficiency was limited by an unexplained excess decoherence in the
Tm3+-doped LiNbO3 waveguide storage material. From our past decoherence studies
of bulk Tm3+-doped LiNbO3 single crystals, it is known that excess decoherence
that can be encountered in waveguides is not a fundamental limit of the material
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we are investigating and resolving
the differences between the waveguide storage material used in the Nature
demonstration by Calgary and the superior properties of our bulk crystals
through coordinated experiments carried out in Montana and Calgary. Experimental
study of optical decoherence combined with theoretical modeling of the material
physics is used to reveal mechanisms for excess decoherence in the waveguide
material to guide improvement in performance through routes including new LiNbO3
materials, alternate waveguide fabrication processes, material processing, and
manipulation of properties through controlled external perturbations such as
applied fields and temperature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's results
have immediate applications in designing solid-state materials for quantum
information processing, optical signal processing, laser frequency references,
and laser materials. Quantum memories that enable long distance quantum key
distribution for secure communication are of strategic importance given the need
to transmit confidential information in a way that keeps it secure even 50 years
from now. There is close collaboration with local groups in these areas at MSU,
AdvR Inc., Scientific Materials Corp., and S2 Corp. -- a company whose
technology was enabled by our scientific research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
techniques employed provide ideal educational programs for students at all
stages, from undergraduates to post-doctoral researchers. This work offers
students opportunities to gain proficiency with concepts and methods for
research and development of optical materials in academic or industrial
environments and is further enhanced by exchanges between MSU and Calgary. In
particular, it provides a much-needed pool of skilled graduates for over twenty
local Montana optical industries with whom close ties are maintained.