* 1212384
* Workshop: Support for Student Participation in the Intelligent User Interface 2012 Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2012,07/31/2012
* Sharon Oviatt, Incaa Designs
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2012
* USD 19,598.00

This is funding to provide financial support for 10 graduate students from
universities in the United States (or who are U.S. citizens) to attend the 2012
International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI 2012), to be held
in Lisbon, Portugal, on February 15-17, 2012, as participants in the doctoral
session, presenters in the main conference, and attendees at the conference for
general training purposes. Sponsored by ACM, the annual IUI conferences
represent the growing interest in next-generation intelligent and interactive
user interfaces; they are the premier forum where researchers from academia and
industry, who work at the intersection of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) and
Artificial Intelligence (AI), come together to exchange complementary insights
and to present and discuss outstanding research and applications whose goal is
to make the computerized world a more amenable place. Unlike traditional AI the
focus is not so much on making the computer smart all by itself, but rather on
making the interaction between computers and people smarter. Unlike traditional
HCI, there is a focus on solutions that involve large amounts of knowledge and
emerging technologies such as natural language understanding, brain computer
interfaces, and gesture recognition. To this end, IUI encourages contributions
not only from computer science but also from related fields such as psychology,
cognitive science, computer graphics, the arts, etc. IUI 2012 will be the 15th
conference in the series; topics of interest this year include: Intelligent
interactive interfaces, systems, and devices; Ubiquitous interfaces; Smart
environments and tools; Human-centered interfaces; Mobile interfaces; Multimodal
interfaces; Pen-based interfaces; Spoken and natural language interfaces;
Conversational interfaces; Affective and social interfaces; Tangible interfaces;
Collaborative multi-user interfaces; Adaptive interfaces; Sensor-based
interfaces; User modeling and interaction with novel interfaces and devices;
Interfaces for personalization and recommender systems; Interfaces for plan-
based systems; Interfaces that incorporate knowledge- or agent-based approaches;
Help interfaces for complex tasks; Example- and demonstration-based interfaces;
Interfaces for intelligent generation and presentation of information;
Intelligent authoring systems; Synthesis of multimodal virtual characters and
social robots; Interfaces for games and entertainment; for learning-based
interactions and for health informatics; Empirical studies and evaluations of
IUI interfaces; New approaches to designing Intelligent User Interfaces. More
information about the conference is available at http://iuiconf.org/.

This year IUI is organizing a student Doctoral Consortium (workshop) for the
first time to expand student attendance and training in this area (see:
http://iuiconf.org/doctoral_consortium.html). The Doctoral Consortium will be
held as a day-long event on February 14, 2012, immediately preceding the
conference, and is designed to give students exposure to their research
community, including an opportunity to present their work to and receive
constructive feedback from their peers as well as senior scientist mentors in
the field. The students' work will also be featured during the main conference
in the poster session, where they will gain additional experience explaining
their work to others in the field. It is essential that our current generation
of students receive good quality training in intelligent interactive interfaces,
since such interfaces will be key components of future interactive systems in a
variety of domains; therefore, the doctoral consortium is designed to encourage
Ph.D. students to start building a professional support network of peers and
mentors. The organizing committee has undertaken to proactively recruit student
participants from schools that have not traditionally been well represented in
the IUI community. Priority will be given to funding students representing
different institutions (no more than 2 from any given institution); women,
minority students, the disabled, and veterans all will be encouraged to
participate.

Broader Impacts: This funding will enable attendance at this conference by
students who might otherwise be unable to do so for financial reasons. It will
enhance the educational experience of funded participants, by bringing them into
contact with leading researchers in the field and by exposing them to the lively
discussion during the course of the conference that often leads to opportunities
for career advancement. The quality of the conference itself will be enhanced as
well, thanks to a broadening of the base of institutions represented and
increased diversity of participants. The rich exchange of ideas at IUI has
previously proven to be a valuable source of ideas for future research, as well
as leading to collaborative efforts; this funding will extend the opportunities
for collaboration and provide intellectual stimulus to programs that have
previously sent few or no representatives to this conference.