* 1212046
* Vorticity driven dynamics in orientationally ordered systems
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Peter Palffy-Muhoray, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 09/30/2016
* USD 223,000.00

Liquid Crystals (LCs) are orientationally ordered fluids. In a broader sense,
LCs can be thought of as soft matter with orientational order, an emerging class
of complex fluids. There are many experiments which show interesting flow
phenomena in liquid crystals. We focus on two of these, where vorticity, driven
by external sources, creates material flow. In the Janossy effect, dye molecules
under photoexcitation in a liquid crystal host act as rotors of molecular
motors, and generate vorticity and subsequent flow. In the Yokoyama-Tabe
experiment, chiral molecules in a Langmuir monolayer are caused, by a transverse
current of water vapor, to rotate and give rise to flow. This award will support
work aimed at understanding such phenomena, where local torques, acting
essentially as point sources of vorticity, give rise to macroscropic translation
and flow. The work will be carried out through an interdisciplinary
collaboration involving applied mathematics and physics, with the goal of
developing a sound mathematical model which is capable of predicting the
dynamical behavior of orientationally ordered systems where flow plays an
essential role; and building robust computational tools that will capture the
essential features of the interplay between flow and microstructure. The
mathematical model we propose has two important components. First, it is the use
of the full orientational probability density function, rather than a few of its
moments to characterize orientational order. Second, the flow dynamics is
included in the model. It is known that inhomogeneous flows play important roles
in forming transient microstructures, thus the orientational state must be
coupled with the macroscopic flow field. This will lay the framework for the
study and design of other complex soft matter systems where flow and local
vorticity play important roles. A novel aspect is the exploration of the
effectiveness of peer mentoring by graduate students from applied mathematics
and physics collaborating on this project. In the rapidly advancing field of
materials science, complex fluids are emerging as an increasingly important
class of materials. They are capable of exhibiting a remarkably broad range of
behavior in response to excitations, leading to a wide variety of applications.
This rich responsivity originates in physical processes which are made possible
by complex internal structure. Complex fluids range today from liquid crystals
to micro- and nanocolloids, virus suspensions and active biofluids. A key
component of many of these systems is orientational order of the constituents.
Remarkable and unexpected behavior can result from the coupling between
orientational order and translation; this includes rubber lasers and light
driven plastic motors. This award will support work aimed at understanding such
phenomena, with the goal of building computational tools to describe and to help
to understand and utilize the responsible mechanisms. The broader impacts of the
proposed work are the usefulness of the developed tools to the larger community
in the design of photo-responsive soft matter, metamaterials for transformation
optics and strategies for biological transport. They include contributions to
science and mathematics education at the graduate level. The two graduate
students, one in applied mathematics and one in chemical physics, participating
in this project will gain expertise in various aspects of this multifaceted work
and will benefit from interactions with more senior members of the research team
and each other. A vigorous effort will be made to encourage the participation of
women and members of underrepresented groups in this project.