* 1212537
* Separations with Reversible Nanogels
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Lisa Holland, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2016
* USD 435,383.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, and co-funding from the Chemical and Biological Separations (CBS)
Program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and
Transport Systems, Professor Lisa Holland and her group at West Virginia
University are developing a thermally-reversible, self-assembled, phospholipid
nanogel for chemical separations. These nanogels are a new material with
unprecedented ability to separate mixtures of complex biomolecules. The full
range of applications for this material will be characterized by determining the
fluidic properties of the material under different conditions and by recording
the separation performance for standard sets of biopolymers including DNA,
peptides, proteins, and carbohydrates. The technology to be developed will
directly affect research in many fields that rely on electrophoretic and micro-
scale separation based assays to identify the biomolecule present in the sample
as well as the concentration. The research indirectly influences other fields
utilizing phospholipids for structural analyses by nuclear magnetic resonance,
as biomimetic coatings, as templates for fabrication, and for the investigation
of membrane protein function. Finally, self-assembled phospholipid nanogels
serve as a model smart-material for which the material properties change under
different environmental conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The teaching,
training, and learning fostered under this award lead to valuable support of
human resources. Graduate students who participate in innovative research and
interdisciplinary research experiences will earn PhD degrees and enter the
workforce with the ability to work across scientific disciplines. The graduate
researchers engaged in this project gain valuable training in bioanalyses,
material science, fluid dynamics, and micro-scale separations of biological
molecules. In addition, micro-flow systems in the form of microfluidic devices
will be adapted for the middle school science classroom. Science education at
this level benefits young students as they begin the process of career identity.
Lessons will be developed that align with teaching objectives to support the
science curricula. The curricula and micro-flow experiments will be disseminated
through local and national presentations, by means of a teaching workshop, and
by submitting the material as a collection to the NSF funded National Science
Digital Library so that is it freely available on-line.