* 1212268
* Calibration and Standardization of Large Surveys and Missions in Astronomy and Astrophysics
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2013
* Stephen Kent, Capitol College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Evans
* 06/30/2013
* USD 25,433.00

This award will partially support a conference titled "Calibration and
Standardization of Large Surveys and Missions in Astronomy and Astrophysics".
The primary purpose of the conference is to bring together active researchers
and experts in the field of astrophysical surveys to discuss advances in the
areas of calibration and standardization and to start to address the challenging
problems of these topics that are common to many current and planned survey
projects.

The intellectual merit of the proposal is to provide a venue for experts in the
fields of survey standardization and calibration to discuss recent advances in
the fields, to share lessons learned from recent calibration efforts, and to
foster community support for solving the challenging problems of calibration and
standardization that are common to many different projects. A key goal of this
conference will be to develop a minimum set of requirements that will be used in
future surveys to increase the ability for data to be cross-calibrated between
surveys and to make it more "archival science" friendly. This conference will
also be a step in the process of having these new survey data ingested into the
Virtual Observatory in a meaningful and useful way.

The broader impacts of the conference fall into two categories; community impact
and participation of young researchers and underrepresented groups in the
conference. The goal of the conference to lay the foundation for establishing
minimum standards for calibration between surveys will have a major impact
across all of astronomical research. With respect to community support, the vast
majority of the requested funds will go to support the travel expenses of young
investigators like graduate students and post-docs and scientists without other
forms of travel support.