* 1212895
* Development and Synthetic Applications of [1,3] and [3,3] Rearrangements of O-Vinyl Oximes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Laura Anderson, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2015
* USD 375,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Laura L. Anderson of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Illinois at Chicago will explore the synthetic applications of the
[1,3] and [3,3] rearrangements of O-vinyl oximes for more efficient access to
important stereodefined organic fragments such as alpha-amino ketones, 1,4-imino
ketones, beta-amino alcohols, gamma-amino alcohols, and heterocycles. Prior use
of O-vinyl oximes in organic synthesis has been hampered by a lack of general
methods for their preparation. This program builds on recent discoveries of
simple methods for the preparation of O-vinyl oximes and initial observations of
the tunability of their rearrangement reactions. Collection of fundamental
reactivity and mechanistic data will be used to guide the development of
stereoselective and catalytic processes and to harness the potential of these
underutilized important synthons. Rearrangement products of O-vinyl oximes will
be further derivitized using the stereochemical information set during the
sigmatropic rearrangements to provide rapid access to complicated,
stereodefined, organic fragments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project could
transform an unused organic compound into a valuable and versatile organic
synthon, providing new tools for the retrosynthetic analysis of synthetic
targets and the elucidation of new efficient pathways to important
pharmaceuticals and materials. The fundamental studies outlined in the proposal
could rapidly elucidate the most potent applications of these underutilized
intermediates and this approach to synthetic method development will also
function as a means to train an ethnic and gender diverse group of graduate and
undergraduate students to find creative solutions to synthetic challenges and
prepare them to positively impact the chemical community.