* 1212340
* STTR Phase I:  Reconfigurable Wireless Platforms for Spectrally Agile Coexistence
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Samuel MacMullan, ORB Analytics
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will involve
research on and development of a reconfigurable wireless platform enabling
secondary access of wireless spectrum via simultaneous data transmission across
several disjoint frequency channels. In particular, the proposed innovations
will advance the current state-of-the-art in the area of non-contiguous
orthogonal frequency division multiple access (NC-OFDMA) architectures. The
anticipated reduction in NC-OFDMA out-of-band emissions and transmitted peak-to-
average power ratio will greatly improve the co-existence of primary and
secondary wireless transmissions. The resultant improved dynamic spectrum access
(DSA) capability will then permit much more efficient use of limited spectrum
resources. The proposed work will be targeted towards the development of a high
throughput and robust hardware implementation for the 802.22 wireless regional
area network, a recently ratified Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers (IEEE) standard that employs NC-OFDMA. The research will result in an
NC-OFDMA optimization framework that will help shape the direction of this field
and guide the design of viable 802.22 products.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project stems from the
opportunity to develop wireless products for the rural broadband and machine-to-
machine markets. Data communication networks are needed by modern society for
access to the Internet, providing both essential services and modern
conveniences. Unfortunately, many communities, especially rural, currently lack
the infrastructure to support such networks, with roughly three billion people
in the world with little if any wireless service. Therefore, conducting research
to optimize NC-OFDMA for high-speed communications systems including 802.22 in
rural areas will benefit society while providing enormous commercialization
potential. The optimization techniques and technology resulting from the
proposed activities will also yield products for smart grids and sensor networks
and support the public safety, emergency services, and first responder community
efforts to provide better communications access to the network.