* 1212320
* Collaborative Research: A Systems Biology Approach for Metabolically Engineering Escherichia coli for Producing Hydrogen via Fermentation
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2012,08/31/2012
* Thomas Wood, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 08/31/2012
* USD 59,869.00

CBET-0753702 Wood

Non-harmful bacteria may be used to produce chemicals for humans and this
includes fuels. Molecular hydrogen is an environmentally-clean fuel; hence, if
hydrogen can be synthesized efficiently by bacteria, then we may reduce air
pollution, reduce our dependence on foreign oil, and avoid greenhouse gases (the
carbon dioxide formed by our process will be recycled to plant mass and used
again to form hydrogen so there are no net emissions). This research will enable
hydrogen to be produced as a clean form of energy from bacteria using
fermentation of simple sugars. In fermentative production of hydrogen, glucose
is converted into pyruvate which is converted to formate which is then converted
to hydrogen. Hence, it is imperative to direct the carbon flux in the bacterial
cell to hydrogen formation by preventing competing glucose reactions and those
that convert pyruvate to acetate, lactate, and ethanol or that remove formate.
To achieve this aim, a systems biology approach will be used to produce more
hydrogen that includes (i) altering the metabolism of the bacteria by removing
unwanted pathways, (ii) evolving the necessary enzymes using protein
engineering, and (iii) modeling all the metabolic pathways of the bacterial cell
so that even better bacteria may be generated. We have chosen Escherichia coli
as our model system since (i) all 3985 non-lethal single mutations of strain E.
coli BW25113 are available; (ii) we may combine mutations rapidly using our
novel, successive, virus-based method; (iii) E. coli is the best-studied
bacterium so its metabolism is well understood; and (iv) its genome is sequenced
so DNA microarrays are available and metabolic flux analysis may be carried out
at the genome-scale. Along with the research results, the three professors
involved in this research will train undergraduate and graduate students, will
make accessible, via the World-Wide Web, specific outcomes of the project, and
will disseminate some of the research results to a diverse audience using
podcasting.