* 1212324
* RUI: The Study of Molecular Motion in Simple Glass Forming Liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,06/30/2017
* John Berberian, St Joseph's University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2017
* USD 302,228.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor John Berberian and his students
at St. Joseph's University will explore the molecular dynamics of glass forming
systems, from their melting points to below their glass transition temperatures,
Tg. The exemplary systems chosen for this study are the relatively simple
symmetrical alkyl halides (specifically, 3 bromo 3 methylpentane, 3 bromo 3
ethylpentane, 1 bromo 2 ethylbutane and 1 bromo 3 ethylpentane) since they are
devoid of hydrogen bonds and long range steric entanglements. This molecular
system provides a systematic change in the length of the carbon chain at
specific sites in the chain. Both modulated differential scanning calorimetry
and dielectric relaxation are used to assess the changes in the configurational
entropy with temperature (all of the molecular systems are dielectrically
active) to test effect of molecular interactions in the Adam-Gibbs theory
(cooperative rearranging regions). Additionally, the kinetics of the cold
crystallization above Tg for these systems are investigated using isothermal
modulated calorimetry and the measurement of the static permittivity both as a
function of time and as a function of temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of this study, along with previous results of similar systems, will
provide deeper insights into the intermolecular interactions that give rise to
the glass forming properties, and phase transitions in general. In turn, the
understanding of the structure of materials on a molecular level will allow the
team to predict the mechanical, thermal, and other properties of materials, such
as polymers and polymer blend. The importance of such structural knowledge
extends to a number of areas (drug industry, construction industry, health
industry, etc.) which have the potential to increase the quality of life. As a
Research at Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) project, the undergraduate
researchers engaged in this project will receive a solid foundational experience
in physical chemistry, as well as an opportunity to see direct implications in
the materials sciences and beyond.