* 1212272
* Hunting for Higgs Particles and Dilatons on the Lattice
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2017
* Joel Giedt, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2017
* USD 201,000.00

This project will extract the lowest lying flavor singlet 0++ states in a model
that could serve as an example of how electroweak symmetry is broken dynamically
(technicolor). This will be the first analysis of flavor singlet 0++ states
built from fermions in the lattice technicolor field of study. These are
important objects, since they can be identified with the effective Higgs
particle (sigma) or perhaps the dilaton of the theory. Obviously, understanding
the mass of this state relative to the scale of electroweak symmetry breaking,
given by the technipion decay constant f(pi) of the theory, is of
phenomenological relevance. We will also obtain an estimate of the width of this
particle, which determines whether or not it is experimentally detectable. Based
on studies of Minimal Walking Technicolor, the 0++ glueball may be anomalously
light in the theory we propose to study; we will be able to extract its mass. It
might even be able to be identified as the dilaton of the theory, depending on
how small its mass is compared to f(pi). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The method used
will be lattice gauge theory. To perform this task, we will extend the QUDA
library (NVIDIA-based multi-GPU code developed for quantum chromodynamics, the
theory of the nuclear strong interaction) to address SU(2) gauge theory with
fermions in the adjoint (triplet) representation. On top of QUDA we will write
software layers for simulation and for analysis. In the analysis stage we will
estimate disconnected diagrams by exploiting dilution. We will also extract the
glueball state by utilizing smearing, blocking and variational techniques. Our
experience and software layers will enable us to rapidly take on other theories
besides SU(2) gauge theory with adjoint fermions in the future. We will use
clover improved lattice fermions with stout smeared gauge links, in order to
reduce lattice artifacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because our code will be made
public, the scientific community will benefit by being able to use our code for
other studies. Our analysis code will be flexible and in fact not tied to the
gauge group and representation. Thus it can be used for studying 0++ states in
other theories, including quantum chromodynamics. As a result, a significant
outcome of the present project is reusable code with wide
application.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;We will train students in theoretical and
supercomputing skills, providing a path toward careers in scientific computing.
We will create increased interest in "beyond the standard model" physics at
Rensselaer, broadening the exposure of students to current trends in high energy
physics. We will perform outreach to a middle school, and develop lesson plans
built around activities that teach concepts associated with our research.