* 1212302
* 2012 Summer School in Statistics for Astronomers
* MPS,AST
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2014
* Gutti Babu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 02/28/2014
* USD 24,269.00

2012 Summer School in Statistics for Astronomers; June 4-8 2012; Pennsylvania
State University, College Park

Astronomical research often involves imaging, photometric and spectroscopic
surveys of the sky that produce terabyte to petabyte databases and billion-
object catalogs. This type of research will be coming to fruition in the near
future with a new generation of formidable telescopes and the federation of
diverse astronomical datasets. While the promise is great, achieving the
scientific goals depends critically on extraction of useful knowledge using
statistical inference, and especially the use of advanced statistical methods.
Observational astronomers are thus confronting a wider range of statistical
challenges than ever before, while unfortunately most U.S. astronomers are not
well trained in statistics, learning only elementary methods through books
written by and for physical scientists. Such volumes usually treat only a narrow
range of problems, providing inadequate conceptual foundations in mathematical
statistics and little guidance in advanced applied statistics. Statistics is an
available technology that must be tapped to advance the needs of astronomy and
astrophysics.

The five-day 2012 Summer School for young astronomers in statistical inference
will present concepts and methodologies at an intermediate level, using
experienced instructors and an innovative curriculum. This is the latest in the
series of intensive week-long Summer Schools in Statistics for Astronomers,
initiated in 2005 by the group at Pennsylvania State. If maintained at a steady
state, these Summer Schools will train about 10% of the nation's young
astronomers, filling a critical lacuna in the US scientific workforce.