* 1212799
* Coordination-Driven self-Assembly: Multi-Component and Photophysical Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Peter Stang, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2016
* USD 435,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Peter J. Stang of the University of
Utah investigates coordination-driven self-assembly of 2D metallacycles and 3D
metallacages. Specifically, heterligated Pt-complexes, involving carboxylate and
pyridyl ligands, will be studied that allow the formation of a greater variety
and more complex supramolecular assemblies. Multi-component self-assembly, as
well as the interconversion of homoligated pyridyl architectures with
heteroligated systems, will be examined. The use of flexible ligands and
heteroligated, flexible multi-component assemblies will be investigated.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance our fundamental understanding
of how simple molecules spontaneously self-assemble into complex nanoscale
systems. This work could have significant impact upon nanoscience and
nanotechnology and, in particular, future "bottom up" manufacturing. It may also
provide new materials with novel properties and functions such as sensors,
catalysts, etc. of importance in the chemical industry. The broader impact also
involves training postdoctoral researchers and graduate and undergraduate
students in supramolecular self-assembly. These researchers will also be
mentored in the dissemination of research results via presentations at major
conferences and publications in premier peer reviewed, scientific journals.