* 1212300
* WORKSHOP: The 2012 HRI Pioneers Workshop at the 2012 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2012
* Robin Murphy, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 11/30/2012
* USD 28,273.00

This is funding to support a Young Pioneers Workshop (doctoral consortium) of
approximately 18 graduate students and 2 postdocs from diverse research
communities (e.g., computer science and engineering, psychology, cognitive
science, robotics, human factors, human-computer interaction design, and
communications), along with distinguished research faculty. The event will take
place on Monday, March 5, 2012, immediately preceding the Seventh Annual Human
Robot Interaction Conference (HRI 2012) to be held March 6-8, 2012, in Boston,
and which is jointly sponsored by ACM and IEEE. The theme of HRI 2012 is "Robots
in the Loop,' which highlights the importance of autonomously capable robots in
enhancing the experiences of human users in everyday life and work activities;
the conference will emphasize embodied robotic systems that operate, collaborate
with, learn from, and meet the needs of human users in real-world environments.
More information about the conference is available at
http://hri2012.org/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Young Pioneers Workshop is
designed to complement the conference, by providing a forum for students and
recent graduates in the field of HRI to share their current research with their
peers and a panel of senior researchers in a setting that is less formal and
more interactive than the main conference. During the workshop, participants
will talk about the important upcoming research themes in the field, encouraging
the formation of collaborative relationships across disciplines and geographic
boundaries. To these ends, the workshop will include sessions in a variety of
formats. Attendees will hear short talks from 3 selected student participants;
those students not invited to give an oral presentation will participate in an
interactive poster session. A panel of five senior researchers will share their
expertise and insights on how to address the interdisciplinary challenge of HRI.
The afternoon breakout session will involve small groups of 3-5 attendees with
diverse backgrounds working to design an integrative HRI project, encouraging
group participation and the cultivation of cross-disciplinary ideas. The
presentation session afterward will allow 10-15 minutes for each breakout group
to present a summary to the entire workshop; the organizers anticipate that the
discussions will continue during dinner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
This workshop will afford a unique opportunity for the best of the next
generation of researchers in human-robot interaction to be exposed to and
discuss current and relevant topics as they are being studied in several
different research communities (including but not limited to computer science
and engineering, psychology, robotics, human factors and ergonomics, and human-
computer interaction). This is important for the field, because it has been
recognized that transformative advances in research in this fledgling area can
only come through the melding of cross-disciplinary knowledge and multinational
perspectives. Participants will be encouraged to create a social network both
among themselves and with senior researchers at a critical stage in their
professional development, to form collaborative relationships, and to generate
new research questions to be addressed during the coming years. Participants
will also gain leadership and service experience, as the workshop is largely
student organized and student led. The PI will act aggressively to recruit young
researchers from minority and underrepresented groups in order to assure
diversity of the participants across a variety of dimensions, so that the
students' horizons are broadened to the future benefit of the field. The PI will
conduct pre- and post-workshop surveys in order to validate the effectiveness of
the 2012 Young Pioneers Workshop.