* 1212112
* CNH: Coupled Natural-Human Dynamics in a Vulnerable Coastal System
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Kam-biu Liu, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,499,935.00

This interdisciplinary research project will investigate the sustainability of
coastal communities that are especially vulnerable to natural resource losses
and natural hazards. The investigators will focus on the Lower Mississippi River
Basin in Louisiana, which is one of the most vulnerable coasts in the
continental United States and the world. Over the years, this deltaic region has
endured multiple threats and disasters, such as land loss, subsidence, sea-level
rise, flooding, hurricanes, and oil spills. The disappearance of land is a
critical problem in the southern part of the region. During the past decade,
significant population and economic growth has occurred in the northern part of
the study area, whereas the southern part surrounding New Orleans has
experienced population and economic decline. A pressing question is whether
southern coastal Louisiana reached a tipping point that makes it too costly to
sustain. If so, has the same type of economic and ecosystem functions gradually
migrated to the neighboring region to the north? The researchers will quantify
and explain these changes using a coupled natural-human system approach, and
they will evaluate the implications of those findings for future planning and
mitigation. The four objectives the researchers will pursue are (1) to develop
methods to assess the sustainability or resilience of a coastal system; (2) to
develop a system-level model to capture and quantify the dynamic linkages among
the major natural and human components; (3) to compare and contrast the
resiliency between the northern and southern parts of coastal Louisiana so as to
understand the resiliency control factors; and (4) to simulate future scenarios
for planning and decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will assess
the sustainability of the lower Mississippi River basin in Louisiana using a
coupled natural-human system approach. It will increase basic understanding
about the key factors affecting the sustainability of a coastal system and how
these key factors interact at a system level. The comparison between the two
systems in coastal Louisiana will provide new knowledge regarding how the two
systems have been coupled in the past that enhances understanding of system
interactions in the present and facilitates projections for the future. The set
of sustainability assessment and modeling tools and software developed in this
project will be valuable educational as well as decision-making tools for
students, other researchers, and decision makers. The project will engage a wide
audience, including K-12 students and teachers from underserved schools, local
governmental officials, environmental groups, and the public. Project findings
will inform policy makers and the public about how to increase the resilience of
the region, and they will provide scenarios to better plan for the future. The
findings also will provide new insights regarding other deltaic regions around
the world that are faced with similar types of threats and challenges. This
project is supported by the NSF Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems
(CNH) Program.