* 1212754
* Structure/property Relations in Silicate-C-O-H-N Melts Melts and Fluids Characterized Experimentally, In-situ, at Mantle Redox Conditions,  Pressure, and Temperature
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2018
* Bjorn Mysen, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2018
* USD 214,025.00

Intellectual merits. An experimental study is proposed to advance our
understanding the processes that govern the budget and recycling of volatile
components in the system C-O-H-N in the Earth?s interior. Relationships between
structure and transport, volume, and thermodynamic properties of silicate melts
and C-O-H-N fluid and fluid/melt element and stable isotope fractionation will
be examined while samples are at temperature, pressure, and redox conditions
primarily using a hydrothermal diamond anvil cell (HDAC). Major objectives are
to: [1] Use vibrational spectroscopy to characterize structure and properties in
silicate-C-O-H-N melt, mineral, and fluid systems as proxies to model the
behavior of fluids and melts in natural magmatic systems. [2] Determine
fractionation of structural species, and of isotopes between minerals, melts,
and fluids in silicate-COHN systems using vibrational spectroscopy and microbeam
analyses of quenched materials. [3] Develop structure-property models to explain
the behavior of natural magmatic systems at P-T conditions corresponding to the
upper mantle of the Earth. Current knowledge of structure of solubility and
solution mechanisms of C-O-H-N volatile components in silicate melts is based
largely on analytical and structural examination of quenched melts (glasses).
However, this information does not precisely reflect properties of actual melts.
Conversely, the proposed experiments will enable measurements of samples while
they are being held at temperature, pressure and redox conditions representative
of the Earth?s upper mantle. Characterization how melt structure affects
mineral/melt element partitioning will be addressed by combining melt structural
data with trace element partitioning experiments (relying on electron microprobe
and ion probe analysis of run products). Partitioning of structural species
between melts and fluids will be accomplished with vibrational spectroscopic
techniques and will be compared with elemental analyses as a means to calibrate
the partitioning of the structural species determined by vibrational
spectroscopy. Protocols will also be developed for use of vibrational
spectroscopy to determine D/H fractionation between fluid and melt while at
desired pressure, temperature, and redox conditions. The proposed work will also
provide new information on rheology, compressibility, and thermodynamics of
component mixing for magmatic systems (melts and fluids) at deep crust and upper
mantle conditions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The PI typically has
one high school student and one undergraduate student (funded by the Geophysical
Laboratory) working in his laboratory. This will continue as a part of the
proposed research. These programs have been very successful resulting, for
example, in seven articles in the peer reviewed literature from the work done in
the PIs laboratories during the last several years with undergraduate and high
school students as co-authors. In this regard, the PI contributes time to judge
and supervise projects by middle and high school students. Winners of this fair
proceed to national science competitions such as the International Science Fair
and the Siemens Foundation's competition in Math-Science-Technology.