* 1212593
* Whistler Mode Radio Sounding of Electrons, Ions and Density Irregularities in the Inner Magnetosphere from 90 to 5000 km
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2018
* Vikas Sonwalkar, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 07/31/2018
* USD 351,684.00

Determining the density and composition of plasma in the inner magnetosphere is
a largely unexplored area of magnetospheric and ionospheric research. Using
recently developed whistler mode (WM) radio sounding techniques and data from a
new generation of space- and ground-based experiments, this three-year research
program will investigate inner magnetospheric plasma density, ion composition
and density irregularities from 90 to 5000km. Four research projects have been
proposed: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Use WM radio sounding data from the Radio Plasma Imager
(RPI) on the IMAGE satellite to measure the cold-plasma density (Ne), ion
composition (H+, O+, He+) and density irregularities (10m to 10km scale size)
along a magnetic field line as a function of geophysical conditions (e.g.
location, local time, plasmapause position, geomagnetic and solar activity).
&lt;br/&gt;(2) Study the variation (loss and refilling) of electron density and
ion composition along geomagnetic field lines before, during, and after
geomagnetic storms.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Build empirical models of plasma density, ion
composition and density irregularities as functions of geophysical conditions
along B0 from 90-5,000km. &lt;br/&gt;(4) Combine WM sounding results with those
from complementary ground based (e.g. ionosonde, magnetometer), spacecraft based
in situ (e.g. DMSP, CHAMP, CRESS, POLAR) and radio sounding (e.g. RPI sounding
at higher altitude in free space modes) to augment and extend the empirical
models and to build new field aligned models of the inner magnetospheric plasma
density and composition up to equatorial altitudes.&lt;br/&gt;These empirical
models will be used to gain new understanding into processes and mechanisms
important to magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling and for use in space weather
predictions. As a result these results should have broad application in space
physics research. The proposal will support a graduate student.