* 1212767
* Mechanisms of Transition Metal Catalyzed Reactions in Hydrocarbons
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Robert Grubbs, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2016
* USD 615,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanism Program supports Professor Robert
H. Grubbs of the California Institute of Technology for the development of a
family of catalysts for the inter-conversion of olefins by the olefin metathesis
reaction. NSF support for this work began decades ago with the determination of
the basic mechanism of the reaction. Today these catalysts find themselves
widely used in academic research and in significant commercial applications.
These advances include the discovery of new inorganic complexes that show
improved activity or selectivity. A number of limitations that remain: the
present grant focuses on new catalyst systems, a better understanding of
regiochemical and stereochemical issues and the observed low efficiency of the
catalysts in the presence of ethylene. These complexes operate by a novel
mechanism, and new families of ligands and complexes will be constructed for
these catalytic transformations as the mechanism is better
understood.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The ruthenium complexes that induce the
metathesis of acyclic olefins can also be used for the ring opening
polymerization (ROMP) of cyclic olefins. Numerous well-defined polymers have
been produced using these complexes as living initiators for the synthesis of
block and highly functional polymers. A special class of polymers that is of
interest for theoretical reasons and may have interesting applications are
polymers without ends-cyclic polymers. A set of ruthenium complexes has been
prepared that produce cyclic polymers from cyclic monomers. To be able to test
standing theories, polymers that are pure cyclics without linear contaminations
are required. A method has been developed that should result in pure cyclics
with a range of molecular weights.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader
impacts and benefits to society, these catalyst systems are currently being used
for an array of successful commercial applications. New pharmaceuticals that
require the closure of a large ring using these catalysts are being developed
and are in clinical trials. A bio-refinery is being constructed that utilizes
the complexes for the conversion of seed oils into chemicals and fuels. In the
production of new materials, polymers that require the NSF catalysts in their
production have been used in the automotive market for a number of years. In
addition, new polymer composite materials are being produced for the
construction of large-scale mechanical devices.