* 1212436
* Workshop on Recent Advances in General Topology, Dimension Theory, Continuum Theory and Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2014
* John Mayer, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 03/31/2014
* USD 23,140.00

Workshop on Recent Advances in General Topology, Dimension Theory, Continuum
Theory and Dynamical Systems Nipissing University, North Bay, Ontario will offer
a Workshop on Recent Advances in General Topology, Dimension Theory, Continuum
Theory, and Dynamical Systems in order to bring senior and junior researchers
and students in these areas together for a five-day series of talks and
seminars. The workshop will be held at Nipissing University campus in North Bay,
May 17-22, 2012. It will be jointly supported by the National Science Foundation
and the Fields Institute of Canada. The scientific focus of the workshop will be
on recent advances in topology, including dimension theory and continuum theory,
and dynamical systems. Senior researchers will share fundamental research
techniques and recent results with attendees, including post-doctoral, graduate
and advanced undergraduate students, and junior researchers who received the PhD
within the last 6 years. Among other topics, recent results on the topology of
buried points in Julia sets, the solution of Lelek's problem on the span of
continua, and extending isotopies of plane continua, all of which have
application in both topology and dynamical systems, will be discussed. Dynamical
systems uses tools from many areas of mathematics, and motivates these same
areas by raising questions, both fundamental and applied. In the workshop,
students and junior researchers, whose focus on the way to a PhD has necessarily
often been narrow, will be exposed to research techniques and results that draw
from multiple sources. The areas of topology, dimension theory, and dynamical
systems traditionally have experienced overlapping research interests, but it is
somewhat daunting for students to acquire the background needed to work in the
overlap. NSF support will enable at least 10 US-based students and junior
researchers to attend the workshop and expand their research horizons. Major
speakers with international reputations are being selected who are active in
these research areas. The format of the workshop is designed to maximize the
opportunities for interaction among the participants beyond the lectures. Time
is provided in the workshop schedule for both formal talks and informal
interactions among the junior and senior participants, including every afternoon
an informal question and answer session for the students and junior researchers
with the day's speakers. The links formed are likely to have continuing impact
on the research direction of both junior and senior participants. url:
http://www.nipissingu.ca/topology