* 1212336
* Collaborative Research:   An Integrated Tectonic Study of the Jamaica Strike-slip Restraining Bend and Gonave Microplate Using GPS, Geomorphologic, Seismic, and Gravity Data
* GEO,EAR
* 09/23/2011,07/31/2013
* Paul Mann, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 07/31/2013
* USD 53,777.00

An integrated, four-year geophysical and geological study of the Caribbean
island of Jamaica, which straddles a major strike-slip fault restraining bend
that has formed in response to partitioning of Caribbean-North America plate
motion between the northern and southern boundaries of the Gonave sliver plate,
is being carried out by a research team of scientists from the University of
Wisconsin and the University of Texas. New geodetic, geomorphologic,
paleoseismic, gravity, and seismic measurements are being combined to: (1)
measure Caribbean plate motion near Jamaica to establish the full fault slip
budget across the island and Gonave microplate motion relative to the Caribbean
and North American plates; (2) establish the locations, slip senses, and long-
term slip rates along major active Jamaican faults through a combination of
geomorphologic, paleoseismologic, and targeted gravity studies; (3) construct
and test forward and inverse models of fault slip rates, to distinguish between
proposed models for how slip is transferred between the offset fault strands,
and to improve earthquake hazard assessment in this densely populated and
earthquake-prone country use constraints from all measurements; (4) combine
results with GPS site velocities from Hispaniola to derive a model for Gonave
microplate motion that is fully consistent with all the
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project should provide a better understanding of
earthquake hazard in Jamaica, which has experienced two destructive earthquakes
since 1600 and continues to be vulnerable to significant earthquake damage due
to seismic energy focusing and liquefaction of unconsolidated alluvium in much
of the heavily populated and economically important southern half of the
country. The measurements should provide useful information about the earthquake
cycle over range of spatial and temporal scales, including the millenial-scale
seismic history and potential of the Plantain Garden fault near the capital city
of Kingston to the year-to-year budget of interseismic elastic strain that is
accumulating in all areas of the island. The research will be done in
collaboration with the Jamaican Seismological Network, which is responsible for
seismological network operation, seismic research, and earthquake hazard
assessment and response.