* 1212842
* Ultrafast time-resolved studies of reactive intermediates
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Christopher Hadad, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2016
* USD 634,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This project will use ultrafast time-resolved UV-
vis and IR spectroscopy to study the birth of carbenes and isomeric alkenes from
photo-excited precursors. This research team will study both polar and non-polar
alkene formation by monitoring the intense C=C and C=O bands, if available, or
the out-of-plane bending region between 750 and 1000 cm(-1) using time-resolved
IR spectroscopy. The primary goal of the project is to generate unique data
concerning: (a) the competition between internal conversion and fragmentation in
diazo and diazirine excited states; (b) to understand the chemistry of
vibrationally excited, open-shell, singlet carbenes; and (c) the dynamics of
fully relaxed closed-shell singlet carbenes. This study will reveal the dynamics
and mechanistic pathways of chemical transformations that proceed during the
first 0.3 - 2000 ps after a diazirine or diazo compound absorbs light. The
secondary goal is to study the dynamics of isomerization of vibrationally
relaxed alkyl substituted closed-shell singlet carbenes to alkenes using
ultrafast time-resolved IR spectroscopy. The 1,2-hydrogen shift reaction is of
basic fundamental interest, and these efforts will systematically vary the
structure of carbenes and solvent to provide the first broad and quantitative
description of this classic reaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This work will raise the level of understanding and
predictability of photochemistry and bring it closer to the level of maturity of
ground state chemistry. These efforts will spur the development of computational
tools that can quantitatively predict photochemical and photophysical processes.
The project will generate data that will help theorists develop methods with
sufficient predictive power to aid the design of photochemical reactions. These
computational and experimental investigations will work synergistically to train
and educate students about reactive intermediates and the means to study them.
Valuable new data will be available to evaluate the intrinsic properties and
reactivity of these unusual reactive intermediates, and for which industrial
applications already exist, particularly in lithography and semiconductor
manufacturing. Graduate students will be trained in conducting research, both
experimentally and theoretically, while the team will also reach out to the K-16
communities with research activities as well as educational outreach and
engagement.