* 1212758
* Conference: 54th Annual Maize Genetics Conference to be held March 15-18, 2012 at the Doubletree Hotel and Conference Center in Portland, OR
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Paula McSteen, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 01/31/2013
* USD 34,700.00

Intellectual Merit. The 54th Annual Maize Genetics Conference will be held March
15-18, 2012 at the Doubletree Hotel and Conference Center in Portland, OR. The
meeting offers members of the scientific community the opportunity to present
and discuss their most recent research relevant to maize genetics and plant
biology. A wide range of topics investigating the structure and function of
genes, pathways, and traits are included, spanning the spectrum of maize
genetics from basic studies of gene action to quantitative trait dissection to
more applied topics relevant to crop improvement. The meeting will feature
45-minute talks by four invited plenary speakers: Thomas Dresselhaus, University
of Regensburg; Jenny Graves, Australian National University; Bill Tracy,
University of Wisconsin - Madison; Venkatesan Sundaresan, University of
California - Davis. In addition, the program will include approximately 35
18-minute talks by speakers selected from submitted abstracts, and two poster
sessions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The Maize Genetics Conference
provides outstanding opportunities for graduate students and postdoctoral
scientists to meet and interact with an international gathering of scientists in
the field, to discuss their research while presenting talks or posters, and to
establish scientific networks that will be valuable as they embark on their
careers. Efforts to broaden participation at the meeting will occur through
outreach and recruiting efforts that seek to support Conference attendance by
students, postdocs and young faculty from underrepresented groups with an
interest in exploring research possibilities in maize genetics. Partnering these
awardees with experienced maize researchers at similar career stages will
facilitate their productive participation in the Conference. The Maize Genetics
Conference is unique compared to other meetings in its efforts to support
attendance by all graduate student attendees.