* 1212000
* Collaborative Research: Towards the Edge of the Milky Way.  The First Contiguous Spectroscopic Survey of the True Outer Halo.
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Constance Rockosi, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2017
* USD 195,927.00

The long dynamical times and radial extent of our stellar halo preserves a
chance to trace the history of mass assembly of both the stellar and dark matter
components of our Galaxy. Most of what we know about the outer halo is learned
from stars that happen to pass nearby. If the outer halo is, as we expect,
dynamically young and not well mixed, the motion of such stars may not tell the
full story of the recent accretion history of the Galaxy. Dr. Rockosi (at the
University of California Santa Cruz) and Dr. Morrison (at Case Western Reserve
University)work on a spectroscopic survey of red giant branch stars in the outer
halo, done as part of the Baryon Oscillation Spectroscopic Survey (BOSS). This
is the dark time survey in the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS)-III project. The
BOSS spectrograph improvements and large area coverage of an area of about
10,000 square degrees allow a contiguous survey of the outer reaches of our
Galaxy. The complete sample will provide kinematics, metallicities, and alpha
element to iron abundance ratios for approximately 1000 stars with a median
distance of 50 kpc, providing a true outer halo sample. The alpha elements such
as O, Mg, and Si are mainly produced in supernovae and trace the chemical
evolution of the halo. The outer halo sample will be used to measure the halo
stellar radial density profile, metallicity and alpha element abundance
gradients to beyond 100 kpc from the center of the Galaxy, as well as identify
and characterize substructure in stellar density, kinematics and chemical
abundance. From this we can learn the fractional contribution of stellar
accretion to the outer halo, as well as the mass and orbit distributions and
star formation histories of the halo progenitors. Comparison of these
measurements in the outer halo to existing measurements in the surviving dwarf
spheroidal galaxies and in the inner halo can be used to infer the mass
accretion history and stellar population evolution of our Galaxy and its
progenitors through time. All SDSS data become public in a timely manner, giving
a rich and in many ways still unexplored resource to astronomers. The principal
investigators have led the stellar surveys in the SDSS projects from proposals
through data releases. All have been actively involved for the past six years in
the calibrations needed before these data can be used reliably for stars, which
included improving the flux calibration of the SDSS spectra, to tests of the
stellar parameters pipeline to the painstaking observation and analysis of well-
studied open and globular clusters. Minority students remain a small proportion
of graduating PhDs. Case astronomy is partnering with the very successful
Fisk/Vanderbilt Masters Bridge Program for minorities so that their graduates
can enter the Case Western Reserve University astronomy PhD program in the same
way that they currently enter the Vanderbilt PhD program; effectively as third-
year graduate students. The Case program for Women in Science and Engineering
(co-founded by the PI) is now in its ninth year of encouraging women
undergraduates to stay in science. Dr. Rockosi leads many projects to develop
facility instrumentation at Keck and Lick Observatory. These instruments are
available via public access to Keck, and the Lick Observatory projects provide a
technology development platform for adaptive optics and other instrumentation
research. Dr. Rockosi and her research group participate in the Santa Cruz
Institute for Science and Engineering Educators, which introduces graduate
students and postdocs to inquiry-based learning techniques while running
workshops designed to encourage underrepresented minority students to go on for
advanced degrees in STEM fields. Approximately 75% of the undergraduate
participants in this program are women or under-represented minorities.