* 1212096
* Quantitative insight into interstellar turbulence
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Alexandre Lazarian, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 06/30/2017
* USD 299,890.00

This is a continuation of Dr. Lazarian's theoretical work on the influence of
magnetic field diffusion in turbulent star-forming clouds on the star formation
process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The appearance, evolution, and overall properties
of a spiral galaxy are strongly influenced by its interstellar medium (ISM). In
turn, the nature of the ISM and many processes within it, such as star
formation, are determined by the magnetic turbulence that stirs the ISM.
Properties of turbulent fluids cannot be confidently understood using only
numerical approaches; and the fluid motions simulated by computers differ from
astrophysical ones by a huge difference in Reynolds
numbers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present work focuses on the role that magnetic
reconnection plays in star formation, and investigates the sources and effects
of turbulence in different phases of the ISM. Although turbulence is chaotic, it
can be described and understood by applying well defined statistical laws to
solve astrophysical problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work improves the
comparison of theory with observations. The studies employ well-tested numerical
codes already in place. The principal investigator and his team will continue to
develop, test, and apply new tools for extracting properties of turbulence (such
as turbulence spectra and sonic Mach number of turbulence) from
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The statistical tools from this study are
made publicly available and provide new tools to the observational community to
study turbulence, its driving, and its magnetization. A graduate student will
work on this project. This project also offers Research Experience for
Undergraduate (REU) students.