* 1212631
* SBIR Phase I:  SecureVault Cloud Platform
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Radu Sion, Private Machines Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2013
* USD 179,995.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will design and build
SecureVault, a technology platform that allows cloud infrastructures to run
clients' tasks with full computation privacy. The cloud provider itself is
unable to access to customers' workloads even in the presence of malicious-
intent direct physical access to the hardware itself. SecureVault significantly
increases cloud defense capabilities, and provides strong computation privacy,
and regulatory compliance guarantees to any regulatory- and security-sensitive
customers. SecureVault achieves this by (i) endowing a traditional
infrastructure with a collaborative security layer of active transparent defense
and control, a cloud ?immune system?, and (ii) new mechanisms that allow full
computation privacy for outsourced tasks. The immune system has its own control
network and can instantly share critical information and react independently for
meaningful operation and fast recovery even under sustained attack and severe
compromise. It also transparently monitors and accesses the server runtimes and
can strongly react and immediately present a united defense across the entire
cloud. Moreover, inherent privacy and confidentiality assurances allow
SecureVault clouds to safely execute computation and host data with full
security, even in the case of a compromised curious service provider with full
physical access to the infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project will manifest itself in all
dimensions of our increasingly internet and cloud-reliant society and
technology. Because clouds introduce significant risks, technology-backed
comprehensive security and privacy assurances are essential to establish cloud
computing as a truly viable alternative to in-house IT. Unfortunately, these
guarantees are not achievable with any of today's offerings or research efforts,
despite being direly needed by all major potential cloud adopters, including
financial, governmental and healthcare markets, heavily governed by security,
regulatory compliance and intellectual property constraints. As a result, rather
than risk regulatory compliance breaches, and unauthorized access to proprietary
business logic, these major markets have simply not adopted the cloud. Countless
surveys outline security and privacy consistently as the top concern preventing
adoption, and markets have reacted with strong reservations. In a recent ISACA
survey, 45% of over 1,800 corporate IT decision makers affirmed that cloud risks
outweigh benefits. SecureVault is a disruptive technology that will bridge this
gap and make cloud adoption secure and attractive in all these markets.
&lt;br/&gt;As a result it will lead to exponential cross-market growth. Finally,
enabling cloud deployment with full computation privacy, regulatory compliance
and data confidentiality will significantly increase enterprise agility and
competitiveness.