* 1212365
* Exploring Public Engagement with Real-time Experimentation in Different Public Venues
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Robert Root-Bernstein, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 06/30/2015
* USD 295,410.00

A team from Michigan State University, in partnership with six science, art-
science, and art museum venues around the country and with the assistance of
researchers at Georgia Institute of Technology, is implementing an EAGER project
to conduct ongoing experiments on the chemical precursors to life as exhibit
experiences for visitors to these venues. The experiments, to be run over the
course of several months as the exhibit travels around the country, expand on
the 1950s' work of Stanley Miller and Harold Urey, which continues to stimulate
new investigations and publications, including experiments being conducted on
the International Space Station. The experiments/exhibits share key features
across the three different kinds of venues, allowing the team to study and
compare the impacts on the various publics of engaging them in real-time science
experiments. Two major goals are (1) to explore new ways to attract public
interest in science by performing in public settings previously untried
experiments on the chemical precursors to life, and (2) to investigate how the
context of different kinds of venues and their visitor characteristics affect
how visitors interpret the experience and what they learn. The team is also
exploring how various data visualization representations can be designed to
foster public interest and understanding. The intent is to develop an approach
that has potential applications to other STEM content domains and expanding the
reach to broader public audiences.