* 1212839
* SBIR Phase I:  High Quality and Low Cost Bulk Aluminum Nitride Substrates for UV LEDs
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Troy Baker, Nitride Solutions Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,395.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate the
feasibility of growth of high-quality and low-cost bulk aluminum nitride (AlN)
substrates by vapor phase deposition. The performance of nitride-based devices,
such as light-emitting diodes (LEDs), lasers, and transistors, is limited by
epitaxial growth on foreign substrates. LEDs with aluminum gallium nitride
(AlGaN) active regions emitting in the ultraviolet (UV) spectrum are limited to
an efficiency of ~1%, but are especially suited to growth on AlN due to the
lattice match. Thus, there is an opportunity to enhance the performance of these
devices by using closely-matched AlN substrates with low defect density. The
proposed approach to grow bulk AlN utilizes a novel vapor phase deposition
method which uses low cost consumables, is scalable to high product rates, and
is capable of high quality. The research objectives are to demonstrate AlN
crystals of excellent crystal quality with low dislocation density (10000/square
cm), grown at a high growth rate of 1 mm/hr. The successful completion of these
objectives will lay the groundwork for high-volume and low-cost production of
high quality AlN substrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project will be a result of a dramatic increase in the
availability of low-cost AlN substrates for use in optoelectronics and energy
conversion devices. The development of commercially viable AlN substrates will
enable revolutionary performance enhancements for many devices, specifically
including UV LEDs, in terms of output power, energy efficiency, and lifetime.
High efficiency UV LEDs will have a broad range of applications including
replacement of toxic mercury vapor lamps used for UV purification, UV curing,
and chemical sensors, and UV LEDs will enable new applications which require
compact and robust UV emitters. One of the most important benefits to society is
the ability to provide an effective, low cost, and chemical free method to
disinfect water for human consumption. Finally, as a supplier of a high-value
enabling semiconductor material, we intend to market to smaller niche
semiconductor manufacturing companies in the U.S. as early adopters of AlN
substrates, thus strengthening the U.S. semiconductor manufacturing industry.