* 1212416
* Building Computational Models to Probe Membrane Fusion
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Michael Klein, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2016
* USD 405,999.00

Michael L. Klein at Temple University is supported by the Chemical Theory,
Models and Computational Methods program in research coupling novel
computational algorithms and methods with leadership-class HPC resources to
understand membrane fusion, a key process in viral infection and
neurotransmitter release at the synapse. In the latter, fusion proteins enhance
the intrinsic slow rate of vesicle-membrane fusion when a 30-50 nm vesicle
delivers neurotransmitter to the plasma membrane. The long-term aim is to
elucidate the mechanistic role played fusion proteins. The size, time-scale, and
complexity of the fusion process demands the use of coarse grain simulation
methodologies such as those developed by the PI's group for lipid-vesicle self-
assembly and related phenomena exhibited by surfactants and macromolecules.
Synaptic vesicles are of the size just now accessible with molecular dynamics
simulation on state-of-the-art hardware. The immediate challenge is to handle
the fusion proteins and then build a complete simulation package - within the
massively parallel LAMMPS simulation code - to eventually explore the complete
fusion process using models calibrated to realistic simulations of the
components. The proposal involves an international collaboration to further
elaborate the needed models for charged lipids and their interaction with
proteins and counter ions. The closely related process of vesicle-vesicle fusion
is broadly relevant to research in surfactant science and nanotechnology. Thus,
success will impact fundamental and applied science ranging from chemistry and
biology to nanotechnology.

The proposed research on using state of the art computer simulation to model key
biological processes will be carried out in the Institute for Computational
Molecular Science (ICMS). Since its creation in 2009, ICMS has spawned new
junior faculty hires with an interest in computation. ICMS already offers
informal classes on parallel programming and HPC tools, and classes on molecular
modeling, which have impacted education -- faculty, post-docs, grad students and
undergraduates in Chemistry, Biology, Physics, Computer Science, and Mathematics
take advantage of the expertise residing in ICMS. The long-term goal is to
develop these informal offerings into formal undergraduate courses and masters
degree programs. ICMS has already embraced significant outreach to the public
and society at large (Philadelphia Science Fair and the Franklin Institute).
Going forward, it will integrate its HR development efforts with existing
programs such as TU-teach, which benefit undergraduates and local high school
science teachers. ICMS will continue to host extended visits of scientists from
around the World plus graduate students from other labs who can enjoy the
intellectual diversity of ICMS research -- chemistry, physics, materials
science, pharmacology, and neuroscience. ICMS graduates have been hired by
industry and into tenure track positions in academe, which attests to the
important of its societal impact.