* 1212448
* Quantum Interface Between Atomic and Superconducting Qubits
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Mark Saffman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2015
* USD 540,000.00

While there has been tremendous recent progress in the realization of small-
scale quantum circuits comprising several qubits, research indicates that a
fault-tolerant quantum computer that exceeds what is possible on existing
classical machines will require a network of thousands of qubits, far beyond
current capabilities. One possible approach involves a hybrid quantum
information processing (QIP) network that would capitalize on the unique
strengths of disparate quantum technologies. Here we outline a research program
focused on the development of a robust quantum interface between superconducting
cavity circuits and trapped Rydberg atoms, the key technological obstacle to
realization of atom-superconductor hybrid QIP. The research program includes the
following specific experimental thrusts: single atoms will be trapped and guided
into close proximity with a millikelvin-temperature superconducting thin-film
cavity; strong coupling between single trapped Rydberg atoms and the cavity will
be probed spectroscopically; and deterministic generation of single microwave
photons by a superconducting qubit will be used to enable an entangling gate
between the atomic and superconducting systems. The development of a high-
fidelity quantum interface between a trapped atom qubit and a superconducting
microwave cavity will represent a significant step towards a hybrid quantum
computer. This program will involve the extensive participation of undergraduate
and graduate researchers, and is rich in educational opportunities at both
levels.

One of the remarkable recent discoveries in information science is that quantum
mechanics can lead to efficient solutions for problems that are intractable on
conventional classical computers. In a quantum computer, information is stored
in quantum bits or "qubits" that can exist not only in states 0 or 1, but also
in arbitrary superpositions of these states. Robust operation of a quantum
computer requires both long lifetimes for these quantum superpositions, along
with the ability to interact qubits with one another on timescales that are much
shorter than the qubit lifetime. For a given system of physical qubits, the
requirements of long lifetime and fast interaction speed are generally at odds
with one another. One possible approach to scalable quantum computing involves
an optimized hybrid quantum processor that combines the best aspects of
disparate quantum technologies. In this program, we are working toward a hybrid
quantum processor that incorporates a stable neutral atom quantum memory, with
storage times of order 1 second, and a fast superconducting quantum processor
capable of interacting qubits on timescales of order 10 nanoseconds. We seek to
address the key obstacle to the merger of neutral atom and superconducting
quantum technologies, namely, a robust interface between trapped atomic qubits
and superconducting quantum cavities. Successful realization of our program will
represent a major step toward scalable hybrid quantum information processing.
This program will involve the extensive participation of undergraduate and
graduate researchers, and is rich in educational opportunities at both levels.