* 1212591
* BREAD:   Development of Novel Salt-tolerant Forage and Cereal Crops
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jan Dvorak, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,104,016.00

PI: Jan Dvorak (University of California, Davis)

Co-PIs: Ming-Cheng Luo and Patrick E. McGuire (University of California-Davis),
Muhammad Javed Iqbal (North Dakota State University), Makhdoom Hussain (Wheat
Research Institute, Faisalabad, Pakistan), and Shahzada Munawar Mehdi (Soil
Salinity Research Institute, Pakistan)

Collaborators: Edward J. DePeters, Emanuel Epstein, and William D. Rains
(University of California-Davis), and Dennis Falaschi (Panoche Water District,
Firebaugh, CA)

Salinity limits agriculture in many semiarid areas of the world. In Pakistan,
the partner country of this project, two million hectares (ha) of the total 21
million ha of land are salinized and are either unsuitable or only marginally
suitable for agriculture. Salinized land can be reclaimed with appropriate
agronomic practices and engineering interventions and/or by growing salt-
tolerant crops. Unfortunately, improvement of salinity tolerance of major crops
has been disappointingly slow because of their inherent salt sensitivity. This
project takes a reverse strategy by improving agronomic attributes of plants
naturally able to tolerate salinity. Perennial tall wheatgrasses and their close
relatives have exceptional salt tolerance and some produce a large quantity of
forage in saline environments. A unique asset of tall wheatgrasses is that they
can be hybridized with wheat, producing plant materials that are often
exceptionally salt tolerant. While the chromosomes of wheat and wheatgrasses do
not recombine naturally, recombination between chromosomes of these species can
be induced through the use of genetic stocks containing mutations in the
homoeologous pairing gene Ph1. The goal of this project is to evaluate the
possibility of developing novel salt-tolerant germplasm with recombined genomes
derived from hybridization between wheatgrass and wheat using the Su1-Ph1
(Suppressor of Ph1) system. Amphiploids developed from these crosses will be
characterized by cytogenetic and genetic approaches as well as for mineral
content, nutritional quality, and agronomic traits. Field evaluations will be
conducted in California and in Pakistan. For genetic analysis, wheatgrass
genomes will be sequenced and genetic markers specific for wheatgrass germplasm
will be developed.

This project will have an impact reaching far beyond developing technology and
materials for agriculture on saline soils in Pakistan. Basic knowledge about
genetic manipulation of recombination between wheat and alien chromosomes with
the objective of producing novel plant forms with recombined genomes will be
generated and disseminated. This knowledge can be deployed in hybridization of
wheat with species other than wheatgrasses in order to produce novel cereals
with improved tolerance of drought, heat, cold, or waterlogging or with novel
attributes, such as perennial growth habit. The salt-tolerant materials
developed in this project will facilitate future discovery of genes controlling
high salt tolerance in wheatgrasses and their deployment in biotechnology of
wheat and other crops in addition to the immediate use of this germplasm in
breeding programs in Pakistan and other countries with saline soils. Wheatgrass
genome sequences and the wheatgrass genetic markers will be deposited at NCBI
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov)and on the project website with links in GrainGenes
(http://wheat.pw.usda.gov/GG2/index.shtml) and Gramene (http://www.gramene.org),
respectively. Genetic materials will be offered for long term storage and
distribution to the National Plant Germplasm System and the Wheat Genetic and
Genomic Resources Center, Kansas State University.