* 1212439
* Methods and Applications of Multi-Photon Quantum State Synthesis
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Paul Kwiat, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2015
* USD 130,000.00

We are developing a source for efficient creation of various single- and multi-
photon states. This project is a culmination of the PI's past research on
optimally engineered spontaneous parametric downconversion sources, high-
efficiency photon detectors, and low-loss high-speed optical circuits.
Specifically, the project implements a switched, temporally-multiplexed scheme
that allows near-deterministic preparation of single-photon states. Combining
four such states realizes the first efficient generation of heralded entangled
photon pairs, a critical resource for many protocols in quantum information
processing. Moreover, generalizations of the scheme enable preparation of a
variety of other multi-photon states of interest. For instance, we can prepare
exact energy eigenstates of the electromagnetic field, "Fock states,"
exponentially more efficiently than with present schemes relying on the
simultaneous occurrence of improbable events; in fact, in the limit of lossless
optics and perfect detectors, the method is 100% efficient. The central concept
-- the ability to add (or subtract) photons one at a time -- can potentially be
further extended to enable production of other multi-photon states of interest
as well, as we are investigating.

Single and entangled photons have become a central resource for experiments
ranging from fundamental tests of quantum mechanics to optical quantum
computing, from quantum cryptography to entanglement-enhanced quantum metrology.
Despite recent advances, reliably and deterministically creating even simple
optical states, e.g., single photons on demand, remains challenging. And while
schemes to realize more complicated multi-photon states have been proposed,
these typically scale exponentially poorly with the number of photons in this
state. As a result, observed rates in experiments of this sort drop very quickly
as the number of required photons increases, requiring minutes or hours to
observe a single instance of the desired state. We are pursuing the efficient
creation of various single- and multi-photon states, pushing the frontiers of
quantum information processing in several different areas, including quantum
communication, quantum metrology, and quantum computing. In addition to
exploring a potentially transformative method for realizing true single- and
multi-photon states, this project has the potential for broader impact beyond
the "traditional" areas of quantum information processing, e.g., for human
vision studies at the single-photon level. Bringing the realities of basic
quantum information phenomena to students at an earlier age and in broader
venues stimulates their interest in pursuing further knowledge in STEM areas.