* 1212574
* GOALI: Atomic Layer Deposition Growth of Challenging Transition Metal Thin Films
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Charles Winter, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Charles H. Winter of Wayne State University
will develop new precursors and deposition methods for the growth of first row
transition metal thin films. The project entails the synthesis and
characterization of transition metal silyl complexes with optimized atomic layer
deposition (ALD) precursor properties, solution reactions of the transition
metal silyl complexes with complementary transition metal complexes containing
other ligands to identify reactant pairs that afford metal powders,
transformation of the solution reactions to ALD processes, and demonstration of
copper/manganese alloy film formation and self-forming manganese-based copper
diffusion barriers. This project will be performed in collaboration with SAFC
Hitech, which will enable advanced ALD precursor evaluation, large scale
precursor synthesis, advanced growth trials, and technology transfer to
industry. The broader impacts involve training postdoctoral fellows and graduate
and undergraduate students, enhancing research and education infrastructure by
bringing together a collaborative group under the GOALI program that includes
Wayne State University and SAFC Hitech personnel, industrial internships for
Wayne State University students at SAFC Hitech, and the potential societal
benefits of having new precursors and atomic layer deposition processes for
first row transition metal thin films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thin layers of
metals, only a few atoms in thickness, have many existing and anticipated future
applications in microelectronics devices and functional materials. However, the
required deposition processes are known for only a few, first row transition-
metal elements. This research seeks to develop new molecular precursors and
deposition chemistry that would enable the low temperature, atomic layer growth
of these metals. Successful execution of the proposed research could enable
practical applications such as self-forming copper diffusion barrier layers in
microelectronics devices, magnetic random access memory device fabrication, and
manufacturing of other devices that require thin films of first row transition
metals. The technology from this project would contribute to the continued
miniaturization of microelectronics devices which would have a broad, positive
impact on the economy.