* 1212768
* SBIR Phase I:  A Web Platform for Creating Virtual Patient Cases for Medical Education
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Craig Knoche, i-Human Patients, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
assess the merit and developmental feasibility of a Web-platform for creating
and delivering next-generation virtual patient case encounters. These case
encounters will enable self-directed class and team-based active learning
exercises that incorporate automated concept and skill proficiency assessment.
Educators will be able to objectively assess patient assessment and diagnostic
reasoning proficiency as well as understanding of the underlying basic science
concepts.

The initial impact of this project is to improve student educational outcomes
and enable compliance with educational reform directives from accreditation
authorities and school administrators. We project revenue in excess of $6
million from the North American UME market alone by the fourth year after
commercial availability. Lastly, US Universities are one of the few US
industries with a positive balance of trade and reputation for international
excellence as evidenced by the US being the educational and practice destination
of choice for many foreign medical students. The broader impact/commercial
potential is to use internet technology to project US leadership in healthcare
education internationally, and thereby generate US jobs and positive foreign
exchange in a strategically important yet heretofore technologically neglected
market