* 1212538
* Theoretical and Experimental Astroparticle Physics, Particle Physics and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2017
* Glennys Farrar, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Allen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 480,001.00

The intersection of particle physics, astrophysics and cosmology is an exciting
and data-driven field, where a combination of imaginative basic theory and
observations has revolutionized our understanding of the Universe. The PI's
research focuses on several areas where the potential for new fundamental
discoveries is particularly high: Ultra-High Energy Cosmic Rays (UHECRs) and
their sources, new phenomena in particle physics, Galactic and cosmic magnetic
fields, and dark matter and its interactions. The highest energy particles in
Nature can now be studied in much greater detail and with higher statistics than
ever before at the Pierre Auger Observatory. Previous work has shown that Auger
data on UHECR atmospheric showers cannot be explained without profound changes
to particle physics at an order of magnitude higher energy than the Large Hadron
Collider. Observations suggest that a new - chiral - phase of matter may be
created.

With this award, the uniqueness of this possibility and its ramifications for
theoretical particle physics will be explored. In order to unravel the seeming
contradictions in present interpretations of the data, the PI and her group will
use a combination of astrophysics analyses to constrain the sources and possible
composition of UHECRs and UHE particle physics phenomenology. Other topics of
research include identifying possible sources of UHECRs and modeling the
Galactic magnetic field, as well as fundamental topics in particle theory,
astrophysical constraints on dark matter interactions, plus non-standard
supersymmetry signatures and other phenomenology for the Large Hadron Collider.

Broader Impacts include public lectures about the PI's research and about the
New York Schools Cosmic Particle Telescope (NYSCPT) project; mentoring high
school students, teacher and student participants of NYSCPT, women (and men)
graduate and undergraduate students, postdoctoral researchers, junior faculty;
and founding participant of the NYU "WINS" program to foster undergraduate
women's participation in science and the Collegiate Honors Seminar program, and
President of the NYU Women's Faculty Caucus.