* 1212962
* SHF: Large:Collaborative Research: Architecting the Next Generation Memory Hierarchy - A Holistic Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Onur Mutlu, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* tao li
* 07/31/2016
* USD 368,800.00

The memory system continues to be a major performance and
power&lt;br/&gt;bottleneck in nearly all computing systems. And, it is
becoming&lt;br/&gt;increasingly more so with major application, architecture,
and&lt;br/&gt;technology trends. Embedded applications that acquire
and&lt;br/&gt;process real-time data, Internet and cloud applications that have
to&lt;br/&gt;analyze large databases, and the exa-scale era HPC applications
that&lt;br/&gt;need to crunch voluminous data sets are just a few examples
of&lt;br/&gt;increasingly data-intensive applications that require high
memory&lt;br/&gt;capacity, performance, and energy efficiency. Thus, the well-
known &lt;br/&gt;memory wall problem has become even more difficult to surmount
and&lt;br/&gt;needs a fundamental rethinking of the memory hierarchy design for
future&lt;br/&gt;computing platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
proposal is to fundamentally and holistically&lt;br/&gt;rethink the design of
the entire memory hierarchy taking into consideration&lt;br/&gt;the emerging
device/memory technologies and to exploit the design trade-offs&lt;br/&gt;at
different layers of the system stack -- from devices to micro-
architecture,&lt;br/&gt;compilers and runtime systems. The solution will cover
innovations in&lt;br/&gt;architecting and optimizing the entire memory path
consisting of the caches,&lt;br/&gt;on-chip networks, memory controller and main
memory. The objective&lt;br/&gt;is to enable 100X improvement in memory capacity
over the next&lt;br/&gt;decade, while providing 5X improvement in performance
and&lt;br/&gt;10X improvement in energy efficiency. The proposed research has
the potential to transform the design of&lt;br/&gt;next-generation memory
systems for the multi-core era, which is expected&lt;br/&gt;to be a ubiquitous
part of the entire IT sector.&lt;br/&gt;The cross-cutting nature of this
research can foster new research directions&lt;br/&gt;in several areas, spanning
technology/energy-aware design, computer architecture,&lt;br/&gt;compilers, and
system/application software. With the memory system forming&lt;br/&gt;the
backbone of nearly every envisioned future application domain,
the&lt;br/&gt;broader impact of this research can accelerate the design and
deployment&lt;br/&gt;of future applications. This project will enable transfer
of research&lt;br/&gt;results to industry, enhance undergraduate and graduate
student training&lt;br/&gt;including under-represented students, and contribute
to the development of new&lt;br/&gt;research and teaching tools.