* 1212948
* RI: Large: Collaborative Research: Reconstructive recognition: Uniting statistical scene understanding and physics-based visual reasoning
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Hassan Foroosh, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 09/30/2018
* USD 545,454.00

This project is creating a novel paradigm for computer vision, termed
"reconstructive recognition", that incorporates the strongest elements of
previous machine learning-based recognition efforts and the strongest elements
of previous reconstruction efforts based on radiometric reasoning. The goal is
to provide a new foundation for machine perception, and the potential for a
transformative advance in applications of computer vision. The project seeks
novel physics-based methods for recognition as well as novel learning-based
methods for interpreting pixel values in terms of the physics of a scene. The
agenda is structured around four aims: Aim I develops generalized reconstructive
processes that unify the recovery of shape, materials, motion and illumination.
Aim II focuses on supervised visual learning methods that exploit such
reconstructive image representations. Aim III pursues unsupervised discovery of
reconstructive representations that converge to be similar to the engineered
models of Aim I. Finally, Aim IV introduces well-defined challenge problems that
focus the field and serve as measurable proxies for progress in computer vision
applications that have high potential impact on society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a significant broader impact to this project, not
least being the improvement in computer vision pedagogy that ensues from a
reunification of the currently divergent recognition and reconstruction views of
the field. More broadly, this project pursues critical steps toward a future
where machines can see, a future that will bring changes to robotics, human-
computer interfaces, security, and autonomous navigation, to name a few.