* 1212951
* Understanding the Effects of Liquid Structure on Chemical Bonds and Solvated Electrons Using Ultrafast Spectroscopy and Mixed Quantum/Classical Molecular Dynamics Simulation
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2013,09/30/2016
* Benjamin Schwartz, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 09/30/2016
* USD 470,147.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-A
Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Benjamin J. Schwartz of the University
of California, Los Angeles and two graduate student colleagues will undertake a
theoretical program of research, supplemented with some experiments, to develop
a better understanding of solvated electrons and photodissociation reactions in
solution through the study of simple, prototypical model systems. The
theoretical work will center on molecular dynamics simulations incorporating a
rigorous, mixed quantum/classical method that Schwartz and his colleagues have
developed, including the development of new interaction potentials that can
respond to changes in the local environment around different chemical species.
The simulations' focus will be on 1) understanding whether or not different
solvents have pre-existing cavities that can control the dynamics of electron
transfer reactions and/or support solvated electrons, and 2) understanding how
liquid structure and dynamics control chemical bond-breaking and bond formation
in solution. Accompanying the simulations will be a limited number of
femtosecond laser experiments that will directly measure the dynamics of charge-
transfer-to-solvent reactions (that create solvated electrons) in a variety of
different solvents and also possibly the photodissociation dynamics of simple
diatomic molecules. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides the broader scientific impacts
of the research being supported, the young researchers working on this project
will gain simultaneous experience in both cutting edge theoretical and
experimental methods. Moreover, the project will provide these educational
opportunities both to students from traditionally underrepresented groups in the
sciences and to Los Angeles area high school students via an outreach program
for high school teachers. Finally, because solution-phase electron transfer
reactions and chemical bond dynamics are ubiquitous in chemistry and biology,
the methods and measurements developed in this proposal will enhance many areas
of research outside the immediate focus of this proposal.