* 1212967
* RUI: Microdroplet Interface Chemistry-Fundamental Studies of Self-Assembled Structures at the Liquid/Liquid Interface
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Sunghee Lee, IONA UNIVERSITY
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2016
* USD 270,000.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program of the
Division of Chemistry (CHE) at the National Science Foundation supports the work
of Professor Sunghee Lee at Iona College, concerning how supramolecular
aggregates direct the crystallization of substances at a liquid-liquid
interface. The research includes: (1) investigating the effect of surfactant
monolayer structure upon crystallization by employing polymorphic organic
crystal systems as reporters for subtle changes in monolayer structure; (2)
studying the mechanism by which lipid bilayers in mesophases promote the
crystallization of important protein targets through establishment of the
droplet interface bilayer as a model; and (3) determining the nature and extent
of interaction of ions with bilayers using the droplet interface bilayer
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will enhance the body of empirical and
systematic knowledge regarding arrangement of molecules which preferentially
reside at the liquid-liquid interface. The understanding of molecular assemblies
at the liquid-liquid interface will be an important contribution to fields which
rely on these structures, such as biomimetic materials synthesis, electronics,
diagnostics, drug delivery, and the plastic and pharmaceutical industries.
Undergraduate students will perform research, co-author the relevant
publications, and present their findings at national meetings. Thus, the
research will impact the future career pathways in science available to numerous
undergraduates, through enhanced availability and depth of research training at
Iona College, a predominantly undergraduate institution.