* 1212418
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Paleocoastal Seasonality on California's Northern Channel Islands: Shellfish Harvesting and Isotopic Signatures of Sedentism vs. Mobility
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2012,10/31/2013
* Nicholas Jew, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2013
* USD 15,080.00

The timing and nature of the spread of anatomically modern humans (AMH) out of
Africa and around the world-including the peopling of the Americas-are some of
the most significant issues facing archaeologists today. There is growing
evidence that coastal migrations and maritime adaptations contributed to the
spread of AMH into Asia and the Americas. Some of the earliest evidence for
seafaring and maritime adaptations in the Americas comes from California's
Channel Islands, which were settled by Paleocoastal peoples at least 13,000
years ago. Questions remain, however, about the permanence of Paleocoastal
occupation on the islands or the level of commitment to maritime life-ways. By
examining Paleocoastal life-ways, settlement, subsistence strategies, seafaring,
and island colonization on the Northern Channel Islands, this research will
contribute to larger issues pertaining to the antiquity of marine fishing in
North America, human impacts on marine ecosystems, and the supposed marginality
of coastal and island environments.

In this Doctoral Dissertation Grant under the direction of Dr. Jon Erlandson,
Mr. Nicholas Jew will use stable oxygen isotope analysis (ä18O) of marine shells
from Paleocoastal archaeological sites to test hypotheses related to the
seasonality of early human settlement on the Northern Channel Islands. Oxygen
isotope analysis will be used to determine the marine water temperature and
season of harvest for marine shells from seven Paleocoastal middens on San
Miguel Island dated between about 10,200 and 8000 years ago. Evidence for year-
round shellfish harvesting would suggest permanent occupation of the islands by
Paleocoastal peoples, whereas evidence for more focused harvesting would suggest
seasonal settlement. To provide an independent check on 18O results, the isotope
data will be compared to artifact and vertebrate assemblages from each site,
which vary depending on the length and timing of an occupation. The isotope
analysis will also provide valuable information on ancient sea-surface
temperatures, which have fluctuated through time and affect the productivity and
structure of local marine ecosystems. All these data will be compared to
published and unpublished data-including the results of current isotopic
research on shells from two Terminal Pleistocene (~12,200-11,400 cal BP) sites
on San Miguel and a large residential shell midden on Santa Rosa Island dated to
~8200 years ago-to test general colonization models. The investigators will
evaluate hypotheses regarding some of the earliest evidence for island
colonization in the New World, generate new hypotheses examining shellfish
availability and harvesting, and examine Paleocoastal site function and
settlement patterns on the Northern Channel Islands.

This research will result in important new archaeological and paleoecological
data, provide training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students in
anthropology, and contribute to the completion of a PhD in anthropology.
Research results will be shared with the public and scholarly community through
peer-reviewed publications, public and professional presentations, and a variety
of print and electronic media.