* 1212234
* IEEE EMBC 2012 Micro- and Nanoengineering in Medicine Conference, Msui, Hawaii, December 2-6, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2013
* Michelle Khine, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 02/28/2013
* USD 15,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1212234, Khine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merits: Micro- and nanotechnologies have emerged to become one of the most ?game
changing? fields in science over the past few decades. In particular the ability
to control and manipulate matter at small length scales has already led to major
advances in a range of different areas such as microelectronics, energy,
biomedicine and environment. Given the increasing amount of interest in this
area the ?Micro- and Nanotechnology in Medicine Conference? (MNMC) aims to bring
together leading experts in the area of micro- and nanotechnology to present the
latest work on the use of various types of technologies for addressing a range
of different challenges that are of importance for biomedicine and education of
engineers at the interface of engineering, medicine, and biological sciences.
This conference will be held in Hawaii, on Dec 2-6, 2012. The conference
organizers have partnered with IEEE-EMBS (IEEE- Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society), one of the leading societies at the interface between
engineering, biology and medicine, to present a program that is highly rich in
both intellectual merit as well as educational opportunities. In particular the
conference brings together students from various academic institutions with
world leading experts in a small and intimate setting that will enable ample
opportunities to network and learn. The conference will focus on a number of
unique areas that are highly inter-related yet not fully put together in a
similar program. These areas include fundamental science of micro- and
nanofluidics and small matter to applications in engineering the environment of
cells using various ?small-scale? technologies, developing devices to detect and
analyze molecules for biosensing and global health applications. Another unique
aspect of the conference is the involvement of people from companies. The
proposed conference will generate a range of opportunities for students and
young investigators to learn about the process of developing and commercializing
a technology from industry speakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The potential impact of this proposed MNMC is far-reaching.
Because this conference combines fundamentals of micro and nano science and
engineering with their applications in medicine, it will catalyze conversations
between otherwise disparate fields. Various biomedical grand challenges facing
our society and the world can be addressed in part or in whole by interfacing
biology and medicine with nanotechnology. By drawing leaders from each of these
fields together to discuss ways of addressing important medical issues with the
most cutting edge technology in an intimate venue, it will enable progress at
the interface of science, engineering, and medicine. To maximize the broader
impact of such a promising conference, several approaches are proposed to raise
awareness, with the larger scientific community as well as engage participation
by under-represented minorities by hosting:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Workshops
for students to engage more intimately with thought leaders. Students can get to
know leaders in the field through workshops to help guide and further their
careers. Having access to mentors is a critical component for a successful
education, and therefore providing a forum to engage mentor and student
interactions would help facilitate this.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Women in
Science, Engineering, and Medicine Panel Luncheon. With still so few women in
engineering and science, a panel luncheon in which women can learn from
established role models as well as open a dialogue on how to best attract and
engage women in these burgeoning fields is needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Best
poster awards for undergraduates and for graduate students. poster competitions
will be held to encourage the highest quality research and presentation at the
undergraduate as well as at the graduate level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Travel
grants for US students. These grants will enable students who otherwise cannot
afford to come to participate in this conference. The grants will be distributed
based on merit (quality of paper submission) with consideration for inclusion of
under-represented minorities and women.