* 1212327
* STTR Phase I:  Metamaterial Based Vacuum Electron Devices for Next Generation Communication Systems
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Jagadishwar Sirigiri, Bridge 12 Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project aims to develop
novel technology for Vacuum Electron Devices (VED) such as Traveling Wave Tubes
(TWT) for the next generation high spectral efficiency, high data rate civilian
and military communication systems. VED amplifier performance be greatly
improved by employing frequency selective interaction structures (IS) with high
gain in the operating band and negligible spurious output in the neighboring
bands for achieving high spectral efficiency. This project aims to develop a
novel TWT with a metamaterial (MTM) IS. MTMs can be engineered to simultaneously
have large negative values of permittivity (å) and permeability (ì) which cause
left handed propagation of electromagnetic waves with high coupling to the
electron beam. Also, such structures allow co-propagation of an electron beam in
the medium of the IS, permitting the choice of a spatially distributed high
current electron beam to achieve higher gain and output power. As a result of
the proposed research an MTM IS for a 10 GHz TWT will be designed, tested and
characterized. A proof-of-concept TWT design will be developed which will have
potential to advance the state-of-the-art in high data rate communication
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project includes advances in novel designs of passive components such as
waveguides, filters, duplexers, power combiners and channel drop filters.
Advances in the performance of these components are crucial to advancing system-
level performance of the next generation communication systems. The design
methodology developed under this work will also be applicable to other microwave
and terahertz sources such as VED based gyrotrons and semiconductor based
Terahertz sources such as Quantum Cascade Lasers (QCL) by using an MTM structure
to improve confinement of desired modes and filtering the unwanted modes. Also,
further development of MTMs will create new technology for the manipulation and
transportation of light which is the basic building block for optical computing.
The development of the concept of using MTMs for solving problems in both active
and passive microwave and terahertz devices will contribute to the understanding
of the basic physics of MTMs and advance the field of microwave engineering.