* 1212012
* Building Up and Tearing Down Galaxies: the Impact of Infalling and Outflowing Gas on Galaxy Evolution
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Jay Howk, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Barvainis
* 09/30/2016
* USD 460,058.00

Galaxies exchange mass with the surrounding intergalactic environment through
outflows driven by energetic processes inside them and infall of intergalactic
matter and of gas stripped from satellite systems. The balance of this exchange
with time is thought to explain a number of key galaxy properties. The proposing
team will test modern models of galaxy assembly by studying the relationship
between galaxies and their circumgalactic gas using a combination of space- and
ground-based gas-phase spectroscopy, ground-based optical imaging and
spectroscopy of galaxies, and numerical simulations of galaxies in a
cosmological context. Specifically, they will: (1) measure the metallicity
distribution in circumgalactic gas using high-resolution spectral observations
of quasar absorption lines; (2) determine the covering factor of cold gas as a
function of distance from the absorbing galaxies; (3) compare the physical and
statistical properties of the circumgalactic gas with those of the central
galaxies; and (4) develop new simulations and diagnostics to compare model
predictions with observations. Graduate and undergraduate students will
participate in the project, and parts of the observational work will be
incorporated in an undergraduate course. The team will contribute to the
development of a planetarium show, and will disseminate observational data and
simulation results through a website.