* 1212543
* Theory of Liquids and Liquid Mixtures, their Structures and Phase Equilibria
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2018
* Benjamin Widom, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2018
* USD 330,000.00

Benjamin Widom of Cornell University is supported by an award from the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods program to study solutions, in water,
of substances that are hardly soluble. The expression "oil and water don't mix"
is almost but not entirely true, and the slight solubility of oils and other
substances in water is often of crucial importance. It affects the efficiency of
separations by distillation and extraction in the chemical process industries;
it is a primary factor in drug design in the pharmaceutical industry; it is a
concern in water pollution and other environmental problems; and it underlies
the most fundamental biological phenomena. It is widely accepted, for example,
that it is the relative incompatibility of the oil-like constituents of a
protein and the surrounding water that is responsible for the protein's folding
into its proper biologically active form. Low solubility in water is an example
of what are known collectively as "hydrophobic" (literally water-hating)
effects. These effects are the objects of the present theoretical and
computational research, which is directed toward the understanding of their
molecular origins and consequences: What makes a substance hydrophobic? In what
other ways does hydrophobicity manifest itself in addition to low solubility?
How does the structure and other properties of the surrounding water itself
respond to the presence of dissolved hydrophobic molecules and what are the
physical and chemical consequences of such molecular-scale rearrangements?

Much of this research is directed to understanding the solvent-induced
attraction between hydrophobic solutes, particularly that measure of the
attraction contained in the second osmotic virial coefficient. It is desirable
to reconcile the values of this coefficient as found from equations of state and
thermodynamic measurements with the integral of the solute-solute pair
correlation function, as required by one of the Kirkwood-Buff relations. In
recent work it has been shown how the virial coefficient may be extracted from
an equation of state with parameters set to give realistic properties of the
pure solvent and a realistic account of those effects of the solute-solvent
interaction such as on the solubility of the solute and on its partial molecular
volume in the solvent. The resulting osmotic coefficient agrees well with that
extracted from experimental solubility measurements. Independently, the several
pair correlation functions in the two-component mixture are obtained by computer
simulation. These, on being integrated, are consistent with the solvent
compressibility, the solute partial molecular volume, and the gas-phase virial
coefficients, yet inconsistent with the previously obtained second osmotic
virial coefficient. This is a serious discrepancy, which is important to
resolve, for a proper understanding of structural effects in hydrophobic
hydration, and hydrophobic effects more generally, depends on it. There still
remains the problem of constructing analytical forms for the several pair
correlation functions to test earlier analytical indications that the amplitude
of the solute-solute correlation function, which is difficult to measure because
of the low solubility, greatly exceeds that of the other two so that the solutes
remain effectively correlated to longer distances than do the solvent molecules
despite the two having the same formal exponential decay length. A remaining
project is that of determining, by computer simulation and analytically, the
solute-solute pair correlation function on the solute-poor side of a closed-loop
coexistence curve, to trace the evolution from entropy-based to enthalpy-based
solvophobicity as the temperature varies between that of the two critical
solution points.