* 1212666
* RAPID:  Chemistry and Vertical Transport of Hox Radical Precursors During the Uintah Basin Winter Ozone Study in Utah
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Jochen Stutz, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2012
* USD 49,941.00

Wintertime ozone pollution in sparsely populated rural areas that have come
under the influence of nitrogen oxide and volatile organic compound emissions
from hydraulic fracturing natural gas drilling activities is a relatively recent
phenomenon. The fact that ozone mixing ratios exceed the federal air quality
standard in winter but not in summer poses a scientific puzzle. Weak solar
irradiance in mid-winter is expected to lead to a considerable slowdown of
photochemistry and consequently low ozone levels. It has been hypothesized that
specific environmental conditions, in particular the presence of surface snow,
are an important factor in the formation of wintertime ozone. Snow increases
surface albedo and, thus, enhances the actinic flux in winter to levels more
similar to those in the tropics. However, it appears that this effect only
explains part of the high wintertime ozone levels. It has also been hypothesized
that snow chemistry can be an efficient source of the hydroxyl and hydroperoxyl
(OH + HO2 = HOx) radical precursors nitrous acid (HONO) and formaldehyde (HCHO).
Elevated levels of these species could further accelerate the formation of ozone
in winter. The weak wintertime solar irradiance and high infrared emissivity of
snow also lead to the formation of strong and shallow surface inversions, which
can further accelerate ozone formation by concentrating pollutants near the
surface.

The Uintah Basin Winter Ozone Study jointly organized by NOAA/ESRL Chemical
Sciences Division, Physical Sciences Division, NOAA Pacific Marine Environmental
Laboratory, and the University of Colorado
(http://www.esrl.noaa.gov/csd/tropchem/2012ubwos/) field experiment is planned
for the time period of January 15 to March 1, 2012. The measurements to be
performed offer a unique opportunity to study polluted wintertime atmospheric
chemistry of ozone, as a large number of complementary measurements will be
performed by other investigators. The following scientific hypotheses related to
wintertime ozone formation will be tested:

- The photolysis of HONO, and to a lesser extent HCHO, are important, if not the
dominant primary HOX formation pathways under wintertime conditions.

- Chemistry in the snow or on the snow-covered ground strongly contributes to
the mixing ratios of HONO and HCHO, and is thus an important factor for HOX and
ozone formation.

- Surface inversions and suppressed vertical mixing play a crucial role in
concentrating pollutants in a shallow surface layer, thus accelerating surface
ozone formation.

Vertical profile measurements of ozone, nitrogen dioxide, HONO and HCHO will be
obtained by Long-Path Differential Optical Absorption Spectrometery. The
acquired data, together with data available from other investigators, will be
interpreted using established methods.

Activities will be closely coordinated with the Utah Department of Environmental
Quality and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region 8. The results will
thus directly be used to develop mitigation strategies for the ozone pollution
found in the Uintah Basin and thus benefit the local population. The results
will also benefit other locations with similar problems, such as the Upper Green
River Basin, Wyoming. The current expansion of natural gas drilling activities
also makes this a timely proposal as the air quality problem found in Utah and
Wyoming may soon also occur in other places in the U.S. and Canada. The project
will also provide a graduate student a career development opportunity, building
on previous experience performing measurements and analyzing trace gas vertical
profile data.