* 1212778
* CIF: BCSP: Large: Connectivity and Information Flow in a Complex Brain
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Ralph Greenspan, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 1,275,000.00

The network properties underlying the circuit operations of the brain are still
basically unknown. There is no complex brain in which the overall activity
patterns have been observed in real time. This project will chart the major
patterns of information flow in a small, complex brain, and analyze its
functional network architecture. Treating the network in a totally unbiased way,
it will generate data from artificial stimulation of brain circuits aimed at
surveying the paths of information flow, without regard to why the brain is
doing anything or what the output is. The task will be carried out in an unusual
collaboration between experimental and computational neuroscientists and network
theorists to chart information flow through the complex, but relatively small,
brain of the fruit fly Drosophila and then to analyze the principles of network
function that it reveals. The rationale for focusing on the fruit fly brain is
that it is small enough to be possible to monitor its activity completely, but
also complex enough (150,000 nerve cells) to offer solutions to the major
problems of complex brain networks. In addition, the entire wiring pattern of
its nerve cell connections is well under way and will soon be completed. The
goal of this project is to characterize the network from the perspective of its
underlying function and architecture, which not may not be identical with its
actual physical layout. With the data in hand, a search will be conducted for
the engineering the design principles embodied in the brain's networks. From
these findings, a general theory of information flow in the brain will be
formulated, based on the first broad-based, whole network
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project aims at mining
biological systems for principles and strategies that can be applied to problems
in computing and engineering. At the same time, it tackles a major problem in
neuroscience in a technically feasible fashion. The challenge to understanding
the overall strategy used by the brain is the fact that, in its operations, the
whole is greater than the sum of the parts. This feature, known as an "emergent"
property, arises from the timing and patterns of signaling activity of many
thousands of nerve cells. If one had access to that data, and could correlate
the activity with the pattern of nerve cell connections brain, it would be
possible to formulate a theoretical basis for large-scale neuronal coding.
Understanding this process, in turn, holds substantial promise for applications
in computing and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
&lt;br/&gt;Educational Impact: In addition to providing the opportunity for
training of graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and undergraduates, a
knowledge of the fundamental strategies of information processing in the brain
would allow us to design educational strategies that take maximum advantage of
that understanding. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technological Impact: The principles
and theoretical formulation that will emerge from this project also have the
potential for providing novel strategies for computer network design and traffic
flow of signals, and for engineering strategies that involve networks and
information flow. The experiments outlined for this project constitute a new
approach to the question of whether there are fundamental underlying principles
of brain network operation which, if discerned, would have wide-ranging
implications for applications such as the design and implementation of
artificial networks constructed for computing, engineered devices, and
communications. In addition, properties such as adaptability, versatility, and
robustness are keenly sought in these areas, and efforts are aimed at being able
to capture the ability of gene networks to carry them out.