* 1212400
* Mechanisms of Septin Assembly and Dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Amy Gladfelter, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 04/30/2017
* USD 673,156.00

Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;The cytoskeleton is made of protein-based polymers
that are required for proper cell structure and function. These polymer networks
serve as machines and tracks to segregate cell components, change cell shape,
and act as protein and membrane scaffolds. The septins are a highly conserved
component of the cytoskeleton important for processes such as cell division,
membrane compartments, and secretion. The septin proteins are widely expressed
from fungi to mammals. Septins come together in cells to build higher-order
structures such as rings, bars, and fibers. We use a genetically tractable model
filamentous fungus called Ashbya gossypii to study septins because its
persistent, dynamic and large septin-based assemblies are especially amenable to
microscopy and biochemical analysis. The objectives of this project address
three key aspects of septin architecture that are presently not understood: 1.
Determination of how septin filaments polymerize and link together in living
cells; 2. Identification of what factors control where septins are assembled
together in cells; and 3. Evaluation of the dynamics of septin filaments. The
research employs a combination of novel single molecule and polarized
fluorescence imaging, genetic mutant analysis and in vitro biochemical
approaches. The experiments in this project tackle a general cellular
engineering problem: how to erect persistent, yet dynamic, structures of a
constant size at specific locations in the cell. This project will discover
basic rules cells use to organize themselves in space to carry out functions of
life such as growth and division. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The PI is
committed to training undergraduates and graduate students and communicating
science in the community. As the course director for undergraduate Cell Biology,
the PI will expand on an inquiry-based lab unit developed by her and her
research group using Ashbya as a model system. After writing and receiving a
grant for "clickers" to use in Biology classes, she has developed a series of
questions to change the lecture based cell biology class into an active learning
space and will continue to expand and share this tool kit with other faculty in
future offerings. The PI has trained seven undergraduates in the lab in the last
five years, including two female math and computer science majors and one male
computer science major. One undergraduate was awarded an REU in the summer of
2010 to work with the PI at the Marine Biological Lab in Woods Hole. Two
Dartmouth undergraduates completed honors theses in the PI's lab this year and
both now have had their work published as first authors. She has mentored two
female PhD students, one female post-doc and one female technician and has had
five female rotation students, two of whom are Latina. The PI speaks about
issues facing women in science and balancing science and motherhood at many
venues on campus including various sorority faculty dinners, at the Biology
undergraduate society, and the undergraduate Women in Science Program. The PI
was the keynote speaker at the American Society for Cell Biology Annual Meeting
Special Session for undergraduate participants in 2010. The PI has mentored two
teacher-scholar post-doctoral fellows to facilitate their development as
teachers by co-teaching with them and providing weekly feedback on their
teaching. The PI speaks at evening seminars in her community about the
importance of basic science research and has spoken to middle school science
classrooms about what it is like to be a scientist. Graduate students in the
PI's lab regularly teach local high school students and teachers about the
principles of light microscopy and the research in our lab. The PI will weave
training, mentoring and local community involvement into her research program
through the continuation of these described activities.