* 1212971
* Mechanistic and Catalytic Studies of Reversible Covalent Bonding
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Eric Anslyn, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2016
* USD 405,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanism Program of
the National Science Foundation, Professor Eric Anslyn of the University of
Texas at Austin will lead a research program focused on dynamic covalent
bonding. Four modern areas of chemistry are currently exploiting dynamic
covalent bonding: supramolecular chemistry, Dynamic Combinatorial Chemistry
(DCC), organocatalysis, and enzyme inhibition. However, the dynamic reactions
routinely exploited in these areas are limited. This is due to the fact that
most reactions involving reversible covalent bonding are very slow to
equilibrate, and therefore exchange components on a time scale that is
impractical. Our goal is to expand the number of reversible systems that are
practical. To do this, the Anslyn team will first explore the mechanisms of four
reversible covalent reactions, capitalize on successes that their group has
recently had in this endeavor, and finally devise catalytic methods to speed up
the reversible covalent interchange. The four reversible reactions they will
target are: thiol conjugate addition, acetal formation, hemiaminal ether
formation, and phosphinite transesterification.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the mechanisms of these four reactions and
uncovering methods for their catalysis will have a broad impact on the chemical
community for two reasons. Firstly, they will create reversible covalent systems
that other investigators can directly use for their own needs. Second, and maybe
of even broader significance, they will demonstrate an approach for uncovering
methods of catalysis that other chemists can also adopt for their goals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the scientific advances, the University of
Texas (UT) at Austin offers a unique environment for broader impact. This
University runs a Freshman Research Initiative (FRI) laboratory for
undergraduates, wherein Dr. Anslyn always parallels a portion of this laboratory
to complement his NSF funding. This laboratory is equipped and sponsored by UT,
and thereby the NSF funding is leveraged to educate freshman chemistry students
in a truly research oriented setting.