* 1212357
* STTR Phase I:  SpiderRadio: Enabling Cognitive Dynamic Spectrum Access Wireless Communications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,09/30/2012
* Vijay Kumar, Instream Media LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 09/30/2012
* USD 149,978.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project consists of the
research and development of a comprehensive, integrated multi-layer solution for
cognition enabled dynamic spectrum access wireless communications. Several
spectrum measurement studies indicate that valuable radio spectrum is severely
underutilized. This has resulted in time and geographical region specific
spectrum holes or white spaces. The intellectual merits of this project consists
of the following technical objectives: (a) development of sensing algorithms to
identify unused or underused spectrum in real-time by optimally trade-off
sensing accuracy for delay; (b) design of a medium access control protocol that
will enable dynamic spectrum access based on the information provided by the
sensing algorithms; (c) development of a multi-network communication protocol to
enhance spectrum access; and (d) cross-layer optimization of these protocols to
significantly improve the data rate while achieving the application delay
constraints.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be in the
understanding of practically achievable performance of cognitive dynamic
spectrum access wireless networks. Highly accurate models and simulation tools
for designing cognitive wireless networks will be developed. These will be very
valuable to the technical and practitioner communities. The proposed technology
will lead to interoperable wireless public safety communications, low cost rural
broadband connectivity in television white spaces, and infrastructure for robust
mobile video applications. The combined market size for these sectors is
estimated to be several billion dollars, globally.