* 1212680
* CI-SEEDS: Seeding the Next Generation Cyberinfrastructure Ecosystem
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2012,12/31/2016
* David Jacobs, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 12/31/2016
* USD 998,979.00

CI-SEEDS: Seeding the Next Generation Cyberinfrastructure
Ecosystem&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of CI-SEEDS are to: 1) establish an
exemplar workforce development program for training researchers that are
prepared to solve today's interdisciplinary science problems, and that will
increase the recruitment, retention, and graduation rate of domestic students in
doctoral programs relevant to a cyberinfrastructure-enabled society; 2) build a
common vision that leverages the established cyberinfrastructure at Clemson to
enable transformative research in areas of University emphasis; and 3) lead a
set of activities with the broad academic community for curriculum planning that
will support interdisciplinary computational and data-enabled science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of this project is in developing a
model workforce development program with a unifying research thrust, guided by
the science of cyberinfrastructure, and motivated by strong NSF-funded research
in data-enabled science and data. The project funds a summer
"Cyberinfrastructure Bootcamp" for beginning graduate students which is
coordinated with an REU program as a single program through CI-SEEDS. CI-SEEDS
provides a framework to fund and further support beginning graduate students in
their first two years of graduate study, with the goal of significantly
increasing the probability of successful completion of a Ph.D. degree. CI-SEEDS
catalyzes planning activities for new academic programs in collaborative
computing research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts of this project are
very significant. CI-SEEDS builds upon an established recruiting program at
Clemson that is reaching far more females and underrepresented student groups
than the national average. The project creates a path for graduate study for
undergraduate students, and provides a foundation for new Ph.D. students in
collaborative computing. The project leverages the Computer Science Division's
longstanding relationship with the Clemson Computing and Information Technology
division, the state-funded CyberInstitute, and the world-class supercomputing
facilities, education, and training at Clemson. The project also leverages
existing awards for student travel to SC, and the SC/TN EPSCoR Track-2 award
with established connections to undergraduate-serving and minority institutions
throughout South Carolina and the region. CI-SEEDS serves as a model program to
increase the recruitment and graduation rate of domestic doctoral students in
interdisciplinary computing research areas.