* 1212279
* EAGER:  Educational Contributions to the Deep Convective Clouds and Chemistry (DC3) Field Campaign
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2014
* Gretchen Mullendore, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 12/31/2014
* USD 87,758.00

The Deep Convective Clouds and Chemistry (DC3) field campaign to be conducted
May-June 2012 is a multi-regional, multi-platform effort to determine the impact
of deep midlatitude continental convective clouds and their intrinsic dynamical,
microphysical, and electrification processes upon upper tropospheric composition
and chemistry. This award will support direct participation of University of
North Dakota (UND) undergraduate and graduate students in DC3 via three
mechanisms: (1) Development and delivery of a special winter/spring on-campus
course addressing the scientific objectives, instrumentation and forecasting
needs for the multi-regional field campaign; (2) a follow-on internship-for-
credit activity n which students will produce mock forecasts for the campaign
and monitor daily forecast and scientific discussions; and (3) direct
participation of a select number of students in the field campaign effort for
the northern Alabama subregion, to be based at the University of Alabama-
Huntsville (UAH).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this effort
derives from support of substantive exchanges between an early-career PI and her
students with other NSF-supported investigators on multidisciplinary topics
involving the interface of convective-scale meteorological processes and
atmospheric chemistry, as well as through contributions to the collection of
field datasets required to meet DC3 project goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts will relate primarily to education of graduate and undergraduate
students in the dynamic arena of field data collection-driven science, with an
eye toward improved retention of underrepresented groups in the sciences such as
women and Native Americans. Methodologies for development of both the class and
internship model will be documented and assessed in order to facilitate similar
experiences, both at UND and other institutions, as well as through
dissemination of outcomes via a peer-reviewed publication and associated
conference presentation to be made by students involved in this effort.
Collaborations between UND faculty and other DC3-involved investigators and
institutions will also be strengthened.