* 1212259
* Integrated Studies of Interfaces in Nanocomposites and Nanoimprinting
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Zhenhai Xia, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2014
* USD 95,692.00

The objective of this project is to study the fundamental interfacial friction
mechanisms and to develop new design concepts for both nanocomposites and
nanoimprinting. A unique approach will be developed to quantitatively measure
the interfacial friction in nanofiber reinforced metal/ceramic nanocomposites
and in metal nanoimprinting. The aim is to demonstrate the principles of
controlling the interfaces to achieve strong, tough nanocomposites, and non-
lubricated nanoimprinting technology. In addition, a multiscale modeling at
atomistic and micromechanics scales will be developed to interpret experimental
results and address important questions on the interfaces in nanocomposites and
nanoimprinting. The modeling and experimental work will be integrated to
determine the interfacial friction mechanisms at nanoscale. The research results
will provide a generic methodology for measuring the interfacial friction at the
nanoscale, design guidelines for material development, and new concepts for
material and process optimization strategies.

This research unifies two high-impact themes, nanocomposites and nanoimprinting,
by an innovative methodology created for studying nanoscale interfaces critical
to both themes. The integration of experimental measurement and theoretical
analysis on the interfaces will offer insight into the interfacial phenomena and
uncover new interfacial mechanisms. Our success will also generate a series of
positive advances on applications, including but not limited to: strong, tough
and light-weight structural material systems for next-generation engines in the
aerospace; multifunctional nanomaterials for MEMS components and devices, and
environmentally-friendly manufacturing. Together with the proposed basic
research, a matching education program will be carried out, which will provide
basic research training and education opportunities to graduate students,
undergraduate students and high school students. Special effort will be made to
encourage women and under-represented minority students to participate in the
research.