* 1212217
* The C-Band All Sky Survey: Diffuse Galactic Emission and CMB Polarization
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Anthony C. Readhead, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2014
* USD 327,158.00

The C-Band All Sky Survey (C-BASS) is a radio survey at 5 GHz of the entire sky
in total intensity and linear polarization. The northern part of the survey will
be completed in 2012 using a cryogenic receiver, optimized for both total
intensity and linear polarization, on a 6.1-meter antenna at the Owens Valley
Radio Observatory. A parallel southern survey will be conducted in 2012-2013
using a similar receiver on a 7.6-meter antenna in South Africa. This award
supports the completion of the northern survey and the publication and
interpretation of the results. The C-BASS will be the first all-sky survey of
diffuse Galactic emission at a frequency low enough to be dominated by
synchrotron radiation but high enough to be uncorrupted by Faraday rotation
effects. It will provide new information about the interstellar medium, the
Galactic magnetic field, and radiation mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;The C-BASS data
are also needed to improve the separation of the polarized cosmic microwave
background (CMB) from foreground emission. The CMB polarization is measured by
the WMAP and Planck satellites, and by several current and future ground-based
and balloon-borne experiments. A major goal for these experiments is to measure
the B-mode polarization signal, which is expected to provide information about
the epoch of inflation - in particular, the energy scale of inflation - and
about physics at grand unification energies. This requires that the CMB is
separated from foreground emission with higher accuracy than it is possible with
our current understanding of Galactic foregrounds. The C-BASS data will
significantly improve the accuracy of foreground subtraction. &lt;br/&gt;The
survey is conducted in collaboration with groups at the Universities of Oxford
and Manchester (UK), Rhodes University and HartRAO (South Africa), and KACST
(Saudi Arabia). The receiver for the northern survey has been constructed and
deployed at OVRO with support from the NSF and Oxford and Manchester
universities. Construction of the southern receiver has been supported by
Oxford, Manchester, and KACST. The The C-BASS sky maps will be made freely
available soon after completion. Students are involved in the design and
construction of the instrumentation as well as the observations and data
analysis. Members of the C-BASS team participate in the development and
execution of broad outreach programs at The Owens Valley Radio Observatory.