* 1212304
* NSF/FDA Scholar-in-Residence at FDA: Neuromechanical outcomes from next generation peripheral nerve implants
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2013
* Sameer Shah, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 109,862.00

1042522&lt;br/&gt;Shah&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will enable the
development of comprehensive criteria to evaluate the efficacy and safety of a
new generation of neural implants. In the development of such criteria, they
will develop fundamental insight into the relationship between nerve
biomechanics, morphology, and electrophysiological function. Several aspects of
our project are transformative. They have developed a rigorous quantitative
approach to directly examine in vivo nerve structure-function relationships.
This will bridge numerous gaps in the literature regarding influences of nerve
architecture on function. They will also use kinematic analysis to calibrate our
measurements of nerve deformation to a baseline physiological frame of
reference, allowing one to scale and compare relative nerve deformation across
species or in different experimental configurations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
approach represents a logical and necessary shift from arbitrary or non-
normalized nerve strains and strain rates reported in previous studies of
peripheral nerve plasticity. Several elements of the experimental design are
innovative, including the integration of nerve electrode implantation with in
vivo biomechanical and electrophysiological measurement, and the use of cellular
elements such as Bands of Fontana to assess regional nerve deformation.