* 1212771
* Ship Operations - R/V Melville
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Stephen Kelety, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rose Dufour
* 03/31/2017
* USD 11,114,954.00

R/V Melville will be operating in the South Atlantic at the beginning of 2012 in
support of the Navy, followed by a 53-day MGG cruise. The ship will then transit
to Chile, where it will begin work jointly supported by NSF, Scripps and NOAA on
the EPR Triple Junction (PI Blackman), followed by post-seismic studies of the
subduction zone by NSF PI Trehu. The ship will then head north en-route to the
Galapagos at which time PI Weller will conduct a NOAA-funded mission to make
observation in support of the Stratus Ocean Reference Station. After leaving the
Galapagos area, the ship will transit to San Diego and finish the year
performing a variety of institutional as well as NSF-funded work.

Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of the proposed work is indirect. It
derives from the intellectual merit of the individual research projects that
depend upon the shipboard work at sea. NSF-funded scientific investigations for
2012 operations include: marine geology; seismic hazard studies; climate
observations; and instrumentation development.

Broader Impacts: The mission of R/V Melville includes the provision of
educational opportunities both to students of the marine sciences, and, through
educational outreach. R/V Melville operations also contribute significantly to a
wide diversity of scientific disciplines, the data from which benefit
oceanographic research beyond those studies directly funded to participate in
cruises.