* 1212558
* Collective Behavior and Spatiotemporal Dynamics in Chemical Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Kenneth Showalter, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2016
* USD 465,869.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
Program of the Division of Chemistry, the Professor Kenneth Showalter of West
Virginia University and his students will investigate three main lines of
research: (i) the dynamics and collective behavior of self-propelled particles,
(ii) the propagating target and spiral waves in precipitation reactions, and
(iii) the synchronization behavior in populations of coupled chemical
oscillators. In the first project, studies of collective behavior in populations
of self-propelled particles, such as Pt-silica particles in hydrogen peroxide
solutions, are carried out to determine the mechanism of inter-particle
interactions. New self-propelled particle systems based on enzyme catalysis and
surface catalyzed reactions are being developed and the motion of n-mer particle
aggregates is being characterized. In the second project, studies of recently
discovered propagating waves in the precipitation front of the NaOH-AlCl3
reaction are conducted. The positive feedback giving rise to the propagating
wave behavior is being characterized and new precipitation systems exhibiting
propagating waves are being developed. The third project involves studies of
populations and networks of coupled chemical oscillators. The theoretically
predicted chimera state, with coexisting subpopulations of synchronized and
unsynchronized oscillators, is studied experimentally and computationally by
using light-sensitive, catalyst-loaded particles in catalyst-free Belousov-
Zhabotinsky reaction mixtures. Self-optimization of link weights in biomimetic
networks of oscillators controlled with an algorithm for spike-timing dependent
plasticity is also being studied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All three lines of
research are expected to yield new and important information about collective
behavior and spatiotemporal dynamics in chemical systems and offer valuable
insights into dynamic behavior in biological systems. The studies of self-
propelled particles will provide mechanistic insights into the propulsion and
interaction of biological unicellular organisms, such as bacteria and algae. The
studies of propagating target and spiral waves in precipitation systems will
offer new mechanisms for chemical wave propagation that rely on structural
features of the medium, much like wave propagation in many biological systems.
The studies of new states of coexisting synchronized and unsynchronized coupled
chemical oscillators and self-optimization in networks of chemical oscillators
provide insights into basic dynamical behaviors pervasive in living systems. The
research program is expected to have a broad local impact from the integration
of research and teaching into the university curriculum. The impact of the work
is further broadened through outreach activities involving the International
Center for Theoretical Physics that bring hands-on research experiences to
scientists in developing countries in Asia, Africa, and South and Central
America.