* 1212288
* inter-Science of Learning Centers Conference
* SBE,SMA
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Garrison Cottrell, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 02/28/2014
* USD 115,797.00

This proposal requests funds to support the annual Inter-Science of Learning
Centers (i-SLC) Conference, organized by the graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows of the 6 Science of Learning Centers (SLCs). This event has served as a
vital venue for exchanging research findings across the SLCs, sharing resources
and stimulating career development opportunities for Center trainees. This
highly productive activity has resulted in cross-center collaborations,
including cross-center student exchanges for additional training in other
laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This year, the conference will be hosted by
the NSF-funded Temporal Dynamics of Learning Center (TDLC) in San Diego, CA on
April 21-23, 2012. To capitalize on the host-center's primary research focus on
the temporal dynamics of learning and how time and timing influences learning,
the iSLC 2012 will have the general theme of "Time, Mind, and Education
Interwined". Requested funds will be used to pay for conference facilities at
the University of California San Diego (UCSD) and to cover participants' costs
of attending, including travel and per diem &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earlier iSLC
conferences experiment in various ways to maximize the effectiveness with which
the meeting meets its objectives, and each evolution of this event reflects
deliberate efforts to improve the meeting based on feedback from prior meetings.
Individual students and postdoctoral fellows attending iSLC will benefit from
visiting UCSD, learning from experiences of their peers, and by being exposed to
new and alternative methodologies and paradigms. Most importantly, they will be
provided with opportunities to participate actively in the cross-center, and
inter-disciplinary network that will provide support for them in their careers.
Since most graduate students and postdoctoral fellows typically attend field-
specific conferences with little opportunity to interact with peers outside of
their disciplinary niches, this annual event is addressing the need to provide
the infrastructure for a national, and even international, interdisciplinary
network of young scholars who are likely to continue to cooperate and
collaborate throughout their future careers. This year, the trainees are
proactively implementing several strategies to broaden the participation of
underrepresented minorities in science, by leveraging on-going efforts at their
respective centers.