* 1212372
* AF: Large: Collaborative Research: Exploiting Duality between Algorithms and Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Ryan Williams, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2016
* USD 450,000.00

Meta-algorithms are algorithms that take other algorithms as input.
&lt;br/&gt;Meta-algorithms are important in a variety of applications, from
&lt;br/&gt;minimizing circuits in VLSI to verifying hardware and software to
&lt;br/&gt;machine learning. Lower bound proofs show that computational problems
&lt;br/&gt;are difficult in the sense of requiring a prohibitive
&lt;br/&gt;amount of time, memory, or other resource to solve. &lt;br/&gt;This
is particularly important in the context of cryptography, &lt;br/&gt;where it is
vital to ensure that no feasible adversary can break &lt;br/&gt;a code.
Surprisingly, recent research by the PIs and others &lt;br/&gt;shows that
designing meta-algorithms is, in a formal sense, &lt;br/&gt;equivalent to
proving lower bounds. In other words, one can prove a &lt;br/&gt;negative (the
non-existence of a small circuit to solve a problem) by &lt;br/&gt;a positive
(devising a new meta-algorithm). This was the key to a &lt;br/&gt;breakthrough
by PI Williams, proving lower bounds on constant &lt;br/&gt;depth circuits with
modular arithmetic gates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
utilize this connection both to &lt;br/&gt;design new meta-algorithms and to
prove new lower bounds. &lt;br/&gt;A primary focus will be on meta-algorithms
for &lt;br/&gt;deciding if a given algorithm is 'trivial' or not, such as
algorithms &lt;br/&gt;for the Boolean satisfiability problem. The proposed
research will devise new &lt;br/&gt;algorithms that improve over exhaustive
search for many variants &lt;br/&gt;of satisfiability. On the other hand, it
will also explore &lt;br/&gt;complexity-theoretic limitations on how much
improvement is &lt;br/&gt;possible, using reductions and lower bounds for
restricted &lt;br/&gt;models. Satisfiability will provide a starting point for a
more &lt;br/&gt;general understanding of the exact complexities of other NP-
complete &lt;br/&gt;problems such as the traveling salesman problem and
k-colorability. &lt;br/&gt;The proposal addresses both worst-case performance
and the use &lt;br/&gt;of fast algorithms as heuristics for solving this
problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This exploration will be mainly mathematical.
However, when &lt;br/&gt;new algorithms and heuristics are developed, they will
be &lt;br/&gt;implemented and the resulting software made widely available.
&lt;br/&gt;This research will be incorporated in courses taught by
&lt;br/&gt;the PI's, at both graduate and undergraduate levels. &lt;br/&gt;Both
graduate and undergraduate students will perform research &lt;br/&gt;as part of
the project.