* 1212314
* STTR Phase I:  Software-Defined Multi-pulse Wideband Radios for Spectrum Reuse and Assured Communications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Richard Twogood, Dirac Solutions Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 147,668.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project seeks to develop
secure/covert short-range wireless personal area communication networks by
addressing the critical technical challenges of RF communications in harsh
environments. The key new contributions in this proposed work include advanced
techniques in the following areas: RF channel equalization, multi-pulse
modulation for covertness and enhanced data security at the physical layer,
adaptive noise and interference cancellation, multiple-input multiple-output
antennas for capacity maximization, and wideband antenna design techniques for
overcoming severe signal attenuation or distortions. Success in Phase I will
lead to development of a powerful and flexible Software Defined Radio solution
for covert communications with exceptionally high data security and operating in
harsh propagation environments for distances up to at least 100 m. Proposed
techniques are virtually certain to overcome the main obstacles that have
prevented previous traditional communications systems, including the ultra-
wideband ones, from succeeding in an array of commercial and government
applications such as first-responder communications, communications in harsh
environments, and related areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is not only significant for defense
and related government applications, but may also enable numerous commercial
opportunities. On the government and military market fronts, there are numerous
Department of Defense and intelligence community needs that can be better
addressed by the novel communications system approach proposed. These include
shipboard communications systems, urban rescue missions, some subset of tactical
communications in harsh environments, intelligence field missions requiring
stealthy communications in all environments (including urban settings), and many
others. Beyond the clear national security payoffs, broader societal payoffs
could include personal security, police and fire rescues, and possibly other
less obvious applications involving short-range communications and personal area
networks. It is expected that these advances will enable successful
communications systems in many areas where traditional systems fail, and that
the funding of this project will facilitate a much broader set of high-impact,
dual-use applications. The proposed new communication systems embody unique
features, modulation schemes, and other technical methods which will expand the
understanding and applicability of these novel approaches to difficult
communication environments.