* 1212442
* Collaborative Research: Development of a Relativistic Atomic Code for Accurate Treatment of Complex Correlations
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2012,11/30/2015
* Marianna Safronova, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 11/30/2015
* USD 314,999.00

The goal of this project is to develop a broadly applicable atomic code for
predicting properties of open d- and f-shell atoms with precision of a few
percent. The recent NSF Workshop on Atomic, Molecular and Optical (AMO) Theory
identified "describing complex correlations in atomic -molecular structure and
collisions" as a central objective of AMO physics in the coming decade, due to
its fundamental importance and relevance to new experiments. While tremendous
progress has been made recently in high-precision atomic calculations, accurate
treatment of correlations in d- and f-shell open systems remains a challenge. In
this proposal, we will develop a new open-source code based on the combination
of large-scale configuration interaction (CI) and all-order linearized coupled-
cluster method carried out in the optional starting potential. The resulting set
of codes will be documented and made available for the scientific community.
Specific test cases that will be treated in this proposal are selected for their
present interest to various applications including variation of fundamental
constants, astrophysics, atomic clocks, and quantum information processing
research: open-shell states of Fe, Fe+, Xe, Hg+, Yb+, and ionized Th. The code
will be designed to calculate specific properties of interest to these fields
beyond energy levels and transition rates. We will also develop methodologies to
evaluate the accuracy of the produced recommended data. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The d- and f-shell atoms considered in this project present frontier
challenges to AMO theory, and also stand in the forefront of a number of
experimental applications to subjects such as time-dependence of the fundamental
constants, studies of fundamental interactions, atomic clock research, analysis
of astrophysical data, plasma science, studies of quantum degenerate gases, and
quantum information. In a number of these applications, accurate AMO theory is
indispensable to the design and interpretation of experiments, with direct
experimental measurement of relevant parameters being impossible or infeasible.
Our code has the goal of elevating treatment of d- and f-shell atoms to the same
level now possible for simpler systems: a challenging prospect that opens up
much of the Periodic Table to applications that heretofore could only be pursued
with the simplest atoms. Therefore, this research will lead to the advancement
of both the study of fundamental physics questions and development of future
technologies (such as atomic clocks and quantum information). Beyond the
development for the scientific community of a new broadly applicable atomic code
we propose to create tools for education of the new AMO students and promotion
of the connection between theory and experiment. We will develop a set of
tutorials on modern applications of the AMO physics that will be based on
practical calculations of examples from forefront research. These tutorials may
be used separately by various groups or combined into introductory graduate
atomic physics course "Modern Applications of Computational Atomic Physics". The
resulting educational tutorials will be disseminated through the PI web-site or
other appropriate web resource databases, shared with other educators and
published in educational journals as appropriate.