* 1212943
* CSR: Large: Collaborative Research: Enabling  Privacy-Utility Trade-Offs in Pervasive Computing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Sharad Mehrotra, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2015
* USD 142,000.00

Pervasive computing, such as sensors in smartphones, buildings, automobiles and
cities, result in increased sharing of sensor data, whether initiated by users
or by other authorities such as service providers, government entities, interest
groups, and individuals. Embedded in this data is information which others, even
using sophisticated data mining algorithms, can fuse to construct a virtual
biography of our activities, revealing private behaviors and lifestyle patterns.
Researchers in this project are devising computational methods to let users
exercise privacy control over their personal sensory data that is
shared.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project is developing a
user-configurable cryptographically-secure ?privacy shield? to run on
smartphones and act upon sensor information flowing to other users, apps, and
services. To make privacy understandable, the user is presented with a higher
level abstraction for expressing privacy and sharing in terms of rich inferences
and contexts drawn from sensor measurements. The user can designate some
inferences and contexts as private. To provide privacy while ensuring the
quality of service provided by the recipients of the sensory information, the
system also incorporates algorithms which, over time, learn a personalized model
of the privacy risk from sharing an inference. The theoretical concepts and the
system realization are being validated via user studies in mobile health and
personal sensing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: By providing better
understanding of the behavioral privacy problem and risks inherent in sharing
seemingly innocuous data, results from this project will lead to a more educated
and informed citizenry, regulators, and policy makers, and provide effective
tools for privacy management to those who share sensory information.