* 1212144
* Collaborative Research: Theories and experiments on scalar mixing in chaotic flows
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Wenbo Tang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2016
* USD 184,276.00

Tang&lt;br/&gt;DMS-1212144&lt;br/&gt;Ouellette&lt;br/&gt;DMS-
1211952&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The investigators model and quantify scalar
diffusion in the limit where homogenization theory is invalid. This regime is
typical when the scalar in the flow has sources or sinks due to physical or
biological forces, such as release or mitigation of contaminants, birth and
death processes, predator-prey interactions in biological species, or many
others. As a result, the classical assumptions of turbulent isotropy and
homogeneity do not apply, and the mathematical challenge is to properly
represent enhanced diffusion (from molecular motion) by the associated fluid
motion at scales smaller or comparable to the characteristic forcing scale of
the flow. The complementary expertise of the investigators enables the
development of mathematically based models that are verified with numerical and
physical experiments. The investigators study scalar mixing from a variety of
angles. Topological measures on the background stirring, based on dynamical
systems methods, are used and tested for modeling turbulent diffusion with
coherent structures. Additionally, mixing measures associated with sources and
sinks are studied with an upper bound approach. Overall, the investigators study
how mathematical theory can be used and adapted to explain inhomogeneous,
anisotropic diffusion processes observable from physical experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Transport and mixing processes associated with
pollutants, such as the Gulf oil spill and radioactive contamination in Japan,
and with biological tracers, such as plankton blooms, are greatly affected by
stirring patterns in the background flow. The novel theoretical and experimental
studies proposed here lay the foundation for improved mathematical models and
simulations of scalar mixing for many environmental and geophysical processes;
in particular, they can be used to address realistic environmental problems.
Other broad impacts include training of a graduate student and a postdoctoral
researcher. Moreover, the experiments and visualizations from simulations, along
with some analytical and computational tools used in this research, are blended
into the investigators' outreach efforts to engage high school students'
interest in mathematics and physics. The project is supported by the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems and by the
Division of Mathematical Sciences.