* 1212308
* Expanding the Toolbox for Quantum Control of Atomic Qudits
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Poul Jessen, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Cavagnero
* 07/31/2016
* USD 365,976.00

This project uses the hyperfine degrees of freedom of laser cooled cesium atoms
as a testbed on which to develop and test new tools for quantum control and
measurement. Qubits and qudits (d-level quantum systems) encoded in atomic
ground hyperfine states are especially useful for such work because they provide
long coherence times, can be coherently manipulated with radiofrequency and
microwave fields, and can be probed weakly or strongly with optical fields.
Efforts will be focused on two closely related areas of research. The first
concerns control and measurement of quantum systems with complex internal
structure, and has as its primary objectives to implement unitary control of
qubits and qudits encoded in the 16-dimensional hyperfine ground manifold, to
explore methods to prepare arbitrary mixed states and implement completely
positive maps, and to improve or develop new protocols for quantum state and
process tomography based on weak measurement and augmented by new ideas such as
compressed sensing. The second focus area relates to quantum control on real
world platforms, and has as its primary goals to improve and extend tools for
robust qudit control in inhomogeneously broadened quantum systems, and to apply
these to atoms in optical dipole traps and optical nanofiber surface traps. The
research is primarily experimental, but numerical simulation and more formal
theoretical study will also be undertaken.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of
Quantum Information Science (QIS) is motivated by the promise of transformative
approaches to computation, communication, and ultra-precise measurement. It has
also inspired new ways of thinking about old problems and unresolved issues in
physics, and played a role in quantum simulations that study the real-world
applicability of idealized theoretical models. QIS is now pursued in many
contexts, including nanofabricated condensed matter systems, cold atoms and
ions, linear and nonlinear optical systems, and various hybrids thereof. Though
details vary with the physics at hand, one of the most fundamental challenges of
QIS is universal: one must prepare the relevant quantum system in a well defined
initial state, drive it though a complex evolution, and access the final state
through measurement. In doing so, many of the tools developed on one platform
can be applied to another. This project will use cold atoms as a testbed for
control of quantum systems that have more than two levels. The resulting toolbox
is likely to be useful and perhaps essential in the many implementations where
carriers of quantum information have complex internal structure. The project
will also contribute to the training of future scientists in the highly
interdisciplinary field of QIS. Students will be involved in all aspects of the
project, including education, research, and the dissemination of results. The
project is a cornerstone of the NSF supported Center for Quantum Information and
Control, co-located at the University of Arizona College of Optical Science and
the University of New Mexico Department of Physics and Astronomy. Weekly video
conferencing, an annual research retreat, and joint participation in conferences
will enrich the educational experience and strengthen the connections between
junior and senior participants at both institutions.