* 1212623
* BREAD:   Assessing, Understanding and Targeting Non-responsive Soils for Improved Crop Production in Smallholder Farms in Sub-Saharan Africa
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Cheryl Palm, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* carlos vallejos
* 09/30/2016
* USD 1,148,136.00

PI: Generose Nziguheba (Columbia University)

CoPIs: Cheryl Palm (Columbia University) and Bernard Vanlauwe [International
Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA), Ibadan, Nigeria]

Key Collaborators: Pedro Sanchez, Markus Walsh, and Ray Weil (Columbia
University), and Keith Shepherd [World Agroforestry Centre (ICRAF), Nairobi,
Kenya)

The success of the African Green Revolution depends on increased use of
fertilizers and improved germplasm, which double or triple yields in many areas
compared to current farmer practices. Yet there is growing evidence that yields
in many fields remain low, showing little response to fertilizers. There is
limited understanding of where, why, and how this soil and crop non-
responsiveness occurs. Nutrient inputs that drive the African Green Revolution
on the nutrient depleted soils of the continent must be efficiently targeted and
managed to realize the benefits of improved crop germplasm. The project has four
objectives: (1) quantify the occurrence of crop non-responsiveness to mineral
fertilizers as related to soil type, topography/landscape, and management
practices, (2) characterize the soil processes and properties that result in
crop non-responsiveness to mineral fertilizers, (3) evaluate rapid and cost
effective field tools for diagnosing these soil factors, and (4) construct a
decision tree for targeting improved management options for non-responsive
soils. State-of-the art analytical methods will provide the quantitative
characterization of chemical, physical, and biological soil factors underlying
non-responsiveness. Expected outcomes include: 1) information on the extent and
location of non-responsive soils, 2) description and quantification of the soil
factors that contribute to non-responsiveness, 3) efficient and cost-effective
field tools to characterize and diagnose soils in terms of non-responsiveness,
and 4) decision tools for soil management options to manage and rehabilitate
non-responsive soils.

The project will make a substantial contribution to science and methodologies
guiding sustainable agricultural production in Africa. A field test kit coupled
with a decision tree for diagnosing and managing non-responsive crops/soils will
be developed for researchers, policy makers, extension services, and farmers
aimed at targeting nutrient management recommendations. Interactions with
national scientists and institutions in Africa will develop capacity, knowledge,
and methods required to increase and scale up the impact of the African Green
Revolution on the productivity of smallholder farms. The project will also
mentor, train, and support graduate students and post-doctoral fellows in the
United States and Africa through the PI, co-PIs, and collaborating scientists in
the project who have all been involved in and led much of the basic and applied
soils research and graduate student training in Africa over the past 15 to 20
years. Data will be deposited and publically accessible at the Africa Soil
Information Service (AfSIS) website (www.africasoils.net/).