* 1212281
* Exploring potential energy surfaces for strong field chemistry, ion dynamics and bio-organic chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* H. Bernhard Schlegel, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* James Lisy
* 07/31/2015
* USD 460,000.00

H. Bernhard Schlegel of Wayne State University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
Division to explore projects in strong field chemistry, ab initio molecular
dynamics, bio-organic systems, and reaction path optimization. Explicitly,
integration of time dependent configuration interaction (TD-CI) and density
functional theory will be compared for modeling molecules interacting with
short, intense laser pulses. Different methods for simulating strong field
ionization will be assessed. TD-CI simulations with field-dependent states and
improved methods for integrating ab initio classical trajectories in strong
fields will be developed. Standard and long-range corrected functionals will be
compared for classical trajectories in strong laser fields. These ab initio
molecular dynamics methods will be used to study the kinetic energy distribution
of protons in strong field fragmentations, and H(+) migration and H3(+)
formation from molecules interacting with intense laser fields. Studies of bio-
organic systems will include redox potentials of intermediates in guanine
oxidation pathways, environmental effects on nucleobase pKa's and redox
potentials, guanine-thymine crosslinks and metal-promoted oxidation of guanine.
To support these studies, new methods will be developed for reaction path
optimization, reaction paths through seams and conical intersections, and
reaction paths for bifurcating potential energy
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding molecular dynamics and exploring
reaction pathways are key challenges in chemistry. Strong field chemistry and
attosecond science address these challenges by using short intense laser pulses
to probe structure and reactivity. Professor Schlegel and his team are
developing new methods for simulating the behavior of molecules under these
extreme conditions. The selected studies of bio-organic systems include
properties and reactivity of DNA bases related to toxicity, mutagenesis and
cancer. To support these studies, the researchers are developing new methods for
exploring reaction paths on potential energy surfaces that will benefit many
areas of chemistry which utilize molecular orbital calculations.