* 1212472
* Differential and Total Cross Sections for Top Quark Production and other Processes at the LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Nikolaos Kidonakis, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2015
* USD 120,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Nikolaos Kidonakis at
Kennesaw State University.

This research project will involve calculations for the production of elementary
particles such as the top quark, the Higgs boson, and Z bosons at the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC), the world's highest-energy collider. The top quark is the
most massive fundamental particle that has ever been discovered: it has many
unique properties and may be crucial to understanding the origin of electroweak
symmetry breaking. For these reasons, the top quark was the centerpiece of the
physics program at the Tevatron collider at Fermilab, and it is now a central
part of the physics program at the LHC. Similarly, the Higgs boson is the
particle thought to be responsible for mass generation and its discovery is also
a priority for the LHC. As part of this project, Professor Kidonakis will
improve theoretical predictions for top-quark production in top-antitop and
single-top channels as well as for Higgs production and other processes. He will
do this by performing state-of-the-art calculations of higher-order corrections.
These calculations will ultimately be important for understanding the
implications of upcoming LHC data.

This work is also envisioned to have significant broader impacts. The proposed
research is very timely since it addresses physics that is relevant to the LHC.
The research findings will also be widely disseminated through publication in
refereed journals and presentations in international conferences and workshops.
Finally, this project will strengthen the educational and research programs at
Kennesaw State University. Professor Kidonakis has actively involved
undergraduate and graduate students in his research, and this project offers
numerous research and educational opportunities for student involvement.