* 1212338
* SoCS: Collaborative Research: Novel Algorithms and Interaction Mechanisms to Enhance Social Production
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Eric Gilbert, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2015
* USD 212,443.00

Millions of people used social media technologies to organize themselves to
produce information and artifacts of value, such as Wikipedia, GNU/Linux, and
PatientsLikeMe. However, these communities have significant problems: (1) They
work so well to let people maintain existing relationships and find others who
are similar to them that they can promote self-segregation and opinion
polarization. (2) Knowledge production has been democratized, but at the price
of devaluing expert participation. (3) They open people to fresh ideas from far-
off places, but few sites incorporate the rich local knowledge of home
communities. This project addresses these problems by creating algorithms and
user interfaces that nudge individuals and communities into more effective
patterns of social connections and interaction.

The intellectual merit includes: (1) Identification of principles people use to
build their social networks, the range of potential contacts they consider, and
the contexts in which they encounter potential contacts. (2) Empirical knowledge
of the effectiveness of different social network structures for solving a range
of realistic decision-making tasks. (3) Novel social recommendation algorithms
that maximize network effectiveness and that recommend interaction opportunities
that serve as contexts for communication and connection.

Broader impacts: This research will be performed in the context of two domains
of societal interest, parenting and bicycling, enabling significant broader
impacts. Providing people information that gives them confidence to bicycle more
increases their personal health, decreases air pollution, and improves community
cohesion. Research shows that parents with larger and more diverse social
networks make better parenting decisions, and that parents also seek expert
advice for specific issues. Therefore, a system that helps people form effective
social networks and that provides access to expert educators offers direct
benefits to parents. Better parents also tend to be more involved in their
communities; thus, improved community health is a bonus effect. Finally, through
the research team's connections with parent educators, the project will
explicitly target parents from low-income families, who have the greatest needs
for support and information.