* 1212577
* CGV: Large: Collaborative Research: Modeling, Display, and Understanding Uncertainty in Simulations for Policy Decision Making
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Michael Goodchild, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 09/30/2017
* USD 559,797.00

The goal of this collaborative project (1212806, Ross T. Whitaker, University of
Utah; 1212501, Donald H. House, Clemson University; 1212577, Mary Hegarty,
University of California-Santa Barbara; 1212790, Michael K. Lindell, Texas A&M
University Main Campus) is to establish the computational and cognitive
foundations for capturing and conveying the uncertainty associated with
predictive simulations, so that software tools for visualizing these forecasts
can accurately and effectively present this information about to a wide range of
users. Three demonstration applications are closely integrated into the research
plan: one in air quality management, a second in wildfire hazard management, and
a third in hurricane evacuation management. This project is the first large-
scale effort to consider the visualization of uncertainty in a systematic, end-
to-end manner, with the goal of developing a general set of principles as well
as a set of tools for accurately and effectively conveying the appropriate level
of uncertainties for a range of decision-making processes of national
importance.

The primary impact of this work will be methods and tools for conveying the
results of predictive simulations and their associated uncertainties, resulting
in better informed public policy decisions in situations that rely on such
forecasts. Scientific contributions are expected in the areas of simulation and
uncertainty quantification, visualization, perception and cognition, and
decision making in the presence of uncertainty. Results will be broadly
disseminated in a variety of ways across a wide range of academic disciplines
and application areas, and will be available at the project Web site
(http://visunc.sci.utah.edu). The multidisciplinary nature of the research and
the close integration of the participating research groups will provide a unique
educational environment for graduate students and other trainees, while also
broadening the participation in computer science beyond traditional boundaries.