* 1212907
* Imaging charge transfer dynamics in nanomaterials using electron donor/acceptor modified AFM tips
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Tianquan Lian, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2014
* USD 194,506.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Tianquan Lian of Emory University and his
postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate student researchers will be supported
to investigate the feasibility of imaging charge transfer dynamics in
nanomaterials using specially modified atomic force microscopy (AFM) tips. Prof.
Lian and his research group will attach quantum dots to the AFM tips and will
measure the photoinduced charge transfer between the modified tip and the probed
surface. The goal of this research is to develop a better understanding of the
photophysical process taking place at the boundaries in nanomaterials used in
solar energy conversion.

Atomic force microscopy methods use contact between a nanometer-scale probe and
a surface to measure the changes in morphology of the probed surface. The probe
is able to measure differences in the physical properties (e.g. hardness,
softness) of the underlying surface at the nanometer (or smaller) length scale.
Prof. Lian and his group are attempting to build an AFM probe that will be able
to do what the AFM does, except by measuring differences in the rate of
photoinduced charge transfer between the modified probe tip and the underlying
surface. The goal is to develop the ability to measure the
photophysical/electrical properties of nanoscale materials with the same
resolution that can be obtained with AFM methods. The students working on this
project will gain useful experience in developing cutting-edge analytical
spectroscopy tools that will be useful for evaluating and characterizing
technologically useful materials. As part of this work, Prof. Lian will continue
his exemplary efforts at encouraging students from underrepresented groups to
pursue careers in the sciences.