* 1212683
* SHF:  Large: Collaborative Research:  Science and Tools for Software Evolution
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Don Batory, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2018
* USD 365,232.00

Successful software constantly evolves. Most programmers work on projects they
did not start. Most companies spend more on maintaining old systems than on
building new ones. This is good, because it shows that companies build software
that is worth keeping and maintaining, but it also means that change is the
heart of software development. Most programming tools treat change at a very low
level: programmers make most changes with text editors, and tools tend to focus
on changes to lines of text, and although programming is predominantly about
change, contemporary tools do not provide direct support for understanding or
facilitating change. This makes programming more expensive, time-consuming, and
error-prone than it should be. This research project will develop a change-
oriented programming environment (COPE) that supports change by putting
transformations at the center of software development. COPE will enable both
average and expert programmers to write, script, modify, and replay their own
transformations. COPE will enable programmers to think about programs as
compositions of transformations, and to automate as many of these
transformations as possible. Characterizing software development in terms of
transformations is an essential step to take software engineering from manual
development to automated (or semi-automated) development of
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By enabling programmers to express their
programming tasks as program transformations, COPE will This alter the way
programmers think about, teach, create, reuse, and understand programs.
Specifically, COPE considers five activities: (1) analyze what changes
programmers typically make and how they perceive, recall, and communicate
changes, (2) automate transformations to make it easier to apply and script
changes, (3) develop tools that compose and manipulate transformations to make
it easier to reuse them, (4) integrate transformations with version control to
provide better ways for archiving and understanding changes, and (5) develop
tools that infer higher-level transformations from lower-level changes. COPE
will deliver a rich transformation-aware toolset that synergistically integrates
all these activities. COPE aims to (a) change the way people program, (b) create
a platform for research for future research, and (c) produce results that
ultimately will become standard software development practice. The PIs will
disseminate the results through presentations, books, publications, open-source
code, industrial collaborations, and educational activities. A version of COPE
will be used to revamp the software engineering curriculum at the University of
Illinois and the University of Texas to emphasize the science of change in large
code bases.