* 1212392
* EAGER: Investigate a novel way of light harvesting by marine phytoplankton: proton-pump rhodopsin in dinoflagellates
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2015
* Senjie Lin, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 01/31/2015
* USD 209,720.00

Photosynthesis was the only known pathway of phototrophy in marine ecosystems
until the early 2000s, when a proton-pump type of rhodopsin (proteorhodopsin, or
PR) was found to occur in marine bacteria living in the sunlit ocean surface,
and its role in facilitating trans-membrane proton transport that leads to ATP
production was demonstrated. It has since been found that the PR gene occurs in
13% to 80% of marine bacteria and archaea in the ocean's surface waters. The PIs
recently detected a rhodopsin gene in marine dinoflagellates that is closely
related to the proton-pump type, but direct evidence of its proton-pump action
in this group of organisms is lacking. Given the importance of dinoflagellates
as oceanic primary producers and micrograzers, it should be determined if
rhodopsin-based phototrophy plays an important role in sustaining dinoflagellate
growth, enabling dinoflagellates to outcompete other groups of phytoplankton in
nutrient-limited environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will address two central questions: 1) Does the
gene discovered in dinoflagellates indeed code for a rhodopsin that absorbs
light and leads to the production of ATP? and 2) How common is this gene in
dinoflagellate communities? These questions need to be addressed before moving
on to the question of how much dinoflagellate rhodopsin contributes to overall
energy acquisition in the marine ecosystem. The current study will: (1)
transform the dinoflagellate rhodopsin gene into E. coli cells to test for
light-induced ATP-generation under controlled laboratory conditions; (2) analyze
representative dinoflagellates (cultured and wild) from Long Island Sound for
presence of the gene; and (3) examine the diversity of dinoflagellate rhodopsin
sequences under contrasting temperature (seasons) and nutrient (spatial)
conditions in Long Island Sound. Due to the risk (of no proton pumping function)
and limited background work, this proposal would not likely succeed if submitted
as a full-fledged project. The EAGER program provides a mechanism for exploring
these risky but potentially important questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study will provide essential information
for understanding how much eukaryotic rhodopsin may contribute to marine
phototrophy. The results will provide a basis on which to determine whether
major research efforts should be invested in the future to systematically
investigate the ecological significance of this gene in marine ecosystems. This
project will also contribute to education and training. First, a graduate class
(Molecular Approaches to Biological Oceanography) will be involved in part of
the project as a required research component of the course. Second, the project
will provide training opportunities to one or two undergraduate students in
marine science research in general and molecular ecology of plankton in
particular.