* 1212527
* Highly Convergent and Stereoselective Synthesis of Heterodimeric Polycyclic Alkaloids
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Mohammad Movassaghi, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2016
* USD 375,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division is
funding Professor Mohammad Movassaghi of the Department of Chemistry at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology to explore and develop new general
methodology for the formation of challenging C-C bonds by directed radical
combination reactions. This project focuses on the development of mild
conditions for synthesis of diazenes as intermediates in guided advanced
fragment assembly. An integral part of the study will focus on evaluating and
broadening the chemistry of these intermediates in chemical synthesis. The
proposed study includes a thorough development of our preliminary results
supported by additional mechanistic probes and studies that will provide
important insight into the stereochemical course of these diazene-based
assemblies for preparation of complex heterodimeric polycyclic alkaloids.

Such chemistry will provide precedence of a general strategy in controlled
complex chemical synthesis that will have broad impact in pharmaceutical,
agricultural, and fine-chemical industries where designed complex molecules are
used in biological and chemical research endeavors. The broader impacts involve
training graduate students and postdoctoral researchers, broadening
participation through the inclusion of undergraduate and visiting student
researchers on the project, and continued contribution by the research group to
MIT's Chemistry Outreach Program at local high schools.