* 1213410
* Controlling reactions, alignment, and deposition of cold molecules by external electric fields with the use of superfluid helium nanodroplets
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Vitaly Kresin, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2017
* USD 431,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Prof. Vitaly Kresin's group from the
University of Southern California will introduce an approach for manipulating
the orientation, reactions, self-assembly, and surface deposition of very cold
polar molecules by the application of an external field. This will be achieved
by embedding the molecules into superfluid helium nanodroplets in a beam. The
droplets cool the molecules to sub-Kelvin temperatures without impeding their
ability to migrate and rotate freely. An externally imposed electric field will
produce nearly complete molecular alignment. This novel route to explore and
control quantum phenomena will be applied to the following areas: (i) Steering
the outcome of molecular reactions and assembly via imposing a mutual
orientation on the reactants; (ii) Nanodroplet size selection via electrostatic
deflection of droplets doped with polar molecules. (iii) Soft-landing of aligned
polar molecules via application of a directed electric field near a substrate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, quantum-level control of cold
and ultracold polar molecule assembly, interactions and reactions has attracted
significant interdisciplinary interest in view of their potential value for
quantum computing, novel condensate phases, molecular interferometry, and
investigations of fundamental symmetries. Potential applications of the
deposition technique include production of oriented films and arrays, enhanced
optical sensing, etc. On the human resources side, the project will offer
graduate students excellent training in a wide range of experimental and
theoretical aspects of an inherently interdisciplinary field. Postdoctoral
researchers will receive professional mentoring. Commitment to teaching and
outreach includes ongoing active undergraduate student involvement in research,
as well as contributions to programs and workshops for undergraduate,
elementary-school, and high-school students.