* 1213575
* Negotiations and Impacts: Great Western Development, Rural Peasants, and Water Policy across China?s Loess Plateau
* SBE,SMA
* 11/01/2011,03/31/2013
* James Cook, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 03/31/2013
* USD 155,868.00

In this project, the PI-team proposes to increase recruitment and retention of
talented undergraduates in social science research by (1) establishing a
multidisciplinary, collaborative research program on the impacts of
national&lt;br/&gt;and provincial policies regarding economic growth and
environmental resource management in one of China's most fragile ecosystems --
the Yellow River Loess Plateau and (2) focusing specifically on water resource
management among local users (rural peasants). This work will be accomplished
through the establishment of four international, multidisciplinary and faculty-
mentored Study Teams. Each Team will select a research question in economics,
biology, or sociology, design a research agenda and perform primary research in
social sciences at rural villages. Through village-level surveys, interviews,
research&lt;br/&gt;observations, and archival research, faculty mentors will
lead students on a journey of discovery that will ascertain how water resource
policies have affected the rate of erosion of the Loess Plateau and what can be
done to fashion effective solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is based
in part on the most successful elements of the PIs' previous work combined with
their current intent to build the conservation and land use database, focus
attention on priority areas, expand and deepen international collaboration and
continue to engage students in international research with scientific, national
and global relevance. Whereas their previous work concentrated primarily on
urban themes, this proposal tracks increasing academic and applied interest in
rural issues. This is a topic&lt;br/&gt;of current interest because although 80%
of the water consumed in Northwest China is used in agriculture which is
accomplished by individual families in isolated villages, whether/how
conservation measures are implemented in the field is not well-
documented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This proposal is unique
among water resource management studies because it will address rural rather
than urban issues -- a notable distinction in that most of the water in
Northwest China is used for agriculture rather than municipal or industrial
purposes. It is believed that one of the most significant contributions of this
work is that it will provide a database for critical water research and planning
in one of the world?s most vulnerable ecosystems. The Study Team features a
unique combination of multi-disciplinary, international mentors who leverage
international, academic and&lt;br/&gt;applied backgrounds to accomplish work
that more traditional groups cannot do. The PIs have over 10 years of research
experience in Northwest China, including the design and management of two
previous programs that provided the experiential background for this proposal
and led to numerous scientific and social contributions of more than 50 students
since 2001. Further, it reinforces both academic and national demand for civic
engagement as it places science in the center rather than the periphery of the
planning arena. It will support four mentors, two graduate assistants, and 12
undergraduates per year from the United States. An equal number of Chinese
faculty and students will&lt;br/&gt;participate and be supported by their home
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This work will play a key
role in discovering current conservation practices and the parameters that
influence them. A practicable framework for conservation in light of both
national and international demand to improve the availability and quality of
water to people in a sustainable manner will be provided. Recruitment will be
specifically directed to undergraduate institutions that serve underrepresented
groups. This work will provide access to current research methodologies in both
the social sciences and land/resource management for our Chinese partners while
preparing participants for the multi-disciplinary and international-based
challenges of social science research in the 21st century by infusing teaching,
training and new methods of learning in every aspect of the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Office of
international Science and Engineering (OISE), from its East Asia and Pacific
(EAP) program.&lt;br/&gt;