* 1213401
* Statistical Mechanics of the Dynamics in Quiescent and Driven Glassy Fluids
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Grzegorz Szamel, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2017
* USD 463,881.00

Grzegorz Szamel of Colorado State University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
division to investigate the dynamics of molecules in quiescent and driven glassy
fluids. Earlier studies showed that, upon approaching the glass transition, the
dynamics become not only slower but also increasingly heterogeneous. Recent
experiments suggested that the dynamic heterogeneity depends on the character of
intermolecular interactions. The current work employs both computational and
theoretical methods to analyze the dynamic heterogeneity in fluids with
repulsive and attractive interactions. In addition, Szamel and his coworkers
work to elucidate the connection between dynamic heterogeneity and slow
dynamics. In the area of driven glassy fluids, the initial goal is to
investigate long range correlations induced by the flow. The long term goal is
to develop a theory for the dynamics in driven colloidal glassy fluids
applicable to both thermal and athermal systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Upon
sufficiently fast supercooling or densification, a great variety of fluids
undergo a transformation to an amorphous solid state. This transformation is
commonly referred to as the glass transition. Materials obtained in this
process, especially polymeric and metallic glasses, have many practical
applications. However, the very nature of the glass transition is still hotly
debated. It is known that upon approaching the glass transition, the dynamics of
the fluid slows down in a surprisingly non-uniform way. The role of this so-
called dynamic heterogeneity, however, is not understood. Professor Szamel and
his group characterize the non-uniform dynamics of glassy fluids and investigate
its relation to the glass transition. Complex materials are often probed or
ordered by imposing non-uniform flow. In particular, shear flow is known to melt
glasses made of colloidal particles. Professor Szamel's research will
characterize this process and relate the behavior of quiescent and flowing
glassy colloidal suspensions.