* 1213333
* Effect of Physicochemical Properties on Nanoparticle Fate and Transport in Unsaturated Porous Media
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Y. Charles Cao, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2016
* USD 330,000.00

The overarching objective of this proposal is to elucidate the key factors
governing the fate and transport of nanoparticles (NPs) in unsaturated porous
media. Model NPs with a range of physicochemical properties (e.g., surface
charge, size, shape, density, etc.) will be synthesized and be used in the
proposed project. It is hypothesized that the NP properties as well as the
surrounding environmental conditions are the dominant factors that govern their
mobility in unsaturated porous media. To test the hypothesis and accomplish the
overarching objective, the following specific aims will be pursued: 1)
synthesizing and characterizing stable dispersions of model nanoparticles with
different size, shape and surface functionalization; 2) relating physicochemical
characteristics of the model NPs to their adsorption in unsaturated porous
media; and 3) relating physicochemical characteristics of the model
nanoparticles to their transport in unsaturated porous media. Laboratory
experiments and modeling tools will be used to elucidate the governing
mechanisms. Because NPs are forecasted to enter different environmental
compartments, especially in soil and groundwater systems, the successful
completion of this project will help improve current theories and models of
their fate and transport, resulting in more accurate predictions of conditions
under which soil and groundwater contamination may take place. Consequently,
this will contribute greatly to the fundamental knowledge needed to prevent soil
and groundwater pollution and protect environmental health in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will be integrated with
education by training graduate, undergraduate, and pre-college students with a
diverse array of backgrounds. Students who are members of underrepresented
groups will be included as major participants in the proposed research
activities. In addition, this proposed research will be coupled with the
existing NSF-REU (Research Experience for Undergraduates) programs at the
university. This research will bring highly skilled, nationally competitive
students to the university and the students and faculty will have an opportunity
to be exposed to the state-of-the-art technology adopted in this research.
Results of the proposed research will be disseminated widely. Beyond
publications and conference presentations, the investigators will work closely
to enhance public awareness of the importance of this research. Findings from
this project will be disseminated widely to regulators, industries, and other
practitioners through workshops, monthly newsletters, flyers, and public domain
websites. It will help improve models to make possible more accurate predictions
of the conditions for soil and groundwater contamination by NPs.