* 1213070
* EAGER: Developing Multi-Hop Sensorbots for Underwater Wireless Sensor Networks
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Deirdre Meldrum, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 06/30/2014
* USD 360,000.00

This EAGER proposal seeks funding to extend the Sensorbot network design, range
and coverage by incorporating multi-hop functionality. Sensorbot developed by
the PIs with internal ASU funding is a miniaturized, low-cost, underwater,
autonomous sensor platform. A single Sensorbot constitutes a network node,
capable of measuring and reporting the properties of the fluid in which it is
located. With EAGER funding, short-range communicating Sensorbots will be
intelligently link together to extend their coverage over long distances in a
multi-hop networking approach, thus overcoming the range limitation of standard
underwater optical communication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, once
deployed, the network of Sensorbots is expected to not only achieve continuous,
autonomous, long term monitoring campaigns but to sustain two-way communication
within the network. The goal of this project is to significantly extend the
spatial range and coverage of a network of optically-communicating, deep ocean
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Sensorbots were created to measure a wide range of low-temperature hydrothermal
fluid properties. Sensors for pH, dissolved oxygen, trace metals, and
temperature are now in operation, and several others are in the early stages of
development. Currently under development are fluorescent polymers that respond
to methane, sulfate, CO2, and other critical analytes in areas of diffuse flow
in hydrothermal regions of the deep ocean. With improved communications, optical
multi-hop networked Sensorbots will have broad and immediate application to a
diverse array of ocean sensing fields. This potentially transformative proposal
is expected to yield solutions to previously intractable questions about the
extent of biogeochemical flux on the ocean floor. This project will include one
post doc and two undergraduate students.