* 1213425
* RUI: Rearrangements in Dehydroannulenes and Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,04/30/2016
* Claire Castro, University of San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 04/30/2016
* USD 204,548.00

With the support of a RUI award from the National Science Foundation's program
in Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms, Professors William Karney and
Claire Castro at the University of San Francisco will work with undergraduate
students to study mechanisms of hydrocarbon rearrangements using quantum
chemical methods. The hydrocarbons that will be studied, dehydroannulenes and
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), have high carbon-to-hydrogen ratios,
making them useful for understanding properties of carbon-rich molecules. Such
molecules are appealing because of their potential as precursors to the
synthesis of carbon nanotubes. This research unites fundamental organic
chemistry concepts with modern computational methods to elucidate processes from
the rearrangements in dehydroannulenes at ambient and sub-ambient temperature to
the very high temperature (&gt; 800°C) rearrangements of phenylenes and related
systems. Previous work by the PIs invoked novel topologies (Möbius, two-twist
Hückel), coupled with pi-bond shifting, to solve longstanding mechanistic
problems in annulene dynamic processes. The PIs and their students will now
focus on the application of this mechanism to cis-trans isomerization in
dehydroannulenes to determine: (1) the nature and topology of the bond-shifting
steps required, and (2) whether cumulenes act as intermediates or transition
states in such reactions. These studies will clarify the scope of bond shifting
as a route for configuration change, as well as shed light on intramolecular
dehydro Diels-Alder reactions. The mechanistic insights generated will be
helpful to experimentalists using such reactions in their syntheses. Further,
mechanisms for benzene ring contractions in phenylenes and other systems will be
probed to identify the most important factors influencing reactivity. This work
will determine whether the lowest energetic pathways involve carbenes or
diradicals and will clarify whether or not key steps are concerted or stepwise.
Potential energy surface mapping for these reactions will provide useful
information to researchers engaged in the synthesis of bowl-shaped PAHs,
fullerenes, and carbon nanotubes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the
scientific findings, this project will provide research opportunities and
training for undergraduates, expose them to current topics in organic chemistry,
and give them practical experience in modern computational methods as well as
help them develop the ability to frame research questions. Students will present
their results at regional and national chemistry research conferences. Active
participation in this research program will prepare USF students for graduate
study in chemistry or for employment in the chemical industry. The PIs' research
team consistently reflects the diversity of The University of San Francisco as
well as that of the Bay Area, and half of their research students have been
women. Many former group members have gone into the chemistry workforce or have
matriculated into graduate programs in chemistry. The PIs will continue to train
students from underrepresented groups in Chemistry. Finally, the improved
computational resources enabled by this award enhance the university's
cyberinfrastructure and will be available to other research groups in the
department.