* 1213546
* Making Metallic Contacts to Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Amy Walker, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2016
* USD 390,000.00

In this work, funded by the Macromolecular, Supermolecular and Nanochemistry
Program, Prof. Amy Walker of the University of Texas at Dallas and her students
will extend and apply a new technique for growing nanowires at precise
locations. Electroless Nanowire Deposition On Micropatterned substrates (ENDOM)
can create nanowires that are centimeters in length and follow complex paths. In
ENDOM, a multifunctional micropatterned surface is used to direct the growth of
nanowires by electroless deposition (ELD). ENDOM is an in situ method and does
not require complex lithography, both significant advantages over other methods
for nanowire synthesis and placement. ENDOM protocols will be developed for
making copper, silver, nickel, palladium and gold nanowires. The mechanisms
underlying ENDOM, in particular the interaction of ELD reactants with the
terminal functional groups in organic thin films, will be studied in detail, so
that the method can be further extended to nanowires of other compositions and
to different substrates. Practical applications of ENDOM will include the
fabrication of nanowire sensors for the detection of hydrogen and ammonia, and
the construction of crossbar circuits for nanoelectronics.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research program will substantially advance the state-of-the-art
in nanotechnology by enabling the integration of nanowires in practical devices.
The program advances the education and training of graduate and undergraduate
students by providing experience in electrochemistry, device design,
nanoscience, materials characterization, spectroscopy and mass spectrometry.
Students involved will gain skills valuable in many industries, allowing them to
choose from a variety of careers. Progress will be disseminated through
presentations at international and national conferences, publication in high-
impact factor journals, and to the general public via participation in programs
run by the UT Dallas Office of Diversity and Community Engagement. Undergraduate
students will participate in the research activities through a summer REU
program run by UT Dallas.