* 1213732
* Exploring the Physical Chemistry of the Catalysis-Based All-Vapor Instant Formation of Gas Hydrates at Moderate P and T (180-220 K)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* J. Paul Devlin, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2016
* USD 260,500.00

Prof. Paul Devlin of Oklahoma State University is supported by the Chemical
Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program of the Chemistry Division to study
the basic physical and chemical properties of clathrate hydrates. Clathrate
hydrate formation, typically from liquid water or ice, is so slow as to often
discourage studies of the rates and mechanisms of the process. The most exciting
and promising discovery from research supported under prior awards is a
completely new method of hydrate formation that reduces the reaction time to the
subsecond scale. A generally slow mixing process has been shunted by using an
all-vapor methodology with component guest molecules fully mixed with water
vapor. Pulsed into a cold chamber the vapor quickly condenses to aqueous
solution droplets that instantly crystallize as 100% gas-hydrate particles of an
aerosol. A catalyst is still required at the current stage of knowledge, but
advances in the all-vapor method sought in this phase of the project may aid
technological developments in a) the production of methane from abundant ocean-
sediment deposits of methane hydrate, and b) the concentration/storage of gases
such as methane and CO2 as hydrate guests at greatly reduced pressures. It has
been shown, for example, that humid air including CO2 is a vapor mixture suited
to the all-vapor formation of a gas hydrate provided a catalyst is
included&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A clathrate/gas hydrate is most simply described
as a host ice-like lattice of water molecules with incorporated small cages that
serve as molecule-sized traps holding small organic or inorganic guest
molecules. Because of an exceptional abundance in nature and their significant
environmental and technological implications, they have been an object of many
investigations over the past century. Much is known about their occurrence and
physical properties; less about their participation in H-bond chemistry and the
mechanisms of their formation. In this project, Prof. Devlin and his
undergraduate research assistants will pursue the development of methods of gas-
hydrate formation and control that will facilitate gas -hydrate science
applications for controlling gases such as carbon dioxide and methane in the
energy industry and the environment.