* 1213622
* Near Infrared Fluorescent Single Walled Carbon Nanotubes as Novel Solution Phase Optical Sensing Materials Proposal Renewal
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Michael Strano, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) and Macromolecular,
Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Programs in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Michael Strano at Massachusetts Institute of Technology and his group
will develop new chemical tools to recognize and communicate the binding of
molecules to the nanotube interface using non-covalent approaches. Specifically,
the investigator plans to 1) study several molecular recognition interactions
through structure/property relationships of absorbed amphiphilic polymer; 2)
construct a visible/near infrared dual channel single molecule imaging
microscope to study molecular recognition at the nanotube surface; 3) synthesize
new polymeric recognition sites based on an amphiphilic loop structure as a
means of molecular recognition, such as boronic acid-poly ethylene glycol
polymer brushes and a looped PEG motif; and 4) explore variants of a Ni2+
chelator-based protein recognition approach to extend to glycoprotein detection
and profiling. The proposed research, if successful, will advance understanding
about how chemical interfaces at the carbon nanotube surface influence exciton
radiative recombination, and the learned knowledge will impact biosensing,
bioimaging, as well fields beyond life science research. In addition to engaging
undergraduate students in research and education, Professor Strano also proposes
to disseminate research results through public media and continuously
collaborate with a high school teach to broaden impacts at the K-12 level.