* 1213475
* Total Synthesis Toolkit for Constructing Multi-Catalytic Colloidal Hybrid Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Raymond Schaak, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2014
* USD 250,000.00

Professor Raymond Schaak at the Pennsylvania State University is supported by
the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) program in work to
develop a total synthesis framework for the rational construction of complex
colloidal hybrid nanoparticles for use in multi-catalytic reaction processes.
This research builds on recently established nanoparticle analogues of
orthogonal reactivity, site-specific reactivity, chemoselectivity,
regiospecificity, substituent effects, and coupling chemistry. The reaction
toolkit will be expanded to include new classes of nanoparticle transformations,
linear vs. radial growth modes, and protection-deprotection strategies for
overcoming the hybrid nanoparticles? natural tendencies toward nucleation and
reactivity. Ultimately, these synthetic tools and an understanding of how they
occur will expand our knowledge of how to construct exceptionally complex hybrid
nanoparticles and how to place nanoparticles at any desired location on a multi-
domain particle. These complex colloidal hybrid nanoparticles will be explored
for use as multi-catalyst systems that couple several sequential catalytic
transformations in a single-pot reaction.

Chemists approach the synthesis of large molecules by rationally modifying and
linking together smaller molecular building blocks in a stepwise manner. This
process, which contrasts sharply with existing design capabilities for inorganic
nanostructures, is guided by mechanistic considerations and empirical guidelines
and is facilitated by an extensive library of chemical transformations.
Colloidal hybrid nanoparticles, which contain multiple distinct nanoparticle
domains fused together through solid-state interfaces, can be considered as
"artificial molecules." A primary goal of this research is to develop new
synthetic tools, along with mechanistic insights into how they work, that will
help to bridge the gap between the synthetic capabilities that exist for complex
molecules vs. those available for hybrid nanoparticle systems, which are much
less advanced. These colloidal hybrid nanoparticles have the potential to
function as modular systems for efficiently carrying out multiple catalytic
reactions in a single pot. A diverse group of students, including a team of
undergraduate researchers, will be exposed to a unique cross-disciplinary
project and will actively participate in a variety of outreach efforts. A new
inquiry-based undergraduate laboratory module to apply organic synthesis
concepts to hybrid nanoparticle systems will be developed, and assignments
introducing students to scientific ethics and the interface of chemistry and
society will be developed and integrated into freshman chemistry courses.