* 1213614
* Quantum chemical methods for studying photoinitiated processes in biological systems
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Spiridoula Matsika, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2015
* USD 411,003.00

Spiridoula Matsika of Temple University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
division to develop and use theoretical models to understand photo-initiated
phenomena in biological systems. Matsika and her research group develop
efficient quantum chemical methods for excited states and conical intersections,
which are essential in studying photo-initiated processes. The proposed methods
enhance the efficiency of multireference configuration interaction (MRCI) by
using natural orbitals obtained from a high multiplicity state instead of the
traditional multi-configurational orbitals. Initial results show that this
approach reduces the computational cost significantly compared to traditional
MRCI without loss of accuracy. Gradients are also being developed for this
method. The effect of the environment is taken into account by a hybrid quantum
mechanics/ molecular mechanics (QM/MM) method. When developed, the developed
methods will be used to study photophysical and photochemical events in pi-
stacked nucleobases. This work contributes to our understanding of how DNA
interacts with UV radiation.

Photo-initiated processes, a primary focus of this work, play an important role
in photosynthesis, vision, and photochemical damage and repair in DNA. Matsika's
research is very useful in studying photo-initiated processes in biological
systems. The methodology will be implemented in publicly available computational
software. Students from groups that are under-represented in the physical
sciences and undergraduate students are an integral part of the PI's research
team.