* 1213755
* Multiscale investigation of biomolecular force transduction
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,05/31/2017
* Deborah Leckband, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 05/31/2017
* USD 350,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes program is supporting the
research of Professor Deborah Leckband of the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign. Professor Leckband's research addresses the fundamental molecular
mechanisms that enable cells to sense and propagate mechanical information
between cells in tissues. The cells of all multicellular organisms are held
together by molecular "Velcro", and cadherins are the principal protein
components thereof. A protein, alpha-catenin, which is associated with cadherins
is thought to act as a biomolecular force sensor, which activates molecular
signaling processes in proportion to mechanical forces exerted on cadherin bonds
at the cell surface. In this role, alpha-catenin functions as a nanomachine that
converts mechanical force into biochemical signals, in order to regulate cell
functions. Professor Leckband's program will investigate the mechanism by which
alpha-catenin senses mechanical force using techniques including surface plasmon
resonance and single molecule AFM (atomic force
microscopy).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because alpha-catenin is representative of a
broader class of scaffolding proteins that control the mechano-chemical
homeostasis of cells, the broader scientific impact of the work may be quite
far-reaching. As important, this program will engage middle school girls
interested in science and engineering through outreach activities at the
University of Illinois. It will also provide education and multi-disciplinary
training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students. In this way,
Prof. Leckband aspires to spark young scientists' curiosity and deepen their
passion for and commitment to science.