* 1213406
* First-principles studies of time-resolved nonlinear optical spectroscopy signals
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Jeffrey Cina, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 09/30/2016
* USD 419,000.00

Jeffrey A. Cina of the University of Oregon is supported by the Chemical Theory,
Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry Division to develop
and implement theoretical methods enabling the first-principles calculation and
interpretation of two classes of time-resolved spectroscopic signals from
condensed molecular systems. In one area, Cina and his coworkers are endeavoring
to predict the results of ultrafast phase-coherent multidimensional electronic
spectroscopy measurements based on the ab initio determination of resonantly
coupled electronic potential energy surfaces. Progress in this direction relies
on the framing and implementation of a new theory based on systematically
partitioning all intra and intermolecular vibrational degrees of freedom into
those that are strongly coupled to the relevant electronic transitions and those
that are weakly coupled or not coupled. The other area of theoretical study
involves the further development and application of a mixed
quantum/semiclassical method for the simulation and interpretation of time-
resolved spectroscopic signals from small molecules embedded in low-temperature
crystals. An essential feature of these systems, which are under experimental
study by V. Ara Apkarian and co-workers at UC-Irvine, is the existence of a
small number of relatively high-frequency vibrational degrees of freedom, whose
dynamics our theory treats numerically rigorously, coupled to a large number of
lower-frequency vibrations amenable to semiclassical approximation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work has a broader impact through the education and
training of graduate and undergraduate students to frame and solve complex
&lt;br/&gt;theoretical and computational problems in collaboration with
experimental investigators. Scientific impacts include the development of
computational tools applicable to significant problems of widespread interest in
molecular science. Both aspects of our theoretical research have the potential
to contribute to progress in the areas of natural and artificial photo-synthetic
energy harvesting, and molecule-based quantum information processing.