* 1213708
* RUI: Host/Guest Interactions of Thermochromic and Photochromic Molecules in Binary Aqueous Media
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Maria Buthelezi, Wheaton College
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2016
* USD 141,171.00

In this project, Prof. Maria T. Buthelezi and her students at Wheaton College
receive support under the auspices of the Research in Undergraduate Institutions
(RUI) activity from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM)
program of the Division of Chemistry to investigate the thermosolvatochromism
and photochromism of spiropyran inclusion complexes with cyclodextrins and
cyclophanes. In addition to the fundamental scientific appeal of studying this
process, photochromic conversion of spiropyran (SP, closed ring form) to
merocyanine (MC, open ring form) may be used in the development of on-and-off
optical switching applications and materials for photochromic switches,
photochromic lenses (optometry), fluorescent biomarkers, nanothermometers, and
drug delivery devices. However, these photo- and thermal-interconversion
processes are solvent dependent and thermally unstable, which have slowed the
pace of application development using this system. In this project, systematic
investigation of the impact of host compound structure and solvent composition
on spiropyran/merocyanine interconversion will be investigated using steady-
state optical spectroscopy, nanosecond time-resolved optical spectroscopy,
calorimetry and computational methods. These studies are expected to identify
combinations of host compound and solvent that stabilize the
spiropyran/merocyanine system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spiropyran is a
photochromic and thermochromic molecule. Under visible light, spiropyran (SP)
solutions are colorless, but when subjected to ultraviolet light, the solutions
become colored as merocyanine (MC) is formed. When MC solutions absorb visible
light, MC is converted back to SP molecule and the solution color disappears.
This interconversion can be initiated with heat in some solvent mixtures.
Conversions like this can be used in many important applications such as
eyeglasses that adapt to varying light levels and optical digital storage
devices. Utilizing this specific conversion in these kinds of applications
requires a thorough understanding of how the solution components affect the
conversion process. Prof. Buthelezi and her students will investigate this
process under many conditions and using many methods in an effort to develop
that understanding. The undergraduate students at Wheaton College will be
involved in all aspects of this project and the hands-on experience gained from
the proposed project will impact significantly their professional outlook and
prepare them to pursue graduate or health professional studies and for eventual
employment in academia, government laboratories, and industry.