* 1213529
* New Earth-Abundant Metal Complexes for CO2 Conversion and Reduction
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Richard Kemp, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2016
* USD 390,000.00

While many view carbon dioxide (CO2) as a waste gas, there exist efforts in many
laboratories to use CO2 as a building block and C1 synthon to produce more
complex organic molecules. Most of these ongoing studies utilize rare and
expensive late-transition metal complexes as catalysts. In this project funded
by the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) section of NSF's Division of Chemistry,
Professor Richard Kemp of the University of New Mexico and his students are
examining the fundamental reactions of earth-abundant main group and transition
metals to reduce CO2 to more valuable, small organic molecules via
electrocatalysis. The long-term goal is to eventually use a renewable source of
electrons (such as wind or solar derived) to re-energize CO2 back into
transportation fuel precursors. If successful, the funded efforts will help lead
to a closed carbon loop that allows recycle of CO2 back into transportation
fuels for re-use.

While the primary work outputs of this grant will be the trained students and
postdoctoral fellows and the published scientific results they generate, the
broader impacts of this project extend into environmental chemistry, public
policy debate, and the greenhouse gas reduction issue, with long-term
implications in the transportation sector as fossil fuels continue to be
depleted. UNM is a minority/Hispanic-serving university, and the PI's group has
a long-standing history of educating students from under-represented groups, and
aiding their entry into STEM careers. This tradition is expected to continue
during this current funding period, and the interactions between UNM and
overseas partners in third world countries will be further expanded.