* 1213030
* Transition Metal Clusters as Single-Molecule Magnets
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* George Christou, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 08/31/2015
* USD 475,001.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research, supported by the
DMR Solid State and Materials Chemistry program, is in the field of single-
molecule magnets (SMMs). SMMs are molecules that can function as nanoscale
magnets, and they bring all the advantages of molecular chemistry to the field
of nanomagnetism, including solubility, crystallinity, monodispersity, and a
shell of organic ligands whose modification can fine-tune many of these
properties and others such as redox potentials. The proposed work will push the
area forward along multiple fronts in mainly new directions, including: (i) the
covalent linkage of multiple SMMs by suitably designed bridging ligands into
supramolecular aggregates that are still molecular and exhibit weak inter-SMM
exchange interactions that introduce quantum effects such as superposition
states and entanglement of the constituent SMM units; (ii) the use of
photochromic organic-bridging ligands to allow development of methods for
controlled photo-switching ON and OFF of the interactions between separate SMMs
in supramolecular aggregates, thus switching ON and OFF the quantum mechanical
coupling that results in their quantum entanglement and superposition states;
this is an ability that is a pre-requisite for the use of SMMs as qubits
(quantum bits) in quantum computing and related specialized applications; (iii)
the synthesis of new mixed-metal 3d-4f SMMs with higher operating temperatures
than are currently available, taking advantage of the high magnetoanisotropy of
the later lanthanide ions; and (iv) the initiation of a novel direction
involving the synthesis of 'molecular multiferroics' that are structurally
analogous to mixed-metal manganite and ferrite multiferroic oxides of formula
MMnO3 and MFeO3 (M = a lanthanide or main-group metal); these ternary oxides
possess both magnetic and ferroelectric order, and the objective is to develop
methods to access molecules that also exhibit both of these types of properties.
A number of new synthetic methodologies, some involving higher-energy conditions
using microwave reactors, will be developed to accomplish these
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic materials are a multi-billion dollar
annual industry in the USA. Current trends in miniaturization of devices
containing magnets have made the development of smaller and smaller magnets
essential. The proposed research is in the area of single-molecule magnets
(SMMs); these are individual molecules that function as nanoscale magnets that
are much smaller than those of traditional magnetic materials. The proposed
research has multiple objectives, including improving the properties of known
SMMs, developing methods to link two or more of them together to introduce
certain effects crucial to the potential use of SMMs in new technologies such as
quantum computing, and making SMMs that also possess a second important property
that will allow them to be employed in other areas of materials science. The
P.I. and his group will also be active in many outreach, education and
international activities designed to maximize the broader impacts of his
research program. He will support the planning and execution of the annual
Chemistry Day at the Mall in Gainesville, FL, targeted at K-12 students, their
teachers and parents, and the local community and media; he will host each year
a Florida high-school student for summer research under the University of
Florida?s Student Science Training Program; he will continue to organize the
annual Florida Inorganic and Materials Symposium student meetings of 13 Florida
higher education institutions spanning PhD granting universities, undergraduate
colleges, and community colleges; and he will co-organize two biennial
international workshops, the Current Trends in Molecular and Nanoscale Magnetism
workshop (2014), and the North America-Greece-Cyprus Workshop on Paramagnetic
Materials (2013, 2015), both of which emphasize oral presentations from students
and postdoctorals. The P.I. will also continue collaborating with several
national and international groups, providing research samples to physicists for
study of quantum and other properties, and studying compounds sent by synthetic
chemists using techniques not available to them.