* 1213789
* Light-directed derivatization, caging, and releasing methodologies based on o-quinone methide chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Vladimir Popik, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 426,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division is
funding Professor Vladimir Popik of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Georgia to design and synthesize novel UV and NIR-sensitive
photolabile protecting groups and photocleavable linkers, as well as develop
methods for the selective photo-derivatization and release of thiol moieties in
various substrates. Photolabile protecting groups allow for the spatiotemporal
control of substrate activation, as well as for 'reagentless' deprotection.
Release of active compounds using light at the red edge of the visible spectrum
extends the utility of the 'caging' technique in biology as it minimizes photo-
damage to cells and might be useful for experiments in mammalian tissues..

This project aims to provide organic, biological, and medicinal chemists with
new tools to control activity of caged compounds in time and in space, with
potentially broad application. For example, the selective and reversible
derivatization of native or genetically engineered cysteine residues in proteins
may allow for the remote control of their activity. Reversible immobilization
can be useful for modification or repair of sensor arrays. This project will
provide undergraduate and graduate students, including those from groups
historically underrepresented in the sciences, with interdisciplinary training
at the interface of synthetic and physical organic chemistry, with elements of
photochemistry, biochemistry, and material science.