* 1213578
* Precisely shaped and functionalized graphene nanoribbons from cascade alkyne cyclizations
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Igor Alabugin, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2015
* USD 200,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Igor Alabugin of the Florida State University
will develop a new approach to synthesizing graphene-like polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons via a cascade alkyne cyclization approach. The approach is to apply
current radical cascade, alkyne cyclizations to the preparation of wider and
longer polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, to modify the initiation and
termination steps in the radical cascade to affect the formation of pentagonal
subunits, and to introduce functional groups around the periphery of the product
molecule, which will permit polarization of the carbon ribbons. The broader
impacts involve training graduate and undergraduate students in an
interdisciplinary research environment, broad dissemination of research results
and concepts via publications, presentations and outreach activities, the
potential societal impacts of new compounds for optical and electronic materials
applications, and broadening participation of underrepresented groups in
chemical sciences via collaboration with a research group at Bethune-Cookman
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing electronic devices using graphene
nanoribbons, ultrasmall strips of matter comprised of a single layer of carbon
atoms, has the potential to generate efficient, miniature devices; however, many
significant technical hurdles must be overcome to realize the benefits. The
project addresses an important, longstanding problem in synthesizing graphene
nanoribbons for use in electronics and will further our understanding of this
technologically important material. Such work could impact industries that use
microprocessors in their products, including computer, consumer electronics,
automotive, etc.