* 1213444
* Conductivity in Ionic Liquids: Decoupling of ions diffusion from structural relaxation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Alexei Sokolov, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2015
* USD 364,815.00

Ionic liquids present a relatively new class of materials important for great
variety of applications, from batteries and fuel cells, to "green" solvents and
bio-technologies. Unique properties of these liquids (e.g. ionic conduction,
extremely low vapor pressure) give them significant potential for use in future
sustainable energy applications and environmentally friendly chemistry. Due to
large variety of possible constituent ions, this class of materials potentially
represents millions of chemically different liquids. This diversity opens
tremendous opportunity for fine tuning of the ionic liquids properties for any
desired applications. However, rational design of these materials requires
fundamental understanding of the relationship between their chemical structure
and macroscopic properties. In particular, understanding parameters that control
molecular motions, ionic conductivity and viscosity is crucial for many
applications of ionic liquids. This award supports Prof. Alexei Sokolov of the
University of Tennessee, Knoxville and his research group to study the
microscopic mechanisms controlling ionic conductivity and dynamics in ionic
liquids. The research plan utilizes a combination of dielectric spectroscopy,
light and neutron scattering studies and viscosity measurements. Using their
expertise in dynamics of glass forming liquids and polymers, Prof. Sokolov and
his research group expect to develop a comprehensive description of the
mechanism of ionic conductivity in ionic liquids, its dependence on chemical
structure, size of the ions and cation-anion interactions. They also expect the
results of their work to deepen understanding of the dynamics of ionic liquids
and to reveal the role of Coulombic interactions in structural relaxation of
this new class of materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Room temperature ionic liquids
present new class of materials with significant potential for use in current and
future sustainable energy and green chemistry applications. Understanding ionic
motions and structural relaxation in these materials is crucial for rational
design and synthesis of new materials with properties desired for particular
applications. This project focuses on fundamental understanding of the molecular
level mechanisms controlling the macroscopic properties of ionic liquids. The
results may lead to developments of more efficient electrolytes for batteries,
supercapacitors and other electrical energy storage applications. Education of
specialists for future technologies is a significant part of the proposed
program. Graduate and undergraduate students are actively involved in this
research. Outreach activities to recruit future scientists from underrepresented
groups and K-12 students are also planned. This project also promotes active
collaboration with national multi-user facilities at the Oak Ridge National
Laboratory.