* 1213310
* Collaborative Research:   Understanding Observations of High Ice Water Contents in Convective Cloud Systems over Tropical Oceans
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2012,10/31/2019
* Edward Zipser, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 10/31/2019
* USD 431,326.00

In recent years commercial aircraft have on multiple occasions experienced
surprising (and in at least one case, catastrophic) engine failures and/or ice
accumulations impacting key slipstream probes (e.g., pitot tubes used for
airspeed indication) while penetrating otherwise unremarkable clouds accompanied
by only weak (&lt;20 dBZ) radar reflectivity values over the tropical oceans.
The absence of large, highly-reflective ice particles or supercooled liquid
characteristic of mixed-phase conditions, whose role in aircraft icing is fairly
well understood, suggests these regions have high ice water contents (IWCs)
dominated by small ice crystals. Safety hazards inherent in such encounters have
motivated a concerted multi-agency, multi-national research effort, the High Ice
Water Content Study (HIWC), aimed at characterizing and understanding such
conditions. The primary HIWC field phase will be based out of Darwin, Australia
during austral summer monsoon, and will involve penetrations of strong
convective oceanic clouds between 0 and -50 degC by a well-instrumented
Gulfstream-II aircraft supplied by original HIWC organizers. The effort
described here will allow these additional U.S.-based investigators to access
and analyze the unique HIWC dataset in ways complementary those planned by the
original organizers of HIWC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These NSF-supported
investigators will focus on the conduct and analysis of model simulations, and
on the development of parameterizations suitable for use by such models in
oceanic convective clouds to examine the validity of specific hypotheses re:
causes of high IWCs in the presence of only small crystals. These mechanisms to
be evaluated include the possibility that: (1) The presence of near-undilute and
very strong updrafts with minimal entrainment, in which homogeneous freezing
takes place when supercooled droplets are quickly lofted to high levels (viz.
temperatures ranging from-35 to -40 degC), thus resulting large concentrations
of small ice crystals in zones where adiabatic water contents exceed 7 grams per
cubic meter; (2) A considerable fraction of cloud water in weak (0-10 m/s)
updrafts between -10 and 10 degC forms precipitation-sized particles via a "warm
rain" process, but then freezes and supports ice-multiplication via the Hallett-
Mossop process leading to large numbers of small ice crystals that are
subsequently lofted to high levels where commercial aircraft operate; (3)
Updrafts strong enough to loft raindrops to levels too cold for the Hallett-
Mossop process to operate provide condensate loading that slows updrafts so that
rain freezes, releasing latent heat that subsequently invigorates deep upper-
level convection favoring graupel/ice generating high concentrations of small
particles; (4) Narrow, unsteady "multi-turreted" updrafts exhibiting a high
degree of small-scale variability exist such that any/all of the above
mechanisms might operate at specific times and/or locations; and (5) Aircraft
malfunctions occurring in exposures thought to be associated with high IWC
values are actually the result of extended flight through anvils possessing IWCs
only in the more moderate range of 1-2 grams per cubic meter. These
investigators will focus on analysis of in-situ observations from cloud
microphysics probes to quantify how the slope, shape and y-intercept of assumed
gamma-type cloud and precipitation particle size distributions (as commonly
employed in mesoscale models) vary with key prognostic variables such as IWC,
temperature, and vertical air velocity with attention to differing conditions
encountered in convective cores, nearby cloud anvils, or other more distant
regions. They will also conduct model simulations, to be evaluated against HIWC
in-situ and remote sensing data, to explore the validity of the above hypotheses
for explaining the existence of high IWC regions consisting of large number of
small particles and to further develop and evaluate parameterizations used in
such models. NSF support will also allow this team to directly participate in
G-II test flights (planned for Florida during late-summer of 2013) and follow-on
preliminary analyses to be conducted in advance of the primary field activities
to be based out of Darwin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
effort rests upon early access to a unique dataset (collected at no direct cost
to NSF) and combined observational and model-based analysis of microphysical
conditions thought to uniquely occur in and around the cores of some tropical-
oceanic thunderstorms in order to better characterize mechanisms involved in
generation of high ice water content conditions thought to impact commercial
aircraft. Broader Impacts will derive from improved understanding of processes
and conditions contributing to aviation hazards for high flying commercial
airliners and including those that may be experienced by NSF's Gulfstream-class
research aircraft, and through development of improved parameterizations for
tropical clouds as applicable to both numerical models and remote sensing
retrieval schemes relevant to evaluation of global climate models. Further
impacts will come through hands-on involvement in field data collection and
associated training of graduate students and mentoring of postdoctoral fellows
involved in this research.