* 1213295
* Finite-time Containment Control for Lagrangian Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/04/2011,06/30/2015
* Wei Ren, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 06/30/2015
* USD 287,270.00

Objective:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to address the
problem of distributed finite-time containment control for Lagrangian networks.
Despite the fact that each topic of containment control, finite-time control of
networked systems, and control of Lagrangian networks is crucial for networked
multi-agent systems, there are few existing results on each topic not to mention
a combination of the three due to numerous inherent challenges. This research
addresses a combination of the three topics in a unified
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Distributed algorithms will be designed to guarantee
finite-time containment control for Lagrangian networks with stationary leaders,
dynamic leaders, and swarming behavior and will be experimentally validated on
heterogeneous robotic networks. The novelty of the research lies in the paradigm
changes i) from leaderless or single leader behaviors dominantly studied in
multi-agent systems to more realistic but complicated multi-leader multi-
follower behaviors involving multi-layer collaboration between multiple
heterogeneous teams of agents, ii) from distributed algorithms that can only
guarantee asymptotic or at most exponential convergence in infinite time
dominantly explored in multi-agent systems to distributed algorithms that are
guaranteed to converge in finite time to meet the needs of many time-critical
missions, and iii) from simplified/idealized linear point models dominantly
adopted in multi-agent systems to more realistic and prevalent nonlinear
Lagrangian models that represent a large class of mechanical systems including
autonomous vehicles and robotic manipulators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has impact on numerous civilian,
homeland security, and military applications and on other fields related to
networked systems including biology, sociology, and physics. A capstone course
on autonomous systems will be developed with emphasis on hands-on labs and
campus-wide robotics competitions. Outreach activities to high school students
will be pursued through involvement in a state-wide engineering program in Utah,
Engineering State. Broad dissemination of the research results will be
accomplished through publications, tutorial workshops, a summer school, and a
dedicated website.