* 1213440
* The Catalytic Mechanism of Oxalate Decarboxylase Studied by Advanced EPR Techniques
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Alexander Angerhofer, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2016
* USD 430,000.00

In this award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division, Dr. Alexander Angerhofer, from the University of Florida, will study
the molecular mechanisms by which the bacterial enzyme oxalate decarboxylase
(OxDC) and specific site-directed mutants catalyze the cleavage of the carbon-
carbon bond in oxalic acid. This enzyme may have important applications in the
control of oxalic acid which is one of the most common naturally occurring
toxins and the main ingredient in kidney stones. Advanced electron paramagnetic
resonance (EPR) and electron nuclear double resonance (ENDOR) techniques will be
used to study the electronic structure and local coordination environment of two
Mn ions in the protein subunit where catalysis takes place. Spin trapping will
be used to investigate free radicals that are released from the protein during
enzymatic turnover. Binding of substrate and various inhibitors to the enzyme
will be studied with high-field EPR. These experiments will yield important
kinetic, thermodynamic, and structural information about binding of substrate
and inhibitors to the enzyme, and will test the current working hypothesis in
which Mn and an associated bound oxygen molecule act as redox shuttles in the
breaking of the oxalate C-C bond. The possible existence of a long-range
electron transfer chain in the protein and its role in the catalytic process
will also be investigated. While OxDC is of interest in its own right and may
lead to future treatments of various oxalate-related pathologies (hyperoxaluria,
kidney stones, etc.), the enzyme will also serve as an example of how a protein
can control reactive radical intermediates. Site-directed mutants have been
generated that have decreased oxalate decarboxylase but increased oxalate
oxidase activites. Work with these mutants will help to elucidate how the
structure of the active site can guide the chemistry and switch between
decarboxylase and oxidase activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
tightly integrated into Howard Hughes Medical Institute "Science for Life"
initiative at the University of Florida, which serves its undergraduate student
population by bringing them into research labs early on. Each year on average
two of the most promising undergraduate science majors will be directly
supported in this project in the summer of their sophomore or junior years. They
will have additional volunteer opportunities and perform research for credit
toward their degrees which allows them to write an honors thesis during their
senior year. These students will receive intensive mentoring by Dr. Angerhofer
and his collaborators and will be given the opportunity to perform cutting-edge
research, which will not only enrich their education but also provide them a
perspective for a future career in the natural sciences. They will also have the
opportunity to present their research at local, regional, and national
scientific conferences. Dr. Angerhofer will make every effort to recruit
students from groups that are underrepresented in the STEM disciplines.