* 1213646
* Tuning the Excited States of New Ru(II) Complexes for Potential Photodynamic Therapy Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Claudia Turro, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2016
* USD 720,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM) Program supports Professor
Claudia Turro at the Ohio State University to carry out fundamental/basic
studies on the dynamics of excited states of ruthenium complexes, including
their ligand-exchange photochemistry. The main goal of the research is to
understand the principles that govern efficient excited state ligand-
dissociation, its kinetics, and how this excited state process can be enhanced
and controlled. One area of interest is the investigation of new metal complexes
that can undergo ligand exchange with water molecules with low energy visible
light. The resulting photoproducts bind to DNA, ultimately resulting in the
death of cancer cells. The primary focus of the proposed work is to gain
understanding how the properties of the leaving ligand and the electronic and
structural characteristics of the ground state and the lowest energy excited
state affect the photochemistry. This research will provide the basic knowledge
that can later be applied to the discovery of new photodynamic therapy agents.
This work will also result in understanding of the initial steps following
photon absorption, and important point in areas that include solar energy
conversion and photovoltaic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers are
committed to the education of graduate and undergraduate students, as well as
members of underrepresented groups. Professor Turro is the faculty advisor for
the student chapter of the National Organization of Black Chemists and Chemical
Engineers at OSU, is a member of the department's Diversity Committee, and
attended national and regional meetings of societies geared to promote and
retain underrepresented minorities and women in science. These efforts will aid
in the training of highly qualified, diverse scientists at the undergraduate and
graduate levels. An important aspect of the research is the potential for the
understanding of the excited state reactivity of the complexes proposed, which
has the potential to impact the areas of medicine and solar energy, thus
providing a clear benefit to society.