* 1213683
* Copper-based water-oxidation electrocatalysts; Design, synthesis and characterization
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2013,08/31/2017
* Raphael Raptis, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2017
* USD 420,839.00

With this award from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry
of the National Science Foundation Professor Raphael Raptis from the Florida
International University develop new, bio-inspired, water-oxidation
electrocatalysts. This research is based on the idea that a catalyst leading to
dioxygen-to-water reduction (such as that observed in an enzyme having a
tricopper oxygenase) can be judiciously modified to catalyze the water-to-
dioxygen oxidation. Specifically, the work plan consists of efforts to
synthesize a hexanuclear copper-pyrazolato scaffold, which will be able to
deprotonate water twice, forming coordinated oxide-ions, and template the
formation of oxygen-oxygen bonds, upon oxidation. The synthetic work will be
theory-driven and will aim at tuning the redox properties of the copper-oxo
assembly as to favor O-based oxidation over a Cu-based one. Structural,
spectroscopic, magnetic and electrochemical studies of the new complexes will
guide the computation of the thermodynamic parameters for this process. The new
electrocatalysts will be anchored on electrode surfaces in order to evaluate
their electrochemical performance.

This research will aim at low-cost electrocatalysts development using Earth-
abundant metal, copper, which will achieve the oxidation of water to dioxygen at
a low redox potential. This will make the splitting of water an economically
viable means of producing hydrogen fuel. The project also provides its
participants with training opportunities in a contemporary, multidisciplinary
research field, exposing them at the same time to the work of our local and
international collaborators. Dissemination of the project results is
accomplished via a host of community outreach activities.