* 1213895
* Silver nanocluster emitters in nucleic acid assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Elisabeth Gwinn, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2016
* USD 560,000.00

Elisabeth Gwinn and Deborah Fygenson of the University of California, Santa
Barbara are supported by an award from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry program for research to build understanding of the spectral
properties, solution structures and array potential of fluorescent silver
clusters that are stabilized within DNA strands and strand assemblies. Tandem
HPLC-mass spectrometry with in-line optical spectroscopy will be used to
determine how the optical properties of such Ag:DNAs relate to the number of
silver atoms and DNA strands contained in the complexes. Double-stranded DNA
strut constructs will be developed to hold individual silver clusters in defined
geometries, and to support dual clusters in nanoscale proximity. Measurement of
diffusion constants, combined with structural modeling, will probe whether
incorporation of the clusters grossly disrupts the designed assemblies. Single
molecule microscopy will be used to evaluate polarization signatures of dual
silver cluster assemblies held in strut-based constructs and to probe whether
silver cluster transition moments are oriented by the underlying DNA assembly.
To characterize and enable future exploitation of directional optical
interactions of such oriented silver cluster moments, spectral and polarization
imaging studies will be carried out on silver cluster arrays formed on DNA
nanotubes. Tiny, light-emitting silver clusters that are held within synthetic
DNA strands are beginning to emerge in innovative applications for imaging,
molecular logic, and selective sensing. Further development is impeded by the
current lack of understanding of the cluster sizes and shapes, and of how they
interact with the DNA that keeps them stable. This work will build an
understanding of how the color and brightness of Ag:DNAs depends on silver
cluster sizes and on the DNA surroundings. The development of strategies to hold
multiple clusters in nanoscale proximity on DNA constructs will enable tests of
whether the orientation of the clusters is stable enough over time to be
exploited in directional interactions of arrayed clusters. Such Ag:DNA
constructs may impact technology through future use in signaling chemical,
mechanical and electronic events; in new probes of biomolecules, and through
fluorescence identification of structural perturbations too subtle to identify
with existing microscopies. High-school audiences will be exposed to this multi-
disciplinary work through UCSB's School for Scientific Thought, in mini-classes
developed and taught by graduate student researchers. The emphasis on
undergraduate participation in the research will focus on engaging students who
transfer to UCSB from California Community Colleges.