* 1213343
* Collaborative Research: Ordering Process in Water, Aqueous Solutions, and Water-Biomolecule Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Pablo Debenedetti, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 01/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

This award by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program supports
the collaborative efforts of Pablo G. Debenedetti (Princeton University), C.
Austen Angell (Arizona State University), and H. Eugene Stanley (Boston
University). Their goal is to understand cooperative phenomena in water, aqueous
solutions and water-biomolecule systems. Cooperative processes involve the
sudden and concerted participation of a large number of basic units: amino acid
residues in protein folding, proteins in fibrilization, small molecules in
first-order phase transitions, or complex molecules in self-assembly. This
collaboration will involve (I) experimental and computational studies of phase
transitions in supercooled network-forming liquids of broad materials science
interest; (II) experimental studies of the control of protein refolding by
solvent tuning; (III) computer simulations of protein refolding rates and their
control by protonation/deprotonation and solvent tuning; and (IV) computational
investigations of the kinetics of water capillary evaporation in nano-scale
hydrophobic confinement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topics addressed in this
project have implications that go far beyond their inherent scientific interest.
These include the long-term storage and preservation of therapeutic drugs
(proposed studies of protein refolding), the molecular mechanisms of
neurodegenerative diseases (proposed studies of protein refolding), the design
of advanced materials by self-assembly (proposed studies of capillary
evaporation), the development of advanced materials for optical communications
(proposed studies of phase transitions in molten silica) and the development of
new proteins with improved stability characteristics in non-aqueous environments
(proposed studies of protein refolding). The project will also provide
opportunities for undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral
researchers to integrate experiment and computation and work in a team at the
interface of chemistry, physics, engineering and biology.