* 1213331
* RUI: Preparation of polymeric phase change materials based upon Diels-Alder chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Philip Costanzo, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2016
* USD 210,000.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program and the Chemical
Catalysis Program support the work of Professor Philip J. Costanzo of California
Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo towards the preparation of
polymeric phase change materials based upon Diels-Alder chemistry. This research
focuses on developing and incorporating new Diels-Alder linkages into thermally-
responsive matrix materials that will be used for multiple applications
including, responsive guest-host systems, renewable resins and rheological
modifiers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides interdisciplinary
research training for graduate and undergraduate students. Outreach programs,
which intertwine undergraduate research and teaching, will impact undergraduate
students, K-12 students and teachers. Undergraduates will be involved in the
creation and instruction of teaching modules for K-12 students. Through the
outreach activities, K-12 participants will be exposed to material science which
stimulates their curiosity for science. The K-12 students are also exposed to a
college experience, which can help encourage them to see themselves as college
graduates. In addition, Cal Poly undergraduates are given an opportunity to have
an early field experience using inquiry based tools. It will also help to refine
their knowledge of material and polymer science. Finally, K-12 teachers may
increase their content knowledge by attending workshops and increase their
available resources via Cal Poly Science Kits for Teachers Library (SKTL), a
durable-lending library.