* 1213291
* CAREER: Distributed Multi-vehicle Cooperative Control - A Consensus Theoretical  Approach
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/04/2011,03/31/2014
* Wei Ren, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 03/31/2014
* USD 274,174.00

&lt;br/&gt;Objective:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The objective of this career
proposal is to derive a consensus theoretical framework for distributed multi-
vehicle cooperative control. In particular, the proposal focuses on distributed
multi-vehicle formation clustering and rigid body attitude synchronization
problems. While consensus algorithms start to emerge in cooperative control,
they are usually simplified or ideal without accounting for the challenges in
cooperative control problems. Therefore, their applicability to the above two
problems is very limited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The research plan of this career proposal consists
of three thrusts: (i) analysis and design of novel, provably correct consensus
algorithms and derivation of a unified consensus architecture for distributed
multi-vehicle formation clustering problems, (ii) analysis and design of novel,
provably correct consensus algorithms for distributed rigid body attitude
synchronization problems, and (iii) experimental validation of the distributed
algorithms on a multi-vehicle testbed. The distributed algorithms derived in the
project will address consensus tracking of a reference state with inherent
dynamics, consensus under actuator saturation, consensus in the absence of
absolute or relative state derivative measurements, and consensus of coupled
nonlinear systems modeled by rigid body attitude dynamics or Euler-Lagrange
equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research has significant impact on applications including space-based
interferometry, environment monitoring, border patrol, and search and rescue. In
collaboration with the Utah Water Research Laboratory, the PI plans to apply the
research results to high-resolution remote sensing of land surface hydrologic
processes by a team of unmanned aerial vehicles. The research also has impact on
the fields of biology, economics, physics, and computer science, where the
consensus/synchronization phenomenon is ubiquitous. The research plan will be
integrated into an education plan that includes four elements, namely,
undergraduate and graduate mentoring, curriculum development, outreach to high
schools, and broad dissemination of the research results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;