* 1213201
* 2012 Biointerface Science GRC/GRS, May 19 - 20, 2012 and May 19 - 25, 2012, Les Diablerets, Switzerland
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2012
* Stefan Zauscher, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Revzin
* 09/30/2012
* USD 7,862.00

1213201&lt;br/&gt;Zauscher&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biointerface Science is an area
of research experiencing explosive growth. The 2012 Biointerface Science GRC,
organized by Dr. Wolfgang Knoll (Chair) and Dr. Stefan Zauscher (Vice Chair),
seeks to capture the excitement of this burgeoning field by a cutting-edge
scientific program and roster of distinguished invited speakers and discussion
leaders who will present the latest research results in Biointerface
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2012
GRC on Biointerface Science aims at bringing together scientists and engineers
that work (and learn) in the diverse fields of physics, chemistry, biology,
biotechnology, materials science, diagnostics, medicine, and environmental
technologies. By presenting and discussing the latest fundamental research
results dealing with the interactions between biomolecules of different chemical
nature and origin and surfaces of various materials, this GRC will try to bridge
the gap and enhance the intellectual interaction between molecular/cellular
biology and the medical disciplines on the one side, and the physical and
chemical sciences on the other side.&lt;br/&gt;This cross-disciplinary dialog is
expected to enhance the quantitative understanding of the molecular mechanisms
that govern the response of complex macromolecular and/or biological systems
when exposed to artificial surfaces and devices. By integrating engineers and
materials experts into the discussion, the GRC on Biointerface Science will
contribute to the translation of the developed biomolecular concepts into the
world of applications, e.g., biomedical devices,and sensors that are urgently
needed for diagnostic strategies and new medical treatments of human
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New in 2012 is the Gordon Research Seminar on
Biointerface Science, which is a unique forum for graduate students, post-docs,
and other scientists with comparable levels of experience and education, to
present and exchange new data and cutting edge ideas related to Biointerface
Science. The GRS meeting will immediately precede the GRC. By inviting young
scientists and students to the GRC we also hope to engage them in the GRS and to
contribute to a paradigm shift in the way we train our young colleagues at the
intersection of the natural sciences,medicine and engineering. By providing
support for this GRC, the NSF will facilitate the interaction of physical
scientists, engineers, biologists and medical scientists in this unique
scientific forum that will positively impact the direction of this young field
and lead to important advances in the understanding of biointerfacial problems,
and the diagnosis and treatment of human diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gordon Research Conference organization has a
strong commitment to supporting diversity in the sciences. In the 2012
preliminary program 7 speakers/discussion leaders are women. There are likely to
be many more women/minority attendees selected from among those submitting
applications. The organizers will further strive to ensure that women,
underrepresented and disabled participants will be offered opportunities to
attend the meeting. Attendees will be selected from the applicant pool in order
to represent a cross-section of researchers working in this area, and with a
view toward expanding the community to include scientists working in related
fields. Efforts will be made to represent the gender and racial diversity
characteristic of the researchers working in this area. Leading scientists and
engineers from companies working in the Biointerface Science area will also be
recruited to participate. With the help of this grant and other financial
resources, the conference chairs will accept a number of junior investigators,
postdocs and graduate students and offer them registration and travel support
(goal of 10 or more from pooled sponsor resources). The supplements will be
decided based on a "state,emt of purpose" to attend the conference and financial
need and affirmative action metrics.