* 1213438
* Generation and Solution of Reactivity of Nitroxyl (HNO)
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* John Toscano, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2016
* USD 470,579.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanism Program supports Professor John
P. Toscano of the Chemistry Department at Johns Hopkins University for research
involving the generation and solution reactivity of nitroxyl (HNO), which has
recently received significant attention, especially as a potential alternative
to current treatments of cardiac failure. Due to its inherent reactivity, HNO
must be generated in situ, but only a very limited number of appropriate
precursors currently exist. Adding to the difficulty of studying HNO chemistry
is that a viable method for its direct detection in solution or biologically
relevant preparations is not currently available. The proposed research will
address these current deficiencies in the understanding of HNO chemistry and
biochemistry, in available HNO donor molecules, and in practically useful direct
HNO detection techniques. In particular, research will develop (1) new
precursors to HNO as well as (2) new analytical approaches for the detection and
study of HNO focusing on membrane inlet mass spectrometry (MIMS). In addition,
research will also address the HNO-induced modifications of the protein
phospholamban (PLN), which is involved in regulating the cardiac sarcoplasmic
reticulum calcium pump (SERCA2a), to determine the mechanism by which HNO
enhances SERCA2a activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of new HNO
donors, combined with reactivity studies and the evaluation of HNO-induced
protein modifications, will not only provide fundamental insight into the
biological activity of HNO, but may also ultimately lead to the development of a
new class of compounds for the treatment of heart failure. In addition, proposed
research on the development of new precursors to HNO, new analytical tools for
its detection, and elucidation of HNO-induced modifications of PLN will afford
broad training for graduate students and undergraduates. It will involve the
synthesis of the precursors to be studied, careful analysis of reaction
mixtures, quantification of products, time-resolved spectroscopic studies,
biochemical analyses, and the use of modern analytical techniques. Students will
acquire a wide range of skills that will allow them to solve complex problems
and will be beneficial for future applications both in industry and academia.
Undergraduate participation in research, as well as efforts to broaden the
participation of women and underrepresented groups, will continue to be actively
encouraged in the current funding period. Undergraduates, either from Johns
Hopkins University or nearby universities/colleges with small or no Ph.D.
programs, will continue to be involved in research during the academic year
and/or over the summer months.