* 1213235
* Organo-f element Chemistry: Integrated Synthetic, Mechanistic, and Catalytic and Thermochemical Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Tobin Marks, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2015
* USD 600,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program in the Chemistry Division at the National Science
Foundation supports Professor Tobin Marks of Northwestern University to lead
four closely interlinked research thrusts, integrating research and education,
and focusing on fundamental and technologically-oriented aspects of new and
unusual catalytic transformations, primarily involving abundant lanthanide,
actinide, and related early transition metal elements. The goal is to use
experimental bonding energetic information to understand unusual bonding modes,
to understand known stoichiometric and catalytic transformations, and to predict
new ones in this part of the Periodic Table. The project seeks to elucidate
principals for inventing new, efficient, useful, atom-efficient, and
environmentally acceptable "green" catalytic processes by investigating: 1)
catalytic metal-heteroelement chemistry--hydroelementation and hydro-
functionalization; 2) catalytic materials synthesis; 3) multinuclear catalysis;
4) electrophilic lanthanide catalysis in ionic liquids--hydroelementation and
its microscopic reverse. In carrying out research, students engage in the
synthesis and purification of new catalysts, characterizing their molecular
structures and dynamics, implementing these catalysts in exploratory reactivity
studies, molecular modeling and electronic structure computation, and rigorous
elucidation of reaction kinetics and mechanism. Students also become familiar
with polymerization reaction methodologies and with in-depth polymer
microstructure, rheology, molecular weight, and thermal characterization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Discovering, understanding, improving, and applying
chemical transformations involving metal-carbon and metal-heteroatom containing
molecules and fragments are of central importance to the U.S. chemical industry.
These transformations include efficient, atom-economical catalytic processes for
the production of fuels, plastics, pharmaceuticals, and other economically
important chemicals on a huge scale. Furthermore, creating a broad chemical
knowledge base and a technically skilled national cadre of researchers expert in
this field is crucial to developing ever more selective, environmentally benign,
and economically competitive technologies. There is also a national need for
researchers trained in basic heavy element chemistry for the nuclear industry.
This project focuses on organometallic/catalytic/materials chemistry with the
goal being to effect, characterize, understand, and disseminate to the
community, unusual and potentially useful new stoichiometric and catalytic
reactivity principals, as well as new insights into bonding and bonding
energetics. These research/education activities deliberately involve young
scientists in all aspects of this knowledge creation. Participation in this
challenging, multifaceted/multidisciplinary project, including interactions with
industrial scientists, will prepare graduate, undergraduate, and postdoctoral
students, having diverse backgrounds, for productive careers in industry,
government laboratories, and academe.