* 1213242
* Elucidating Length and Time Scales of Spatiotemporal Heterogeneity in Supercooled Liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Laura Kaufman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2016
* USD 459,800.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Laura Kaufman, together with her
postdoctoral associates, graduate students, and undergraduate researchers at
Columbia University will investigate fundamental aspects of spatiotemporal
heterogeneity in small molecule and simulated model supercooled liquids. The
proposed experiments will employ a set of carefully chosen probe molecules that
allow for systematic interrogation of the length and time scales of
heterogeneity in a variety of small molecule glass formers. These measurements
will detail the spatial and temporal extents of heterogeneity in particular
supercooled liquids and may suggest underlying connections between supercooled
liquid fragility and breadth of spatiotemporal heterogeneity. Beyond typical
supercooled liquids, experiments on systems that display similar phenomenology
but are suspected of possessing structural heterogeneity are proposed. In
addition to these measurements that monitor single molecule (SM) probe
rotational dynamics, experiments that directly interrogate translational
diffusion at the SM level will be undertaken. Simultaneous tracking of rotations
and translations will resolve questions regarding the poorly understood
phenomenon of rotational-translational decoupling in supercooled liquids,
revealing whether this behavior can exist on a single molecule level.
Accompanying carefully crafted simulations will allow for both rotational and
translational motility to be tracked in analogy with the proposed experiments
and will investigate reciprocal probe-host interactions in a manner that will
inform and strengthen interpretation of experimental results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Achieving a fuller understanding of spatiotemporal
heterogeneity in supercooled liquids is of great fundamental interest as well as
of applied interest in diverse fields, from petroleum transportation to
cryopreservation of cells. The proposed work will also have strong educational
impact on undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral researchers in the Kaufman
laboratory as well as on younger students. Professor Kaufman has initiated a
relationship with a local charter school to present lectures on complex fluids
to 4th-6th grade students, collaboratively develop additional lectures with
their science teacher, and translate real-time assessment tools used in this
school into the General Chemistry courses at Columbia University. Through
service on Columbia University's Quality of Life Committee, Professor Kaufman
will facilitate dissemination of information to Columbia University science
students and faculty on federal agency and University-based family friendly
policies, and will assist in design, dissemination, and analysis of a study on
Columbia University faculty use and perceptions of the University's family leave
policies.