* 1213072
* Synthesis and Studies of Conjugated Poly(Ionomers) as Next Generation Materials for Advanced Polymer Electronics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Kenneth Carter, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2015
* USD 220,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Kenneth Carter of the University of
Massachusetts, Amherst will develop methodologies to form n- and p-type doped
conjugated poly(ionomer)s from a single, neutral parent polymer. The approach is
to synthesize conjugated polymers possessing benzimidazole repeat units either
in homopolymer or copolymer form; to probe how acid-base and alkylation
chemistries can be used to switch the benzimidazole repeat unit between various
types of aromatic systems; to study systematically the effects of these
modifications on the electrical and photo-physical behavior of the polymers; and
to explore how these polymers can be used to fabricate functional organic
electronic devices. The broader impacts involve training graduate and
undergraduate students in polymer chemistry and organic electronics science,
disseminating research results and concepts via publications, presentations at
conferences and incorporation of material into lecture courses, and broadening
the participation of underrepresented groups in chemical sciences via partnering
with NOBCChE to bring undergraduates to campus for summer research experiences.

Plastics are long chain organic molecules and are found in many facets of
everyday life, including food packaging, structural materials for automotive and
aerospace transportation, and lightweight electronic devices. Electrically
conducting carbon-based (organic) molecules and polymers hold enormous promise
for realizing highly efficient, affordable, and broadly available electronic and
optical devices. This research explores how chemistry can be used to control and
switch the electronic properties of an electrically conducting polymer.
Ultimately, such work could lead to the development of organic electronic
materials, low cost solar cells, light emitting displays, and chemical and
biological sensors.