* 1213904
* Simulation studies of permeability and melting behavior in gel-phase lipid bilayers
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* James Kindt, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2016
* USD 402,998.00

James T. Kindt at Emory University is supported by the Chemical Theory, Models
and Computational Methods program in lipid bilayer research. The dramatically
different properties of lipid bilayers in the ordered gel phase and the
disordered fluid phase (found below and above the transition temperature,
respectively) have found applications in thermoresponsive liposome technology.
The proposed research activities in the Kindt group will use atomistic molecular
dynamics and mixed Monte Carlo/molecular dynamics (MCMD) methods to explore
aspects of gel phase structure, dynamics, and thermodynamics relevant to these
properties. First, the behaviors of several force-fields will be evaluated for
their agreement with x-ray scattering data and experimental gel/fluid transition
temperatures. Secondly, hypotheses for origins of the experimentally determined
peak in bilayer permeability near the transition temperature will be explored.
Comparison of the free energy of ion and small molecule passage through fluid,
gel, and interfacial zones of a bilayer at coexistence will be used to test the
"leaky interface" explanation, and continuum-based modeling of surface stress
relaxation will be used to test the "surface compressibility" explanation.
Thirdly, using MCMD, partitioning of lipid "dopants" within the interior and
interfaces of gel phase domains will be evaluated. Finally, the dynamics of gel-
phase vesicle response to ultrafast temperature jumps will be modeled, in close
conjunction with experimental collaborators, using atomistic simulation for sub-
microsecond dynamics, coarse-grained simulation for longer-time relaxation, and
phenomenological kinetic modeling.

Lipid molecules tend to arrange themselves in water into double-layer sheets
called bilayers. Living organisms use lipid bilayers to form boundaries between
and within cells. Lipids can also be manufactured into nanoscopic capsules
(called liposomes or vesicles) to contain a variety of substances, which find
uses in biotechnology, drug delivery, cosmetics and personal care products,
agriculture and food science. These are useful if the capsules are designed to
empty their contents in response to some "switch". Some lipid bilayers have a
built-in "switch" in the form of an inherent sensitivity to temperature:
changing the temperature from just below to just above a specific "transition
temperature" will cause the liposome to undergo a change in state, similar to
melting. The transition influences the shape and permeability of liposomes --
below the transition temperature, the liposome will release contents very
slowly, while above the transition temperature, molecules can escape more
rapidly. For reasons that are not fully understood, the permeability is strongly
enhanced at temperatures very near the transition temperature. Research in the
Kindt group will use computer models of molecular behavior to investigate the
structure of bilayers and liposomes near the transition temperature, where the
lipid structure is partially melted and partially solid, to test hypotheses
about this enhancement. In conjunction with colleagues who are measuring the
rate of vesicle melting in the laboratory, we will also use our simulations to
help describe the structure of the lower-temperature phase of the vesicle, which
is not uniform and spherical but has facets and ridges, and the factors that
determine the rate of the melting transition. The goal is to discover
fundamental reasons for observed liposome behaviors, so that these technologies
can be approved and applied more broadly. As a secondary product of this
research, the Kindt group will produce molecular animations of our simulations
to educate students and the public about lipid behavior over the World Wide Web.