* 1213976
* Dynamics of Organic Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Charles Doubleday, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2015
* USD 330,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program supports Dr. Charles E.
Doubleday of Columbia University for the devleopment of non-statistical
computational methods to better understand organic reaction mechanisms. This
research will develop methods to compute the detailed sequence of atomic motions
as starting materials are transformed into products (classical trajectories),
using a combination of quantum mechanics and classical mechanics. Dr. Doubleday
will examine reactions that are important in organic chemistry, and whose
mechanisms of operation have remained elusive. These include unimolecular
isomerizations and some bimolecular cycloadditions. A third type is enediyne
cyclizations that occur in a powerful class of naturally occuring antibiotics.
Dr. Doubleday will study quantum mechanical tunneling in these reactions, in
addition to computing classical trajectories. In all projects, the goal is to
understand the way in which energy flows from reactants to products. The deeper
understanding gained will allow more precise control in designing molecules for
specific applications.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;An important component of this
project is the training of undergraduate students in scientific research. Since
research is collaborative and students learn from each other, the work fosters
group skills as well as individual achievement. In collaborations with
colleagues at other institutions, Dr. Doubleday helps train graduate students in
the use of trajectory methods. The principal investigator's classical trajectory
program is available and is currently being used at other academic institutions.
Benefits to society at large will emerge from a deeper understanding of the
mechanisms of chemical reactions. In the enediyne project, the focus is on the
active center of a class of powerful antibiotics, with the goal of understanding
and control. As the principles uncovered by this research become incorporated
into applied areas, potential benefits could include greater understanding and
control over chemical processes important in atmospheric and life processes, and
in human health generally.