* 1213718
* Experimental Investigations of the Contact Freezing Properties of Mineral Particles Using Optical Tweezers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Ryan Sullivan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2016
* USD 431,561.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Chemistry Division at the
National Science Foundation supports the research of Professor Ryan Sullivan at
Carnegie-Mellon who will determine the contact freezing properties of
atmospherically relevant mineral particle compositions using optical tweezers.
Professor Sullivan and his students will determine the ability of various types
of mineral dust particles to catalyze the spontaneous heterogeneous freezing of
supercooled droplets through contact freezing. The droplets will be suspended in
a focus laser beam using a refrigerated optical tweezers system. The retrieved
Raman spectrum will provide key information on the droplet?s physical and
chemical state just prior to and when freezing occurs. The number of dust
particle-droplet collisions that occur before freezing will be explicitly known,
and contact freezing will also be discriminated from immersion freezing
mechanisms. This research will help to resolve long outstanding questions
regarding the prevalence of contact freezing in the atmosphere, and its
potential importance for modifying cloud properties and inducing
precipitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will help fill an
important knowledge gap regarding a fundamental phase transition of a ubiquitous
molecule in our environment: water. The results will impact a wide range of
fields from physical chemistry to biogeochemistry and atmospheric science, and
increase our understanding of aerosols-cloud-climate interactions. The findings
will be particularly important for improving the outdated descriptions of
heterogeneous ice nucleation currently used in weather forecast and global
climate models. The project will provide students with valuable experience in
the novel use of optical tweezers to study heterogeneous ice nucleation for the
first time. Our international collaboration with scientists at the University of
Bristol will afford our students with the unique opportunity to be trained by
experts in the use of optical tweezers for atmospheric aerosol particle
research. The project will provide training opportunities for students in a
research area of great societal importance.