* 1213052
* SHF: Large:Collaborative Research: Architecting the Next Generation Memory Hierarchy - A Holistic Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Chitaranjan Das, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* tao li
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,360,000.00

The memory system continues to be a major performance and power bottleneck in
nearly all computing systems. And, it is becoming increasingly more so with
major application, architecture, and technology trends. Embedded applications
that acquire and process real-time data, Internet and cloud applications that
have to analyze large databases, and the exa-scale era HPC applications that
need to crunch voluminous data sets are just a few examples of increasingly
data-intensive applications that require high memory capacity, performance, and
energy efficiency. Thus, the well-known memory wall problem has become even more
difficult to surmount and needs a fundamental rethinking of the memory hierarchy
design for future computing platforms.

The goal of this proposal is to fundamentally and holistically rethink the
design of the entire memory hierarchy taking into consideration the emerging
device/memory technologies and to exploit the design trade-offs at different
layers of the system stack -- from devices to micro-architecture, compilers and
runtime systems. The solution will cover innovations in architecting and
optimizing the entire memory path consisting of the caches, on-chip networks,
memory controller and main memory. The objective is to enable 100X improvement
in memory capacity over the next decade, while providing 5X improvement in
performance and 10X improvement in energy efficiency. The proposed research has
the potential to transform the design of next-generation memory systems for the
multi-core era, which is expected to be a ubiquitous part of the entire IT
sector. The cross-cutting nature of this research can foster new research
directions in several areas, spanning technology/energy-aware design, computer
architecture, compilers, and system/application software. With the memory system
forming the backbone of nearly every envisioned future application domain, the
broader impact of this research can accelerate the design and deployment of
future applications. This project will enable transfer of research results to
industry, enhance undergraduate and graduate student training including under-
represented students, and contribute to the development of new research and
teaching tools.