* 1213634
* Development of cryogenic ion spectroscopy as a structural tool for complex ions extracted from solution and spectroscopic characterization of non-covalent interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,11/30/2015
* Mark Johnson, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 11/30/2015
* USD 534,000.00

In this award funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program
of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Mark A. Johnson of Yale University will
continue his integration of vibrational spectroscopy with cryogenic mass
spectrometry to create a new, generally applicable structural probe for chemical
analysis with dramatically enhanced resolution and sensitivity. This development
exploits very recent technological advances that allow increasingly complex
species to be extracted from solution, frozen into well-defined structures near
10 K, mass-selected, and then characterized with vibrational, electronic and (in
the case of anions) photoelectron spectroscopies. The most important aspect of
these gas-phase studies is that, because species are quenched into
configurations with minimal thermal fluctuations, much sharper band patterns are
recovered than are observed in condensed media. Johnson's program will extend
and expand the utility of cryogenic vibrational spectroscopy to elucidate the
particular H-bond donor-acceptor pairs of folded structures of biopolymers as
well as those at play in non-covalently bonded host-guest complexes. Special
emphasis will be placed on identifying scenarios which yield highly selective
docking of substrate molecules to biomimetic peptide catalysts. An important
aspect of the study will be to elucidate the relationship between the
conformations obtained in the gas phase and those found in solution, which will
be accomplished by following the dependence of ion structure on the number of
solvent molecules retained in the gas-phase cluster. Because these measurements
are carried out using methods specifically built for this application, his
program dedicates significant effort toward refinement of the experimental
approach, including temperature control and micro-solvation of the isolated
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Johnson's program directly interfaces physical
chemistry students with immediate challenges addressed by synthetic colleagues,
and thus prepares a new generation of scientists with a versatile skill set,
well centered in the chemical sciences. His program contributes to the strong
foundation of an emerging branch of chemical analysis where complex systems are
subjected to structural characterization in the ansatz of a supermolecule. The
generality of the approach is ideally suited to engage young researchers and
established colleagues alike, with exciting and powerful new ways to explore
chemical structure.