* 1213283
* Interfacing earth-abundant electrocatalysts with mesostructured oxide photoanodes for solar photoelectrocatalysis.
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Daniel Gamelin, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2016
* USD 344,149.00

With this award from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division of
the National Science Foundation, Professor Daniel Gamelin at the University of
Washington, Seattle, will carry out studies in the area of solar energy
conversion and storage in the form of chemical fuels. Specifically, this project
seeks to address the challenge of interfacing non-crystalline water-oxidation
electrocatalysts with crystalline semiconductor photoelectrodes for
photolectrochemical (PEC) solar energy conversion. The research will use a
combination of preparative and analytical techniques to develop a deeper
understanding of interfaces in a set of composite catalyst/semiconductor
photoanodes. The principal investigator (PI) will apply state-of-the-art
photoelectrochemical and spectroscopic techniques to assay these photoelectrodes
and to advance understanding of microscopic relationships between surface
morphology, functionalization, and redox catalysis. The PI and his team will
seek to develop fundamental structure/function relationships that address
catalyst-semiconductor coupling, electron-hole recombination dynamics, and the
impact such catalysts have on the photoanode electronic structure. The research
will address mechanistic differences between electrocatalytic and
photoelectrocatalytic responses of this family of water-oxidation catalysts, as
well as performance differences. This work will improve the solar water
splitting efficiencies of these composite photoanodes in PEC cell
configurations, particularly at low overpotentials where recombination losses
are most severe and detrimental to energy conversion efficiencies.

This research will focus on interfacing non-crystalline Earth-abundant
electrocatalysts with mesostructured oxide photoanodes for use in solar
photoelectrochemical devices capable of splitting water that will generate
hydrogen as a chemical fuel. This research will advance the general
understanding of such composite photoelectrodes for photoelectrochemical solar
energy conversion. The research will yield new complex materials and new
fundamental knowledge that could broadly impact future alternative-energy
technologies. This project will also provide advanced interdisciplinary training
in the areas of inorganic, physical, electro-, and materials chemistries, in
order to prepare participating undergraduates, graduate students, and
postdoctoral researchers for future careers in science, engineering, and
education. There is a special emphasis on integration of research and education
at the early career levels (undergraduate, high school) through aggressive
involvement of undergraduates, incorporation of experiments and concepts from
this research into the University of Washington undergraduate curriculum,
collaboration with faculty and students from undergraduate institutions, and
mature outreach activities at Seattle-area high schools and community colleges.