* 1213484
* Functions of Carbon-Oxygen Hydrogen Bonding in Biological Methyl Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Raymond Trievel, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2015
* USD 330,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program is funding Professor
Raymond Trievel at the University of Michigan to investigate the proposition
that methyl C-H-oxygen hydrogen bonding plays an important role in
S-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet or SAM)-dependent lysine methyltransferases.
AdoMet-dependent methylation is a ubiquitous reaction in biology and has
integral roles in metabolism and signal transduction, particularly with respect
to DNA and histone lysine methylation in epigenetic gene regulation.
Unconventional C-H---O hydrogen bonds have been reported to coordinate the
AdoMet methyl group in the active sites of lysine methyltransferases, but their
role in methyl transfer has remained poorly understood. Using the lysine
methyltransferase SET7/9 as a model enzyme, this project will examine the
functions of these hydrogen bonds in AdoMet recognition and catalysis using an
integrated approach combining enzymology, X-ray crystallography, NMR
spectroscopy, and unnatural amino acid mutagenesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of these studies will provide a conceptual framework that defines the
enzymatic roles of carbon-oxygen hydrogen bonding in lysine methyltransferases
as well as other classes of AdoMet-dependent methyltransferases that also
exhibit methyl carbon-oxygen hydrogen bonding. In the broader context, it is
envisioned that this work will provide insights that lead to a more general
understanding of the functional importance of C-H---O hydrogen bonding in
biological methyl transfer. With respect to training/educational impact, this
project will engage both undergraduate and graduate students in the fields of
chemical biology, structural biology and biophysics/spectroscopy, providing for
a stimulating, multi-disciplinary research experience at the Chemistry-Biology
interface. The PI will continue to work to bring women and students from
traditionally underrepresented groups into the research laboratory.