* 1213289
* Single-conformation spectroscopy of isolated peptides and synthetic foldamers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Timothy Zwier, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2016
* USD 540,000.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program
of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Timothy Zwier of Purdue University and
his graduate and undergraduate students are carrying out experimental studies of
the conformational preferences and laser-induced isomerization of a series of
model peptides, synthetic foldamers, and peptide aggregates, studied either as
isolated molecules cooled in a supersonic expansion or as ions cooled to 10K in
a cryo-cooled ion trap. Neutral peptides and foldamers are being studied using
laser-induced fluorescence (LIF), mass-resolved resonant two-photon ionization
(R2PI), IR-UV and UV-UV hole-burning methods to determine the number of
conformational isomers present and obtain their single-conformation infrared and
ultraviolet spectra. From these spectra, the researchers deduce the preferred
intramolecular H-bonding arrangements, discover their unique spectral
signatures, provide benchmark tests of the accuracy of calculations, and provide
a test bed for emerging methods for quantifying non-bonding interactions in
large molecules. Proline-rich alpha-peptides that form loose helices in solution
are being studied in isolated form to determine their inherent conformational
preferences in the absence of solvent. Synthetic foldamers composed of several
types of constrained peptides, prepared collaboratively by the Gellman group,
are being studied to test how elongation of the peptide backbone in combination
with constraints from cyclic residues, affects the conformational preferences.
In expanding these studies to include ions, Professor Zwier and his team are
using a newly constructed multi-stage mass spectrometer that incorporates a
cryocooled ion trap capable of carrying out single-conformation spectroscopy on
larger peptides and peptide aggregates, using photofragment spectroscopy. Here
the focus is on longer peptide sequences known in solution to form prototypical
secondary structures. Finally, two model peptide hexamers (NNQQNY and VEALYL)
composed of sequences that play key roles in amyloid fibril formation, are under
investigation as prefibrillar aggregates (oligomer ions containing 2-12
monomers), with the goal of obtaining unique spectroscopic signatures of the
early stages of interdigitized beta-sheet formation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project impacts society at large by providing incisive experimental
tests of important natural and synthetic structural scaffolds, which can aid
theoretical development of next-generation quantum chemical, force field,
spectroscopic, and dynamics methods. Specific targets touch on important
biophysical problems. Proline-rich alpha-peptides are models for unstructured
protein segments. Synthetic foldamers form unique structural scaffolds designed
to interact with specific biological receptors of relevance to a wide range of
biomedical and drug-discovery applications. The probable role of soluble
prefibrillar oligomers in amyloid disease pathogenesis makes them important
targets for detailed structural characterization.