* 1213223
* High-Resolution Crystallographic Studies of Short-lived Excited State and Structural Dynamics in Solids
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Philip Coppens, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* James Lisy
* 08/31/2016
* USD 536,790.00

Through this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Philip Coppens and his team will
develop and apply X-ray diffraction methods for the detailed study of photo-
induced processes in solids. Chemistry is often referred to as a science of
molecular change; studies of reaction mechanism are therefore central to
chemistry. The studies are designed to increase our understanding of photo-
chemical processes in which light is converted into chemical energy. The
research uses a combination of crystallography, spectroscopy and theoretical
calculations to study chemical reactions which take place in either pure
crystals or in multi-component, framework-forming, supramolecular solids. These
supramolecular solids offer great versatility and therefore the opportunity to
observe the effect of the molecular environment on reactivity. This includes the
influence of steric restrictions imposed by the crystal matrix on the reaction
rate and the conformation of the product, the effect of the chirality of the
cavity walls on the nature of the product, and the effect of host-guest energy
transfer which can enhance the reactivity or suppress it, depending on the
direction of the transfer. A particularly active component of the work is the
study of light-induced fleeting species in solids. Such species exist for a
millionth of a second or less, but determine the course of subsequent chemical
reactions and are of crucial importance in materials chemistry.

The study of chemical reactivity at the atomic level is relevant for our
understanding of how chemical reactions proceed and can be manipulated. Such
reactions include important catalytic, solid state and physiological processes.
The project concerns a frontier area of science, solid-state chemistry, which is
pursued in many laboratories across the world. One of its aims is to keep the
United States competitive in the field.