* 1213288
* Structure of water at interfaces with nanometer solutes and bioenergetics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Dmitry Matyushov, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2015
* USD 281,000.00

Dmitry Matyushov of Arizona State University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
Division to develop theoretical methods to study the structure and dynamics of
the protein-water interface. The main focus of this research is on the
connection between electrostatic properties of hydrated proteins and efficiency
of electron transport in biology. Redox proteins are employed by living systems
to transport electrons across the cellular membrane. This process is a major
step in the overall bioenergetics of the cell. The fundamental efficiency
bottleneck of energy chains of biology is rooted in the conflicting requirements
of long-distance electron transport and low energy input. Results from
Matyushov's research group offer a potential resolution to this conundrum,
providing a connection between sequence and fold of proteins, dictated by
selection, and their function as electron carriers. The PI has proposed that
protein-water interfaces have developed to produce the statistics and dynamics
of electrostatic fluctuations distinct from those observed for small molecules.
Globular redox proteins are studied to clarify the origin of their unusual
electrostatic properties. Theories of non-Gaussian interfacial fluctuations are
being developed and tested against numerical computer simulations and laboratory
experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The structure of water at the
nanometer interface is of broad importance for the understanding of life. All
energy of life depends on efficient trans-membrane electron transport, either in
photosynthetic reaction centers or mitochondria. The problems addressed by this
proposal will affect a number of disciplines where water-mediated interactions
are critical. The proposed work integrates with educational effort to establish
a program in theoretical biological physics/chemistry, including the development
of undergraduate and graduate courses, weekly seminars, poster sessions, and
annual workshops.