* 1213838
* Fluorescent sensors for subcellular iron imaging in live-cells
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Maolin Guo, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program and co-funding
from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Maolin Guo and his group at University of Massachusetts,
Dartmouth will develop fluorescent sensors for subcellular imaging of free iron
ions in live cells. Iron is an essential element for many fundamental
physiological processes such as oxygen transport and DNA synthesis. However,
free iron is toxic to cells because it promotes the production of highly
reactive free radicals which damage biomolecules. Either iron deficiency or iron
over-load in the body is linked to various disease conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, measurement of iron ions in cellular or
subcellular compartments is a challenging task due to the lack of analytical
techniques with adequate spatial and temporal resolution and sensitivity. In
this project "turn-on" and ratiometric fluorescent sensors for subcellular
imaging of free iron ions in live cells using a laser confocal microscope will
be designed and synthesized. Coordination-induced fluorescence activation (CIFA)
or coordination-induced fluorescence resonance energy transfer (CIFRET)
mechanisms will be applied to develop the iron-imaging sensors. The sensors will
be capable of entering subcellular compartments such as mitochondria to image
iron at subcellular level and their ability to image iron ions will be tested in
live cells. Insights gained from this study will shed light on the rational
design of sensors for imaging other metals and other important biomarkers. This
research will provide imaging tools for investigating the complex mechanism of
iron homeostasis and iron trafficking at subcellular level, which may
potentially lead to the development of pharmaceuticals to treat diseases related
to iron dyshomeostasis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will be integrated with
educational activities that provide multidisciplinary training of graduate and
undergraduate students including women, minority and foreign students and
visiting scholars in chemical synthesis and analysis, spectroscopy, microscopy,
cell biology and bioimaging. In addition, high school teachers and students will
actively participate in the project thus impacting K-12 education in
southeastern Massachusetts.