* 1213352
* Umpolung Reactivity in Stereoselective Synthesis of 2-Deoxy Glycosides and Thioglycosides
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Jianglong Zhu, University of Toledo
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2016
* USD 360,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Jianglong Zhu of the Department of Chemistry at University
of Toledo will develop umpolung reactivity-based glycosylations for
stereoselective syntheses of biologically important 2-deoxy glycosides and
thioglycosides. Despite recent accomplishments in the development of
glycosylation methodology, stereoselective synthesis of 2-deoxy sugars remains
challenging because of the lack of a directing group at the C-2 position. This
project focuses on investigating reactions of stereochemically defined 2-deoxy
glycosyl anions with sugar-derived peroxo and disulfide acceptors for
stereoselective preparation of 2-deoxy glycosides and thioglycosides. In
addition, experimental efforts will be taken to understand the mechanism of
these umpolung reactivity-based glycosylations.

Successful accomplishment of this project will have a significant impact on
synthetic organic community, because it will provide a strategy that complements
current methods in the stereoselective synthesis of structurally challenging and
biologically valuable 2-deoxy glycosides and thioglycosides. This project could
lead to the synthesis of a variety of sugar based therapeutic agents. In
addition, it will provide excellent training for undergraduate and graduate
students, K-12 science teachers, and high school students, including those from
groups currently underrepresented in the chemical sciences.