* 1213870
* Accurate Atomistic Modeling of Solutions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2017
* Peter Pulay, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2017
* USD 320,504.00

Peter Pulay of the University of Arkansas is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program to develop improved
electronic structure methods for simulating reactions in solutions, with
possible extension to a protein environment. Accurate simulation of these
reactions requires the evaluation of thermodynamic averages, increasing the
computational burden by many orders of magnitude. Pulay's recent General
Polarizability Quantum Mechanics / Molecular Mechanics (GP-QM/MM) methodology
has already been implemented in a Metropolis Monte Carlo code and shown to speed
up conventional QM/MM calculations by four orders of magnitude with barely any
sacrifice in accuracy. Pulay and his coworkers will develop analytical gradients
for the new method, allowing the determination of reaction paths in solutions.
They will also implement improved solvent models, to match the accuracy of the
description of the reactive system. They will extend the current Monte Carlo
simulations to the alternative Molecular Dynamics method which can supply
information about the time scale of the changes. The new techniques will be
applied to the prediction of pKa values, equilibria between zwitterionic and
neutral forms of amino acids and small peptides, conformational preferences of
peptides, and reactions known to be strongly affected by polar solvents. They
will also investigate the factors determining whether anions preferentially
adsorb on the surface in water microdroplets.

During the last three decades, both computer power and theoretical methods
advanced tremendously, finally allowing accurate routine calculation of the
electronic structures and properties of medium-sized chemical systems in the gas
phase. However, most chemistry (and virtually all biochemistry) takes place in
solution or in a protein environment. Polar solvents like water have a profound
effect on chemical reactivity, and require very large numbers of simulation runs
to obtain accurate averages. As a result, significant approximations are
frequently made in the methods, although this reduces their accuracy. Instead,
the methods under development in the Pulary group aim to correct this situation
and have been shown to reduce the computational cost by 4 orders of magnitude;
larger savings are expected for bigger systems. This will allow the use of
accurate theoretical methods for solutions. Pulay has contributed a number of
algorithmic advances in the field of electronic structure theory, beginning with
the analytical gradient technique which is the cornerstone of most current
quantum chemical applications. Other widely used contributions are molecular
geometry optimization, acceleration of the basic method to calculate
wavefunctions (SCF), the calculation of NMR chemical shifts, and Local Electron
Correlation. Pulay and his coworkers also work on utilizing computer simulation
of molecules to improve undergraduate and graduate chemistry education, using
sophisticated computer graphics to convey the information.