* 1213751
* Tuning Surface Chemistry through Polarization
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Eric Altman, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2016
* USD 390,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Eric I. Altman of Yale University will
investigate the fundamentals of how polarization in oxides can be used to
manipulate surface chemical and catalytic properties. The overall program
objective is to understand how polar interfaces can be exploited to induce new
surface chemistry, and to create materials whose surface chemistry can be
dramatically altered by switching the polarization direction of a ferroelectric
support. This understanding is essential to developing new methods to tune
catalytic activity for demanding reactions, to create new classes of materials
that allow surface reactions to be turned on and off, and to create materials
whose surface properties can be reversibly altered and patterned. The objective
is met through three complementary thrusts that all exploit the dramatic
polarization-direction dependent properties of ZnO(0001). The first thrust
focuses on the ability to induce polarization-dependent properties in
catalytically important oxides that are non-polar; the Cr2O3/ZnO (0001) system
will be studied as a prototypical system anticipated to give the largest
polarization dependence possible. The second thrust is directed towards inducing
switchable surface properties in a material that in bulk form is polar but not
ferroelectric. In this case Professor Altman and his students aim to induce
ferroelectricity in ZnO by supporting it as an ultra-thin layer on a
ferroelectric support. The third thrust focuses on new ferroelectric materials
in which the constituent oxides have similar reducibilities and are both
chemically active; ZnSnO3 will be studied as a model for this new class of
materials. The proposed work relies on atomically precise fabrication tools and
characterization methods to determine the intrinsic surface chemical properties
of well-defined surfaces, and collaboration with first principles theory to
understand the mechanisms responsible for the observed behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have a broad impact through its
contributions to education and training in emerging areas of science and
technology. The graduate and undergraduate students working on this project will
get a unique opportunity to develop new strategies for tuning reactivity. To
meet these objectives the students will develop expertise in fields spanning
surface science, materials science, kinetics and dynamics and spectroscopy in a
collaborative environment integrating experiment and theory and international
experiences. In addition, international partnerships will allow students from
overseas to contribute to the project and for Yale students to travel abroad; as
research is now an international endeavor, these partnerships provide valuable
international connections and exposure to international cultures that greatly
benefit the students' future careers.