* 1213456
* RUI: Scattering Theory Casimir Methods and Coherent Structures in the Early Universe
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Noah Graham, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2015
* USD 120,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Noah Graham at Middlebury
College. The work is organized around two distinct, though related, lines of
inquiry.

The first research direction focuses on Casimir forces, which arise from
quantum-mechanical fluctuations of charges and fields. While Casimir forces are
negligible in our everyday experience, at small distances -- in particular, at
distance scales relevant to the next generation of microelectromechanical
devices -- they can become important. Recent progress has established a
systematic framework for calculating these forces in a wide range of situations
relevant to nanotechnology. In this approach, one calculates the Casimir force
by relating it to fundamental quantities associated with the reflection and
scattering of light. This work will create new techniques for computing the
necessary reflection and scattering data, and then will apply the results to a
wide range of Casimir force calculations. The methods to be used to analyze
light reflection and scattering are very general, and thus potentially
applicable to a wide range of problems in physics and engineering. The second
research direction focuses on the role played by oscillons -- extremely long-
lived, localized, oscillatory solutions to the nonlinear equations of motion
that arise in field theory models -- during the "reheating" epoch of the early
universe, following cosmic inflation and the Big Bang. Here large-scale
numerical simulation will play a key role in understanding the self-organizing
behavior through which oscillons emerge from a chaotic thermal background.

Both of these lines of research will have significant broader impacts in other
fields of science and engineering, and in education and training of students.
The Casimir project will develop new computational techniques with a wide range
of potential applications, while the oscillon project will push the current
boundaries of high-performance parallel computing. Through both summer research
projects and integration of aspects of this research into the undergraduate
curriculum at Middlebury College, both projects will also offer significant new
opportunities for students to learn both fundamental physics and broadly
applicable analytic and computational skills.