* 1213127
* HCC: Large: Collaborative Research: DNA Machine Builder: Creative molecular-machine design through mass-scale crowdsourcing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Erik Winfree, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2016
* USD 457,717.00

This project will develop and evaluate methods by which large numbers of humans,
together with computers, can advance the field of synthetic biology by
assembling a corpus of creative designs of molecular machines built from DNA
segments as well as other molecular structures. Specifically, it will develop a
massively-distributed DNA machine construction game that will enable human
worldwide collective creativity to be applied to problems ranging from the
design of novel self-organizing materials to smart therapeutics that can sense
and respond to their environment. The innovative approach is to cast problems of
constructing molecular nano-machines with specific functions as a collaborative
machine design game governed by the rules of DNA strand interactions.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This approach points to a new paradigm for future
science, in which a large group of people together with computers work on
difficult creative problems, finding solutions that could not be found by
computers alone, or by people alone, or without the massive participation of
users. If successful, this approach could change science profoundly, with wide-
ranging impact on many disciplines including nanotechnology, biochemistry,
medicine, and even social and economic behavior analysis. Although the project
specifically focuses on games that use DNA strands as principal building blocks
of nano-machines, the potential set of applications is large, and encompasses
three of the most significant problems facing humanity today. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the computer game is to develop and focus
collective creativity towards a design space of machines governed by DNA
molecular mechanisms. It is currently not known whether this form of
sophisticated scientific design creativity can be developed rapidly with non-
experts. It is also unknown whether this developed creativity can exceed the
current capabilities of the scientific community. This project aims to answer a
number of fundamental questions: How does one develop computer games to maximize
targeted human design creativity? What are the guiding principles of successful
molecular design games? How do we generalize game-development principles to the
widest possible range of synthetic biology problems? How can we develop a
collective creative design process that outperforms any individual creativity?
How do we learn from the way people play the game, and distill their strategies
towards stronger automated approaches? &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The successful
outcomes of this project can have a wide ranging impact on health and medicine.
One such problem is the design of diagnostic devices and imaging technologies.
The game players will work to develop DNA sensors and circuits that can
autonomously analyze and interpret the information encoded in a set of molecular
disease markers. This approach will enable new devices for multi-analyte testing
in low resource settings and will lead to novel medical imaging technologies.
Another challenge is design of novel targeted therapeutics, in this case novel
RNA-based therapeutics that can autonomously sense and analyze their environment
and activate a therapeutic response only where required. A third problem is
design of novel materials. This project will develop DNA nanostructures with the
potential for the massively parallel self-assembly materials with desired
electronic, optical, or chemical properties. These materials will find
applications in areas from artificial photosynthesis to biofuels production.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This effort will have positive broader impacts for
informal science education. The game will reach out to people of all demographic
profiles in hope of educating everyone about key molecular research challenges,
empowering them to solve important scientific problems, and engaging them in
research and science in general. Hopefully, the best scores in these games turn
into seminal discoveries with deep impact on people's lives. Also,
undergraduates will be involved directly in game development, and a course
centered around prototyping of molecular games will be offered. Furthermore, the
research team will work with education scientists to develop a new curriculum
about DNA and how nature uses molecular mechanisms to achieve function. The
curriculum will be anchored around the DNA Machine game and will be piloted in
US high schools.