* 1213019
* Designing Axially Chiral Sensors for Enantioselective Recognition of Chiral Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Christian Wolf, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2015
* USD 412,500.00

Based on funding from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanism Program,
Prof. Christian Wolf's group at the Department of Chemistry at Georgetown
University will develop molecular probes that differentiate between the
enantiomers of chiral amines, alcohols, amino acids and other important classes
of compounds. These molecules provide unique opportunities for time-efficient
enantioselective sensing of minute samples amounts. This program will explore
chiral recognition events and asymmetric induction processes with sensors
derived from axially chiral 1,8-diheteroarylnaphthalene N,N'-dioxides,
1,8-bisphenolnaphthalenes, and intrinsically stereodynamic polyarylacetylenes.
These three classes of sensors are designed (a) to closely embed interactions
with chiral compounds into a highly stereoselective environment (b) to generate
a strong chiroptical response to substrate-controlled induction of axial
chirality in stereodynamic receptor molecules, and (c) to utilize fluorescence,
UV and circular dichroism spectroscopy to quantitatively measure chiral
recognition and induction events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many biologically active
compounds, including pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals, flavors, and nutrients, are
chiral ("left- or right-handed"), and the majority of today's top-selling drugs
are marketed as single enantiomers. The analysis of the enantiomeric composition
of chiral chemicals plays an integral role in the drug discovery process and
during optimization of asymmetric reactions. Real-time enantioselective analysis
with carefully designed sensors that translate a chiral recognition event into a
strong UV, fluorescence or circular dichroism signal holds significant promise
to effectively complement the advance in automated parallel synthesis and
combinatorial methods that can generate large numbers of samples overnight. It
is expected that the fundamental and applied aspects of the proposed research
will benefit academic and industrial chemists alike and provide high-throughput
screening methods that allow rapid enantioselective analysis of large numbers of
samples while minimizing waste production and energy consumption.