* 1213521
* RUI: Thermodynamics of Secondary Aerosol Formation: The Role of Binary and Ternary Nucleation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* George Shields, Bucknell University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2016
* USD 315,000.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Chemistry Division at the
National Science Foundation supports the research of Professor George C. Shields
at Bucknell University for an NSF-RUI program to support four undergraduates in
a summer research experience for three summers and a postdoctoral research
associate for three years. In an effort to understand the initial stages of
secondary aerosol formation, the proposed research will study the most important
binary system in the atmosphere, H2SO4-H2O. Combining molecular dynamics
sampling and high level quantum chemical methods, the minimum energy structures
and the thermodynamics of formation of small molecular clusters will be
determined. The critical cluster size and abundance of the clusters will be
calculated for conditions relevant to the atmosphere. As the binary H2SO4-H2O
itself is not sufficient to explain aerosol formation rates in the atmosphere,
the same methodology will be applied to the ternary H2SO4-ammonia-H2O,
H2SO4-amine-H2O, and H2SO4-ammonia-amine-H2O systems, which have been shown to
enhance the formation of aerosols. The calculated trends in thermodynamics of
cluster formation will be compared with nucleation rates provided by the
principle investigator's experimental collaborator.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A
significant number of undergraduates, including women students and minorities,
will have the opportunity to work side-by-side with the principle investigator
on meaningful research projects in a highly mentored environment. Students will
receive and benefit from intensive training in computational chemistry, and from
this experience will develop skill sets and understanding of the research
process that will serve them well in their scientific careers. A postdoctoral
associate will learn how to develop a meaningful and productive research program
with undergraduate research students and as the only computational chemist in
the department, Professor Shields will expand the exposure and scope of research
and collaborative opportunities for students and faculty in the department.