* 1213409
* Catalytic Regioselective Functionalization of Alkane and Arenes
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* John Hartwig, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2016
* USD 524,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor John F. Hartwig at the University of California, Berkeley
will develop reactions at typically unreactive carbon-hydrogen (C-H) bonds.
Prof. Hartwig's group discovered the borylation of methyl C-H bonds in alkanes
and alkyl groups of functionalized molecules and developed iridium complexes
that catalyze the borylation of aryl and alkyl C-H bonds under mild conditions,
with sterically controlled selectivity, including reactions that occur with high
turnovers. The proposed research builds upon several sets of preliminary data on
the silylation of C-H bonds, the borylation of aliphatic C-H bonds with a new
iridium catalyst, and the factors that control selectivity in these C-H bond
functionalizations. The proposed research will broaden the scope of the
borylations of alkyl C-H bonds to include the borylation of secondary C-H bonds
and activated primary C-H bonds, directed borylations by strategies related to
this group's recently discovered directed silylations of alkyl C-H bonds, and
aspects of intermolecular C-H bond silylations of arenes, heteroarenes, and
alkenes. The proposed research will also gain insight into the mechanism of
silylations and borylations of C-H bonds by preparing boryl and silyl complexes
that are competent to be intermediates in the recently discovered borylations of
aliphatic C-H bonds and silylations of aliphatic and aromatic C-H bonds.

For many years, chemical synthesis has focused on reactions at particular points
of a molecule that contains a reactive array of atoms called "functional
groups." The C-H bonds distal from these functional groups are usually
unreactive with reagents used for conventional synthetic chemistry. The proposed
research focuses on reactions that occur selectively at the C-H bonds of a
molecule that are typically unreactive. One challenge that must be met to
achieve this goal is the selective functionalization of a specific C-H bond in a
molecule. In some cases, the selectivity for one C-H bond results from the
spatial availability of the bond, in some cases from the distribution of
electrons around the bond, and in other cases from the position of a functional
group several atoms away from the C-H bond. Methods to exploit each of these
properties for selectivity will be uncovered. This research will lead to new
methods to conduct chemical synthesis in fewer steps, with less waste, and with
less reliance on the installation and protection of functional groups. In
addition, this research creates the underlying principles on which future design
of catalysts and processes for more efficient synthesis are based. This may
impact the synthesis of useful materials such as polymers containing new
properties, organic molecules with enhanced abilities to emit light, components
of catalysts for other reactions, organic probes for understanding biological
systems, and components of medicinally important molecules. Work emanating from
the proposed research has become part of new curricula for the classroom, short-
courses, many external lectures, and a major textbook project that was recently
completed by the PI.