* 1213247
* Structure and Dynamics of Strongly Interacting Systems in the Condensed Phase: From Glasses to Quantum Transport.
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* David Reichman, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2015
* USD 420,000.00

David Reichman of Columbia University is supported by the Chemical Theory,
Models and Computational Methods program to develop theoretical tools to
investigate classical glassy liquids as well as quantum energy transfer and
charge transport in condensed phase and nanoscale systems. In the first part of
the program, new approaches are outlined to isolate and quantify growing
structural order in supercooled liquids. The length scale associated with
growing amorphous order is used to predict dynamical behavior in liquids as they
approach the glass transition. In addition, the information obtained on a host
of growing length scales (both structural and dynamic) is used to test and
distinguish competing theories of the glass transition. In the second and third
parts of the program novel methods are developed to describe real-time transport
in condensed phase quantum systems. These methodologies include development of
our RDM-Hybrid approach to understand energy and electron transfer in condensed
media in the difficult cases of intermediate coupling germane to charge
transport in organic crystals and aggregates, and a combination of our recent
advance in electronic structure theory for strong static correlation (the DMFT
for molecules approach) with our newly developed realtime "bold" Monte Carlo
technique. This combination will allow, for the first time, a rigorous
description of real-time quantum transport in driven systems where charge is
transported through transition-metal containing clusters.

In addition to the fundamental impact associated with a better understanding of
the glass transition, the isolation and quantification of growing amorphous
order may lead to better strategies for the design of targeted material
properties in amorphous solids. The realistic description of transport
properties in quantum condensed phase systems will have technological impact via
a greater understanding of the fundamental events that underlie processes such
as those that occur in solar energy conversion. In addition a program to
communicate cutting edge science to high school students and the general public
is being planned through collaboration with the New York Academy of Sciences.