* 1213971
* RUI: Production of Highly Reactive Metal-Oxo Species with Molecular Oxygen and Visible Light for the Selective Oxidative Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Rui Zhang, Western Kentucky University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2016
* USD 266,999.00

With this award from the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Prof. Rui Zhang and his students at the Western Kentucky University
(WKU) will develop sustainable, "green" and selective oxidation catalysis via
high-valent transition metal-oxo species using molecular oxygen and visible
light (sunlight). The proposed photocatalytic cycle involves the following: 1)
visible light-induced disproportionation of the mu-oxo metal(IV) macrocycle
dimeric complex to form metal(III) and metal(V)-oxo oxidizing species; 2)
substrate oxidation by the resulting reactive metal(V)-oxo species to give
oxidized products and a second metal(III) species; concluding with 3) aerobic
oxidation of the metal(III) complex to regenerate the mu-oxo dinuclear metal(IV)
complex. The approach will include synthesis and identification of ligand and
metal(IV) dimer types for efficient photo-disproportionation reactions and
optimization of the catalytic conditions by elucidating key factors. An
important goal will be to reveal the reaction scope of the developed
photocatalytic methods.

This work will address globally important energy and environmental issues. The
use of molecular oxygen and sunlight without the need for an external co-
reductant in oxidative catalysis is particularly relevant to realizing
innovative and economically advantageous processes for conversion of
hydrocarbons into oxygenates and, at the same time, to move toward a
"sustainable chemistry" that has a minimal environmental impact. This work will
also generate insight into important chemical and structural factors that govern
photocatalytic properties and processes. Furthermore, it will integrate research
and education through training and educating students at WKU, a primarily
undergraduate institution. This interdisciplinary research is of significant
interest to students and offers them a broad view of chemical research that will
enhance student learning and success as emerging professionals. Many of these
students will pursue doctorate degrees upon graduating. The PI and the research
team have a strong record of actively involving and training undergraduate
researchers. This project will also reach out to the exceptional science
students attending the newly formed Commonwealth of Kentucky residential Math
and Science Gatton Academy located on the campus of WKU as well as the recently
established 5-year B.S./M.S. program in the Department of Chemistry.