* 1213888
* Fundamental Physics and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Alexander Vilenkin, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2015
* USD 600,000.00

This award funds the research of Professor Alexander Vilenkin at Tufts
University.

Recent developments in cosmology suggest that much of the universe is in a state
of explosive accelerated expansion, called inflation. We live in a "bubble"
where inflation has ended, and other bubbles with diverse properties are
constantly being formed. A major unresolved problem in this theory of eternal
inflation is the problem of calculating relative probabilities of different
measurements. In the course of eternal inflation, any event having a nonzero
probability will happen an infinite number of times, and comparing infinities is
an inherently ambiguous task. The challenge is to formulate a compelling
probability measure prescription. This will put the theory on a much firmer
footing and will (at least in principle) allow its observational tests. Another
major topic of this research is the evolution and observational signatures of
cosmic strings. Strings can be formed as high-energy linear defects in the early
universe and can produce a variety of observational effects at the present time.
A detection of cosmic strings would be of great importance, as it would open a
unique window into the physics of very high energies and into the early history
of the universe.

This project is also envisioned to have significant broader impacts. The new
worldview that has emerged from the eternal inflation scenario has far-reaching
implications beyond physics. Professor Vilenkin will continue presenting these
ideas in public lectures, in popular articles, and in popular magazine and TV
interviews. The research described above will be done with active collaboration
of graduate students and postdocs, thus providing crucial training to the young
physicists.