* 1213381
* Surface Chemistry of Complex Multi-Element Metal Oxides
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Kevin Smith, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* James Lisy
* 02/29/2016
* USD 396,750.00

In this research, supported by the Chemical Structures, Dynamics and Mechanisms
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Prof. Kevin E. Smith from Boston
University will use a powerful combination of x-ray spectroscopies to measure
the surface electronic structure and chemical reactivity of complex multi-
element metal oxides. The surface chemistry of these oxides is of fundamental
scientific importance due to the significant role they play in catalysis, energy
generation, and energy storage. While the chemical properties of many simple
stochiometric metal oxides are well understood, this is not the case for oxides
that contain multiple metal elements and have non-stochiometric and/or defective
surfaces. The goal of this program is to understand the fundamental mechanisms
controlling the chemical reaction of small molecules with the surfaces of such
oxides under a wide range of physical conditions. In doing so, the results of
this program will allow basic scientific knowledge of complex metal oxide
surface chemistry to be applied to problems of importance in numerous
applications, not least in solid oxide fuel cells, but also in solar and
electrolytic water-splitting devices, and metal-air batteries. This program
holds the promise of transforming the understanding of the surfaces and
interfaces of complex oxide materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an ambitious
research program that uses intense x-rays to the study the fundamental physical
properties of a class of materials of great technological and scientific
importance, namely compounds of numerous metal atoms and oxygen atoms. These
materials are used in catalysis, in energy generation devices such as fuel
cells, and in energy storage devices such as batteries. The program aims to
produce definitive measurements of the chemical reactivity and electronic
properties of these complex metal oxides, and thus greatly expand our
understanding of such materials. It addresses important problems in renewable
energy generation, namely measuring the fundamental parameters that control the
efficiency of fuel cells and other energy devices.