* 1213161
* Single cell transcriptome analysis: a chemical approach for studying mammalian gene regulation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2017
* John Zhong, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 06/30/2017
* USD 320,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes program is supporting the
research of Professor Zhong of the University of Southern California. Professor
Zhong will investigate the reprogramming mechanism of mammalian cells with
single-cell transcriptome analysis. Although traditional cell lysate approaches
provide significant quantities of RNA for analysis, the temporal and
quantitative gene expression information is erased and averaged among all cells
in the lysate. The "lost key" of gene regulatory relationships is to be found in
single-cell transcriptomic analysis as opposed to the averaged cell lysate-
techniques currently used in many traditional studies. The Zhong group will
induce the expression of reprogramming factors (RFs) in cells to determine which
genes are regulated by the induced-RFs at the single-cell level. This study will
provide molecular information to dissect the genetic mechanism of reprogramming,
deepen our understanding of cell fate decision, and demonstrate a novel chemical
approach, single-cell transcriptome analysis, for chemical/cell
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The microfluidics/cell sorting/qPCR approach to
single cell transcriptome analysis is expected to have broad scientific
applications to problems at the chemistry/biology interface, far beyond the
scope of this grant. As important, the project will contribute to education and
training at the high school, undergraduate and graduate levels and involve
efforts to broaden participation of under-represented minorities in modern
chemical biology research. Plans for community outreach and "virtual lab"
development also in place, and expected to widen the reach of this multi-
disciplinary approach to research at the intersection of at the chemistry,
nanoscale engineering and cell biology.