* 1213795
* Syntheses and Characterizations of Efficient Visible-light Driven Photocatalytic Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Pingyun Feng, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

With this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program, Prof. Pingyun Feng
of the University of California at Riverside (UCR) will develop new visible-
light-driven semiconducting heterogeneous photocatalysts for water splitting.
Semiconducting materials lie at the foundation for the construction of devices
for capture, conversion, and storage of solar energy. To achieve low-cost and
efficient solar energy conversion, the discovery of efficient semiconductor
materials and new conversion pathways is essential. The overall goal of this
research is to design and synthesize efficient visible-light-driven
photocatalytic materials based on crystalline metal oxides while developing a
solid understanding of materials-design principles such as band engineering
mechanism and composition-structure-property relationship. The principal
investigator (PI) will focus on developing low-cost versatile synthetic methods
to synthesize photocatalytic materials with highly responsive visible-light
activity. Strategies for maximizing the visible-light activity include (1)
compositional and structural control to achieve band gap engineering, (2)
crystallinity and morphological control to enhance efficient charge separation,
and (3) optical, photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic measurements to provide
guidance for further tuning and optimizing synthetic
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research addresses an important
energy and environmental issue: the use of renewable and non-polluting energy.
It aims to develop new multi-functional materials suitable for energy production
and storage such as conversion of renewable solar energy to hydrogen fuel that
is environmentally friendly. It will also provide a fundamental understanding of
important chemical and structural factors that govern photocatalytic properties
and processes. This will allow rational synthetic design and optimization of
advanced materials for solar energy conversion and fuel production. Furthermore
it will positively impact a very diverse student population since UCR has a
large enrollment of minority students, and undergraduate research is strongly
encouraged at this institution and in the PI's group. The research project
combines diversity in materials synthesis and various characterization
techniques and provides excellent training opportunities for students. The
students' research experiences with this project can have a major impact in
their scientific career in research areas of increasing importance to our
society.