* 1213259
* Scroll Wave Dynamics in Heterogeneous Reaction-Diffusion Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Oliver Steinbock, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2016
* USD 395,249.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program
of the Division of Chemistry, the research group of Professor Oliver Steinbock
(Florida State University, FSU) will investigate self-organizing wave patterns
in autocatalytic reaction-diffusion systems. These far-from-equilibrium systems
are a treasure trove for 21st century science. They create intricate regulatory
networks, exhibit fascinating dynamics, and generate information-relaying
patterns that one typically expects to find only in biology. The project focuses
on understudied processes in three-dimensional excitable media and specifically
on rotating scroll waves. These dissipative structures are formed by propagating
regions of autocatalytic activity and trailing "refractory zones" of high
inhibitor concentration. The primary goal is to establish a complete description
of vortex pinning and vortex unpinning in three-dimensional excitable systems.
An important example is the distinction between true pinning to small
heterogeneities and mere surface termination of the vortices' rotation backbone.
Experiments will include weakly excitable, curved, and moving heterogeneities
that should allow the active repositioning and reshaping of scroll waves. These
challenging studies can be pursued using photochemical methods and/or computer-
controlled motion of solid objects. The latter approach will induce fluid flow
in the reactive solution but should not affect pattern stability below threshold
values that the will be characterized systematically during the project. If
successful, these studies will also provide a novel approach to chemo-
hydrodynamic systems. Another goal is to demonstrate and analyze the unpinning
of scroll rings from heterogeneities in BZ-gel systems using externally
controlled electric fields and temperature gradients. The project will test a
hypothesis that unpinning can proceed via tilting of the scroll ring relative to
the pinning, torus-shaped anchor or alternatively via radial expansion. These
investigations will be complemented by kinematic modeling efforts and
computational studies of three-dimensional reaction-diffusion models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the chemical research under this project is
motivated by the self-organization of living systems. A striking example is the
motion of electrical patterns in the human heart that orchestrate the healthy or
disturbed pump action of this vital organ. Spinning, vortex-like states have
been linked to tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation with the latter being
among the leading causes of death for Americans. Highly reproducible experiments
with simpler chemical systems have and will reveal important insights into these
states. The research team around Prof. Steinbock will specifically investigate
how such vortices are changed, reshaped, and possibly stabilized by less active
regions. In the context of the heart such regions correspond to scar tissue
caused by traumatic events such as heart attacks. This multi-faceted research is
also ideally suited for the modern training of undergraduate, graduate, and
postdoctoral students. Furthermore Prof. Steinbock will continue his firm
commitment to foster underrepresented groups and participate in mentoring
programs that aim to increase their leadership roles in research and academia.
Specific activities include the production of videos for FSU's Global
Educational Outreach Program and YouTube. In addition, Prof. Steinbock will
participate in FSU's Honors Research Program for first-year students and
contribute to the "Saturday Morning Physics" lecture series for local pre-
college students.