* 1213241
* Study of the Reaction between Nitrogen Monoxide and Carbon Monoxide in the Presence of Double Metal Cyanides for the Potential Application as Emission Control Catalyst
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Jianfeng Jiang, Yeshiva University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2016
* USD 109,926.00

With this award from the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Chemistry Division at
the National Science Foundation, Professor Jianfeng Jiang of Yeshiva University
will study the reaction of nitrogen monoxide and carbon monoxide in the presence
of double metal cyanides (DMC) for the potential application as emission control
catalysts. The proposed study will start with the exploration of the synthesis
of first row transition metal mixed cyanide/carbon monoxide complexes that are
also of fundamental interest. Afterwards, studies of the reactivity of the
carbon monoxide-coordinating metal cyanides or DMCs with nitrogen
monoxide/dinitrogen monoxide will follow. The studies will also include analysis
of nitrogen monoxide/dinitrogen monoxide with carbon monoxide in the presence of
DMCs.

This research is relevant because of the possibility of preparing new carbon
monoxide-coordinating metal cyanides, new types of DMCs and high temperature
stable carbon monoxide-coordinating polymers, and the potential for developing
alternative emission control catalysts. For example, if the reduction of
nitrogen monoxide/dinitrogen monoxide to dinitrogen by carbon monoxide is
greatly accelerated by a DMC, this DMC can be used to replace precious rhodium,
platinum and palladium metal inside catalytic converters. In addition,
undergraduate students who participate in the research will benefit by having
first-hand research experience, working on solving problems directly related to
our environment, manuscript writing and communicating results in formal
presentations.