* 1213350
* Proton coupled electron transfer and beta hairpin maquettes: Biomimetic prototypes for artificial energy conversion
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Bridgette Barry, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2016
* USD 400,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes program and the MPS Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities supports the research of Professor Bridgette Barry
of Georgia Institute of Technology. The Barry group will design and assemble
bio-inspired, peptide constructs for light-driven energy conversion. Proton
coupled electron transfer (PCET) reactions are critical in a variety of
important biological processes, including photosynthesis, respiration, DNA
synthesis and repair, and prostaglandin synthesis. The Barry group seeks to
assemble nanoscale, peptide-based devices, which can carry out similar
reactions. These maquettes (or models) will provide water-soluble, stable redox
agents with tunable redox potentials, kinetics, and directional control of
charge transfer. These model studies are designed to generate fundamental new
insights relevant to artificial energy conversion, and enzymatic catalysis.

The broad scientific goal of these studies is to improve our understanding of
proton coupled electron transfer. There are translational implications of the
work, i.e. the construction of nanoscale prototype peptides has the long term
potential to lead to manmade devices, to be used in artificial solar energy
conversion, nanowires, diodes, and fuel cells. The educational broader impact of
these activities lies in an inherently interdisciplinary training environment
that takes its cues from biology, but seeks to use a combination of peptide
chemistry and biophysical chemistry to develop minimalist peptide-based systems
to elucidate fundamental aspects of PCET. Professor Barry will continue to
strive to provide an environment that promotes broadening the scientific
participation of underrepresented groups.