* 1213598
* Selective Copper and Iron Recognition and Sensing by Yeast Regulatory Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Chuan He, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2015
* USD 350,000.00

In this award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Dr. Chuan He, from the University of Chicago, will develop a set of
genetically encoded probes that can monitor copper and iron in live cells. To
this end the He group has been working on understanding the molecular mechanisms
of selective copper- and iron-binding by a group of yeast regulatory proteins.
These proteins exhibit high sensitivity and selectivity in regulating the uptake
and export of copper and iron in order to balance cellular concentrations of
these essential metals. Through biochemical and structural characterization of
these proteins, the He group plans to reveal the underlying mechanisms of metal
selectivity. The new knowledge will aid the design and development of probes
that can selectively recognize and image copper and iron in live cells. Further
protein engineering will be performed to increase the dynamic range of the
probes. The success of this research program will provide the first sets of
genetically encoded copper and iron probes that can be used as tools for
understanding the fundamental chemistry of copper and iron in live cells.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximately one third of naturally occurring proteins
utilize metal ions for essential biological functions. Copper and iron are
essential for almost all life forms, and careful balance of these ions in living
systems is crucial to avoid potential toxicity while satisfying physiological
needs. This project focuses on understanding the exact mechanisms underlying a
group of proteins that can recognize copper or iron with high selectivity among
many other metal ions in nature. The knowledge learned will be used to develop
probes that allow researchers to image essential metal ions in live cells. The
availability of these probes will make possible direct visualization of the
intracellular movement and metabolism of these metal ions and their chemistry
inside healthy or diseased cells. The tools developed in this project could help
chemists and biologists gain fundamental new insight into the roles of copper
and iron in biology.