* 1213759
* Receptor Mediated Circular Dichroism Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Babak Borhan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2016
* USD 505,500.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program is
supporting the research of Professor Babak Borhan (Michigan State University) in
the area of chiroptical spectroscopy. With prior NSF CAREER funding, his
laboratory has shown that porphyrin tweezers (two metalloporphyrins linked via
an alkyl linker) can serve as host systems for chiral guest molecules, which
upon complexation lead to an observable circular dichroic (CD) spectrum. The
resultant spectrum is easily deciphered to extract stereochemical information of
the bound chiral guest molecule. The advantages are that the methodology is non-
empirical in assignment of helicity for the interacting porphyrins, it is micro-
scale in nature requiring microgram amounts of chiral substrate, it is non-
destructive (chiral material can be recovered), has little prep work, and
provides the answer in a matter of minutes. Future work will focus on expanding
the repertoire of host systems such that a larger subset of chiral organic
molecules can succumb to analysis. Most importantly, guest molecules that only
have one site of complexation (thus cannot complex with both porphyrins of the
tweezer) require a new strategy. It is hypothesized that appropriately designed
pseudo-cage host systems with the ability to complex molecules that contain only
one site of attachment will predominantly adopt either a P or M helicity upon
interaction with chiral guest substrates. The resultant complex is CD active and
will provide information required for analysis of absolute stereochemistry. The
target chiral molecules for absolute stereochemical determinations are alcohols,
amines, diols, diamines, epoxy alcohols, and hydroxy ketones, saturated and
unsaturated heterocyclic molecules, and molecules with remote stereochemistry,
to name a few. The latter list of compound families is a large subset of chiral
molecules that serve as chiral pool reagents for numerous applications in
organic synthesis, organic materials, and the medicinal and pharmaceutical
arena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A routine, microscale, easy, and reliable method for
stereochemical determinations is critical in many areas of chemistry and
biology, benefiting a large number of researchers in the latter areas. The
nature of the research proposed here is interdisciplinary. Student training will
couple chemical synthesis with the design of chromophoric hosts based on a
thorough understanding of molecular and structural dynamics. The students will
also have to be proficient and knowledgeable spectroscopists. The proposal also
has elements that are fit for less accomplished students to participate in
research. For the past ten years, the group has organized and directed the
Project SEED program at Michigan State University. Continuing to recruit, train,
and scientifically stimulate high school students will be a top priority. The
training of undergraduate students will be no less important.