* 1213811
* High-Precision Spectroscopy of CH5+: Demystifying the Ro-Vibrational Spectrum
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Benjamin McCall, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2016
* USD 460,000.00

Benjamin McCall of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaig, is supported
by an award from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms program in the
Chemistry division to implement two complementary experiments to study the high-
resolution infrared spectrum of CH5+. This ion is the prototypical carbonium ion
of the type so successfully used by George Olah and colleagues for superacid
chemistry, and is also a critical intermediate in interstellar chemistry. A
high-resolution ro-vibrational spectrum consisting of nearly 1000 lines was
obtained over a decade ago, and remains completely unassigned. The first
experiment aims to record the CH5+ spectrum at room temperature with sub-MHz
precision and accuracy using cavity-enhanced velocity modulation spectroscopy,
to enable the first experimental determination of ground-state energy level
spacings using the method of four-line combination differences. Our second
experiment aims to record the CH5+ spectrum using a novel fast ion beam
spectrometer fed by a continuous supersonic expansion discharge source, to
provide the first unambiguous, high-precision spectrum of CH5+ at low
temperature; this in turn enables the experimental determination of the energies
of the lowest rotational energy levels of CH5+. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Taken
together, these experiments should provide the first understanding of the ro-
vibrational structure of this enigmatic molecule, and enable McCall and
coworkers to construct an energy level diagram of the ground vibrational state
of this ion for the first time. Ultimately, this new understanding should also
enable the radio-astronomical detection of this important ion in dense
interstellar clouds. This research, and associated activities, can be expected
to have a broad impact in terms of enhancing interdisciplinary research,
training undergraduate and graduate students, and integrating teaching and
research. The overarching theme of these efforts is to bring together the
chemistry, astronomy, and physics communities, and to encourage cross-
fertilization between these three disciplines.