* 1213682
* Structure, dynamics and solvation in heterogeneous environments
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Grzegorz Szamel, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2016
* USD 420,000.00

Prof. Branka Ladanyi is supported by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models
and Computational Methods program for research dealing with systems in which
fluid interfaces or microheterogeneities play an important role. Several such
systems are considered. One set includes fluids confined either in surfactant
assemblies on in silica nanopores. Another concerns the properties of water in
solvation shells of molecules of biological relevance. The methods of approach
involve statistical mechanical theory and computer simulation. The work on
fluids in surfactant assemblies deals with two types of systems. One of these is
reverse micelles (RMs) in which surfactant-coated water droplets are dispersed
in a continuous nonpolar phase. Atomistic RM models are being developed and
their properties are being investigated as functions of water content w0 =
[H2O]/[surfactant], a parameter closely related to water droplet size. Following
up on their work on model development of RMs formed by anionic surfactant AOT,
the research group is working on developing an atomistic model for RMs formed by
the cationic surfactant CTAB (cetyltrimethylammonium bromide), determining the
structure and dynamics as a function of w0 and comparing the results to relevant
experimental data. The next task is to investigate solvation of molecular ions
in RMs, determining how solute-surfactant electrostatic interactions influence
solute location within the RM and how they are reflected in the solute time-
resolved infrared spectra. The other type of system under study contains water
and perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS) surfactant and serves as a model for
fuel cell membrane materials. Water and ion mobility is being investigated in
these systems as water content varies and the surfactant undergoes transitions
between lamellar and hexagonal phases. The work on fluids in silica nanopores
builds on earlier studies of the properties of water confined in approximately
cylindrical pores of varying diameter. Research is also being made into
calculating and analyzing the observable in quasi-elastic neutron scattering
(QENS) of water confined in nanopores and investigating how pore hydrophilicity
and anisotropy influence molecular rotational and translational dynamics
detectable by QENS. Studies are also being made into the interfacial structure
and dynamics of liquids composed of molecules that are anisotropic in shape and
polarizability, starting with benzene and its fluorinated analogs. Contact with
experiment is made by modeling collective polarizability anisotropy dynamics
observable by optical Kerr effect. The work is in collaboration with research
groups at the University of Perugia in the study of aqueous oligosaccharide
solutions using depolarized light scattering (DLS) and molecular dynamics (MD)
simulation. The goal of this work is to map out and develop a better
understanding of the dynamics of water in solvation shells of biomolecules. The
approach includes measuring DLS spectra of solutions at varying concentrations
of biomolecules, modeling the spectra via MD and molecular theory and analyzing
them in terms of contributions from different species, their interactions and
correlations. In addition to oligosaccharides, the project includes studies of
aqueous solutions of oligopeptides and proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
studies deal with liquids confined in nanopores and surfactant assemblies as
well as with complex aqueous mixtures, using methods of theoretical and
computational chemistry. Understanding the properties of these systems at the
molecular level is important in areas beyond physical chemistry. Aqueous
interfaces with ionic surfactants are a feature of biological systems such as
proteins and cell membranes. Understanding such systems is of technological
importance, related to electrochemistry, fuel cells, oil recovery, and
environmental clean-up, among others. Understanding the properties of liquids
confined in nanopores is important in heterogeneous catalysis, separations,
lubrication, and microfluidics. This research in the properties of aqueous
solutions provides information on water interactions with biomolecules and about
the molecular basis for biopreservation. Students and postdocs working on this
project are learning theoretical and computational methods of statistical
mechanics of many-body systems and applying them to systems and phenomena
relevant to chemistry, materials science, and biochemistry. Since the proposal
includes collaborative work with experimental groups, they have the opportunity
of learning how their work applies to real systems and how the quantities that
they are calculating are measured.