* 1213983
* NSCC/SA: Avoiding Water Wars: Environmental Security Through River Treaty Institutionalization
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Jaroslav Tir, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2013
* USD 59,045.00

This award was funded through the Social and Behavioral Dimensions of National
Security, Conflict, and Cooperation competition, a joint venture between NSF and
the Department of Defense.

The goal of this project is to determine whether and how international
institutions can prevent and manage conflicts between riparian states. Due to
population growth, pollution, development, and climate change, humanity is
facing the prospect of inadequate access to water, which is straining the
Earth's international river systems. The growing consumption of river water has
important implications for global security, as the unregulated use of rivers
exacerbates problems of pollution and water scarcity and increases the risk of
political and military conflict between states.

This project focuses specifically on treaties that govern the use of
international rivers. The central hypothesis is that the ability of a river
treaty to prevent conflict depends on the treaty's level of institutionalization
that is the extent of formal institutional features it provides to oversee the
agreement. The impact of four institutional features is investigated: monitoring
provisions, conflict management provisions, enforcement mechanisms, and
permanent intergovernmental organizations. The theory posits two different
casual mechanisms. First, by supporting the cooperative management of rivers,
treaty institutionalization can address the core problem of water scarcity and
prevent the emergence of conflict. Second, in the event that disputes over
rivers do arise, treaty institutionalization can provide mechanisms to resolve
them before they escalate to militarized conflict. These expectations are tested
using a large sample of river treaties signed between 1950 and 2007 and on
several different outcomes: the emergence of competing claims to a river,
militarization of those claims, dispute settlement attempts, and successful
conflict resolution.

This project represents a novel extension of theories of international
institutions and international law into the topic of environmental security. It
presents a new theoretical model of the effect of international institutions on
conflict based on two distinct causal mechanisms, and tests the predictions of
this model with a comprehensive data set. It builds on and extends a growing
number of empirical studies of the management and resolution of conflicts over
rivers by treating river cooperation agreements in a much more detailed and
nuanced fashion. The findings of this study also have implications for the
extant literature on conflict management, the design of international
institutions, and compliance with international law.

This project will inform policy in an area of growing importance to global
security. If international institutions do promote cooperation and facilitate
conflict management, then supporting the creation of institutionalized river
treaties should be a natural policy response to the growing problem of water
scarcity. Promoting the management of rivers through institutionalized
agreements could help prevent the water wars that some scholars anticipate in
the coming decades. Thus, institutions could play an important part in a
proactive foreign policy that seeks to prevent or manage conflicts over water,
heading off the need for greater military involvement after those conflicts
escalate. This is also relevant for global climate change, given that some of
the many anticipated consequences of climate change are widespread reductions
and significant irregularities in the volume of river flows. The promotion of
new and improvement of existing river treaties present considerable
opportunities because over half of the World's rivers are not yet covered by any
agreement while well over one-half of the existing treaties are only minimally
institutionalized. But the optimal design of (new) agreements will require a
detailed and rigorous understanding of the effects and utility of specific
institutional features.