* 1213269
* Metal Complexes Of Donor-Bridge-Acceptor Biradical Ligands: From Nanoscopic Electron Correlation To Inhibition Of Back Electron Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* David Shultz, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2016
* USD 390,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis program (SYN) of NSF's Division
of Chemistry, Professor David A. Shultz of the North Carolina State University
and his students are investigating donor-acceptor interactions that are
ubiquitous in both nature and in molecular electronics. Research in this area
includes a wealth of effort aimed at developing an understanding of how
molecular bridge (B) fragments facilitate electron transfer between donors (D)
and acceptors (A), especially over long distances. This project will show how
the electron spin exchange coupling in semiquinone-nitronylnitroxide (SQ-B-NN)
D-B-A biradical ligands can be used to reveal key structure-property
relationships concerning the electronic coupling matrix element, H_DA.
Elucidating these fundamental structure-property relationships can lead to
significant advances in our understanding of electron transfer/transport in
molecule-based devices as well as suggest novel molecular architectures for such
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to prepare and
characterize molecules designed to clarify and to advance our understanding of
how electrons are transferred from one part of a molecule to another. Electron
transfer is ubiquitous in both nature (e.g., photosynthesis) and in the
marketplace (electronic devices). The results will advance our understanding of
intramolecular interactions that control electron transfer and may revolutionize
the design of molecules for electronics. This research area provides excellent
training for students in the areas of molecular design, synthesis, spectroscopy
and theory. In addition, the PI will support students from a local HBCU for
summer research.