* 1213293
* Plasmonic Spectra and Sensing of Individual Subwavelength Particles Under the IR Microscope:  Cells, Inkjet Spots, and Airborne Dust
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Jim Coe, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2015
* USD 450,000.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Professor James V. Coe of the Ohio State University and
his graduate student and undergraduate student researchers will be supported to
develop methods for the spectroscopic study of particulate matter. The research
will use metal films with arrays of subwavelength-sized holes to obtain
plasmonic-enhanced infrared spectra of trapped particles. The Coe group will
also work on developing, calibrating and testing a Mie-Bruggeman model for
analyzing the spectra that are obtained. The researchers will study the spectra
of airborne dust particles from a variety of environments and will investigate
the production of arrays modified with latex spheres and inkjet spots. The
researchers will also attempt to build an instrument capable of recording the
spectra of single particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Infrared spectroscopy is an
important analytical method that gives rich, detailed information about the
chemical composition of matter. The work of Professor Coe and his student
colleagues is aimed at providing scientists with information about the chemical
composition of particulate matter. This research is important in that the small
particles that the groups study are comparable to the kinds of respirable
particles that can lead to a variety of health impacts. Besides the broader
scientific impact of this research, the research students participating in this
research will be exposed to cutting-edge research in analytical chemistry with a
talented researcher and educator.