* 1213038
* III: Large: Collaborative Research: Moving Objects Databases for Exploration of Virtual and Real Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2018
* Goce Trajcevski, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 03/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Researchers at Florida International University (IIS-1213026), University of
Illinois at Chicago (IIS-1213013), Brown University (IIS-1212508), and
Northwestern University (IIS-1213038) are developing a high-performance model
for information processing and fusion in mobile environments, providing a
collaborative integration between the real and virtual worlds. This model,
applicable to the fields of computational transportation and mobile sensing,
enables querying and visualization of moving objects data (MOD) and their
relationship to static and dynamic geospatial data. Research project addresses
the issues of: balancing the processing of location-based data streams coming
into MOD servers with efficient processing of visualization-related queries;
determining optimal distribution of queries/tasks among multiple regional
servers; maximizing the scalability of prediction techniques in terms of
efficient management of objects' data and queries; modeling data uncertainty;
coupling map generalization with trajectories' data reduction when zooming
across different scales; resolving issues of privacy and security; and enabling
semantic querying. A demonstration of the outcomes is available within the
TerraFly testbed (http://TerraFly.fiu.edu) -- a public Geographic Information
System (GIS) mapping engine and location-based data
repository.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work explores the novel steps towards
combining the real and virtual worlds, an emerging research frontier. The
virtual world is relatively well understood, but the combination of the real and
virtual poses great challenges and promises transformative results with high
potential payoff, including in-car navigation systems, massive fleets of mobile
sensors, self-navigating vehicles, situation command, and location-based
services. While advancing Computer Science, the project also leverages prior
investment of, and provides direct benefit to, NSF, NASA, DoI, DoT, DHS, and
other stakeholders such as the NSF EarthCube project. By improving the
efficiency of spatial, temporal, and moving object data management and making
these results available to constituencies via TerraFly, EarthCube and other
venues, the project will produce societal benefits. This project provides a
foundation for improving the quality of services in multiple applications such
as disaster management, environmental monitoring, transportation, education, and
logistics. The resulting technologies may serve as a base to advance research on
self-navigating vehicles, robots, and mobile sensors. In particular, this work
facilitates the technologies of Informed Traveler Programs, dynamic navigation,
situation control, and airborne observational systems. The project provides rich
educational and research opportunities for students from the collaborating
institutions -- including underrepresented students. In addition, educational
modules are developed, and research results will be incorporated in curriculum
expansions. Further information is available at the project's website
(http://CAKE.fiu.edu/MOD).