* 1213612
* Rapid Response Research (RAPID) Proposal to NSF Hydrologic Sciences: Impacts of Forest Fire on Snow Accumulation and Melt
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Anne Nolin, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 01/31/2013
* USD 18,436.00

Recent work documenting snow-vegetation interactions in burned and unburned
forests show that burned forests experience increased snow accumulation but
earlier and more rapid melt. Burned areas also experience higher wind speeds and
as a result, increased sublimation losses and sensible heat inputs. At the
local-to-watershed scale, wildfire-derived black carbon sloughing from burned
trees onto the snowpack has been suggested as an additional important forcing of
earlier melt and anecdotal evidence suggests that snowpacks in the wildfire
areas appear to be experiencing this forcing. The effects of fire are likely to
represent a new paradigm for snow-vegetation dynamics and their hydrologic
impacts.

This hydrologic research will focus on a recently burned headwaters catchment,
Shadow Lake in the Oregon Cascades, which typically receives over 2 m of snow
water equivalent each winter. This research will provide substantial direct
results on the impacts of wildfire on snowpack accumulation and ablation and the
magnitudes of the mechanisms involved. Paired sites will allow us to quantify
site differences, 3-dimensional measurements will provide key vegetation
structure information, transects provide information across burned-unburned
gradients and between recent and older burn sites, and data from monitoring
networks will provide key spatial and temporal contextual information. The
results of this work will provide important insights into the hydrologic impacts
of fire on snowpack dynamics with potential to redefine the paradigm of snow-
vegetation interactions in fire-affected watersheds.