* 1213574
* Fluorescent Heteroditopic Ligands - Coordination Chemistry, Photophysics, and Sensing Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Lei Zhu, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2016
* USD 363,000.00

With the support of an award from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanism
Program (CSDM) at the National Science Foundation, Professor Lei Zhu at the
Florida State University will lead a research program that investigates the
fundamental photophysics and coordination chemistry of fluorescent heteroditopic
ligands. This work may lead to the development of fluorescent indicators for
quantitative analytical applications using fluorescence microscopic means. The
preliminary data from the PI's laboratory introduced the coumarin-based dual-
emitting molecules as suitable structural platforms for studying the mechanism
of dual emission. In the proposed work, steady state and time-resolved
spectroscopic experiments will be used to reveal a kinetic model to account for
dual fluorescence. Furthermore, dual fluorescence that is tunable via engineered
interactions between electron acceptor moieties and a target molecule in a
heteroditopic ligand framework offers opportunities for ratiometric sensor
development. The proposed investigations on the fluorescent heteroditopic
ligands containing a spirolactam form of rhodamine shall reveal the factors that
govern the efficiency of intramolecular electron transfer of spirolactam-
containing fluorophores, and the kinetics of spirolactam ring-opening. Resolving
these two issues will advance the fundamental understanding on the rhodamine
spirolactam chemistry, which provides a sound basis for incorporating rhodamine
spirolactam in a sensor structure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award to Professor
Zhu at the Florida State University will lead to results that enrich the
knowledge base on the fundamental molecular photophysics and coordination
chemistry. Furthermore, tunable dual-fluorescing heteroditopic ligands can be
developed into ratiometric fluorescent sensors when a specific interaction
between the fluorophore and a target molecule is designed into the fluorophore
structure. Investigations on the rhodamine spirolactam chemistry and the metal-
coordination dependent ring-opening kinetics will aid further sensor development
based on this system with a largest possible signal-to-noise ratio. Some of the
broader impacts of the proposed activities derive from the PI's commitment to
teaching, and to advocating the dissemination of cutting-edge scientific
research to the broader public. With the support of this award, a course on the
societal/cultural interests on chemical research to chemistry majors and
graduate students will be developed. The chemistry- and graduate education-
related contents from motion pictures and chemistry-related blogs will be used
as teaching materials for training young science communicators to the public at
large.