* 1213182
* Catalytic Chemistry with Shape-Tuned Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2012,11/30/2017
* Beatriz Roldan Cuenya, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 11/30/2017
* USD 425,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Beatriz Roldan Cuenya of the University of Central Florida (UCF) will
synthesize metal nanoparticles (NPs) with uniform sizes (1-3 nm), shapes, and
structures and investigate the correlation between their geometrical shape and
catalytic properties. Target material systems will include gold, platinum, and
palladium NPs supported on titanium dioxide, strontium titanate, aluminum oxide,
and zirconium dioxide. Reactions of environmental and economic importance such
as carbon monoxide oxidation and the water-gas-shift reaction over gold and
platinum NPs and nitrous oxide (NOx) reduction over palladium NPs will be
investigated. Understanding the relationship between the structure and function
of catalysts requires detailed information about their three-dimensional atomic
configurations as well as possible chemical changes occurring under reaction
conditions. To address the complexity of real-world catalysts, a synergistic
approach taking advantage of a variety of experimental methods will be
undertaken. These methods include in-situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy,
atomically-resolved scanning and environmental transmission electron microscopy,
scanning tunneling and atomic force microscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
and diffuse reflectance Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tailoring the chemical reactivity of nanomaterials at the
atomic level is one of the most important challenges in catalysis research. To
achieve this elusive goal, fundamental understanding of the geometric and
electronic structure of these complex systems must be obtained. Numerous studies
have been devoted to understanding the properties that affect the catalytic
performance of metal nanoparticles such as their size, interaction with the
support, and oxidation state. The role played by the nanoparticle shape on
catalytic performance is, however, less understood. Complicating the analysis is
the fact that the former parameters cannot be considered independently, since
the NP size as well as the support will have an impact on the most stable NP
shapes. In addition, the dynamic nature of the NP catalysts and their response
to the environment must be taken into consideration, since the working state of
a NP catalyst might not be the state in which the catalyst was prepared, but
rather a structural and/or chemical isomer that adapted to the particular
reaction conditions. The selected model reactions have broad applications in the
fields of energy generation and environmental remediation, as for example NOx
reduction in turbines and automotive catalytic processes. This project will
support the research efforts of doctoral students and K-12 students at UCF,
which will also be trained at the user facilities of Brookhaven National
Laboratory and Argonne National Laboratory. Furthermore, the principal
investigator will bring concepts related to the field of nanoscience closer to
the general public via her involvement with the Orlando Science Center,
including the organization of an annual poster exhibit entitled "Art in Science,
Science in Art".