* 1213876
* Probing Hopping Conduction in Long, Pi-Conjugated Molecular Wires Assembled by Click Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* C. Daniel Frisbie, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sarah L. Stoll
* 08/31/2015
* USD 420,000.00

In this award sponsored by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the NSF, Prof. Dan Frisbie of the University of Minnesota and his
students aim to understand how pai-conjugated molecules conduct electricity. In
particular, their goal is to connect pi-conjugated molecules between metal
electrodes and to probe conduction in the "hopping regime" in which electrons
are injected into the molecular orbitals and hop from site-to-site along the
molecular backbone, driven by the potential difference between the metal
contacts. Building and characterizing the conduction of these structures will
allow a better understanding of how molecular architecture impacts electrical
conductivity in molecules. It will also allow useful electronic functions (e.g.
current rectification) to be built into the molecular wires, which may enable
new nanoelectronic applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental approach
involves building pi-conjugated molecular wires from metal electrodes using
sequential "click chemistry" reactions to connect monomers in a step-wise
fashion. This chemistry allows the syntheses of molecular wires that are tens of
nanometers in length with simultaneous control of the wire architecture on 1
nanometer length scales. Wires will be made with many different chemical
functionalities, including redox-active sites, and with cascades of energy
levels that can facilitate uni-directional electron transport (i.e., current
rectification). After synthesis, the metal electrodes bearing oriented
assemblies of wires will be inserted into an atomic force microscope (AFM),
where the microscope probe tip will be brought into contact with the wire
assembly with a controlled, nano-newton compressive load. In this manner, the
AFM functions as an electrical probe station. Voltages applied between the metal
AFM tip and the metal substrate drive current through the wires and the current-
voltage (I-V) characteristics of the wires will be measured. The I-V
characteristics will be recorded as a function of molecular length, chemical
functionality and temperature. Analysis of this information will be used to
create a more complete understanding of structure-conduction relationships in
conducting molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this proposal
will be in the training of graduate students and undergraduates in important
emerging areas of chemistry and nanoscience. In particular students will develop
skills in molecular synthesis, structure characterization, atomic force
microscopy, and electrical measurements. They will also develop a more complete
physical understanding of the physical principles involved in electrical
conduction in molecules and nanoelectronics, more generally. In addition, this
grant will offer summer research opportunities for three high school students
from the Twin Cities metropolitan area, exposing them to scientific research at
an early stage and positively impacting their understanding of chemical
concepts.