* 1213299
* Sustainable Synthesis of BTX-Derived Chemicals
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* John Frost, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2016
* USD 444,500.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor John W. Frost of the Department of Chemistry at Michigan
State University will interface microbial catalysis with chemical catalysis to
convert renewable, nontoxic sugar starting materials into chemicals currently
derived from the benzene-toluene-xylene (BTX) stream of petroleum and gas
refining. Dienes will be microbe synthesized and chemically reacted with
dienophiles to yield cycloaddition products designed to provide access to a new
generation of monomers and plasticizers where all carbon atoms are derived from
renewable sugars. Catalytic dehydrogenation of the cycloaddition products is to
afford substituted terephthalates. Other cycloaddition products will provide
access to substituted cyclohexene tricarboxylates and cyclohexane
tricarboxylates.

Substituted terephthalic acids can impart unique properties when employed as
additives or monomers in liquid crystalline polymers used in electronic and
medical applications as well as in polyethyleneterephthalate used in clothing
fiber and bottle resin. The novel properties that substituted terephthalates
impart to engineering and consumer polymers could open new applications and new
markets thereby providing an important economic multiplier along with job
creation. Similarly, the wide array of ring-substituted cyclohexene and
cyclohexane tricarboxylates are targeted towards nonaromatic plasticizer
markets. By interfacing microbial synthesis with chemical synthesis, a level of
structural diversity is accessed that may ultimately enable the identification
of new high-performance plasticizers that do not bind to estrogen receptors. The
attendant health safety and environmental benefits would be considerable.
Finally, this research program will provide a unique training opportunity for
pre-undergraduate, undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral students, including
those from groups historically underrepresented in the sciences.