* 1213347
* Theoretical studies of spectroscopic and dynamic implications of large amplitude vibrations
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Terry Miller, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2016
* USD 447,500.00

Anne McCoy of The Ohio State University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program within the Division of
Chemistry for the development of theoretical tools to unravel the spectroscopy
and dynamics of molecular systems that undergo large amplitude motions. The work
involves extensions of the Diffusion Monte Carlo (DMC) technique including the
development of "on-the-fly" DMC and using DMC to evaluate measurable quantities
including energies and intensities of ro-vibrational transitions. McCoy and her
coworkers are using Diffusion Monte Carlo to develop potential energy and dipole
moment surfaces. They also employ reduced dimensional approaches to explore
photoinduced proton translocation and spectroscopic manifestations of hydrogen
bonding more generally. The research focuses on systems of current interest to
experimentalists as well as theorists, and the results will be used to extract
physical insights from spectroscopic measurements.

By opening up a broad range of molecular and ionic systems for investigation,
the work is having a broad impact on the study of systems of astrochemical and
environmental importance in addition to deepening our understanding of hydrogen
bonding and proton transfer in aqueous solution. The majority of students
engaged in this research are from under-represented groups in the physical
sciences.