* 1213550
* Mechanistic Studies of Ribonucleotide Reductase
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Gary Gerfen, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 07/31/2018
* USD 403,527.00

In this award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division, Dr. Gary Gerfen, from the Albert Einstein College of Medicine of
Yeshiva University, will investigate the mechanism of turnover by and inhibition
of the enzyme ribonucleoside triphosphate reductase. Ribonucleotide reductases
(RNRs) are present in all cellular non-parasitic organisms characterized to
date, and are also encoded by many DNA viruses. These enzymes catalyze the
reduction of nucleotides to the corresponding deoxyribonucleotides, the only
known means of de novo generation of precursors for both DNA replication and
repair. Despite significant progress being made in the study of all classes of
RNR recently, questions remain regarding mechanisms of substrate turnover,
inactivation by mechanistic inhibitors and allosteric regulation. The objective
of this award is to focus on the simplest representative RNR, ribonucleoside
triphosphate reductase (RTPR) from Lactobacillus leichmannii. Gaining insight
into the reaction mechanism and allosteric regulation of this simplest of the
ribonucleotide reductases will contribute to basic understanding of this
important class of enzymes. Dr. Gerfen will investigate the mechanism of
substrate turnover using ribonucleotides and active site mutants, and the
mechanism of inhibition and inactivation using mechanism-based inhibitors.
Finally, the structure and dynamics of regions of RTPR thought to be important
for allosteric regulation will be probed using room temperature continuous wave
and low temperature pulsed site directed spin label electron paramagnetic
resonance techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ribonucleotide reductases are enzymes
that provide the only known way to make the building blocks of DNA in almost all
organisms. Because DNA is crucial to every aspect of cellular function, these
enzymes play an essential role in the metabolism of organisms from bacteria to
humans. Defects in the structure and function of these enzymes lead to many
diseases, and antibacterial and anticancer drugs designed to inhibit the
function ribonucleotide reductases are currently in clinical use. However, it is
not understood how the drugs that inactivate these enzymes function. Dr.
Gerfen's work will give us better understanding of the basic mechanisms by which
ribonucleotide reductases function.