* 1213380
* Collaborative Research: Topics in Gauge Theory, Gravity and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* V Nair, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2016
* USD 480,000.00

This collaborative award funds the research activities of Professors V.P. Nair
and Alexios Polychronakos at the City College of the City University of New York
and Professor Daniel Kabat at Lehman College of the City University of New York.

Gauge theories describe the interactions of all elementary particles. One
particular gauge theory, known as Quantum Chromodynamics, describes the
interactions of quarks and gluons. These are the elementary particles inside
nuclei, which can bind to form nuclei as well as other yet-to-be-detected
particles such as glueballs. While the interaction of quarks and gluons at very
high energies is fairly well understood, a detailed understanding of how quarks
and gluons bind together to form nuclei and glueballs, and why isolated quarks
cannot exist ("quark confinement"), is far from complete. This research project
will contribute in this direction by building on previously introduced
techniques within the simpler context of gauge theories with two space
dimensions. This research project will also develop new techniques for
calculating the Casimir force, which arises from quantum fluctuations of the
electromagnetic field and which is central to many techniques in nanomechanics.
Finally, on another front, Professors Nair and Polychronakos will continue their
work on statistical distributions of random matrices, with implications for a
variety of questions from condensed-matter physics to quantum gravity. New
physically observable quantities will be analyzed and their implications for
quantum gravity will be explored.

This project will have significant broader impacts. Professors Kabat, Nair, and
Polychronakos will involve undergraduate and graduate students as well as
postdoctoral researchers in their work, thereby providing critical training to
these junior physicists. The project will also play an important role in
fostering continuing collaboration between City College and Lehman College.
Maintaining a joint research program has had a positive impact on attracting
students to these research areas. Given the demographics of the two colleges,
this has been particularly true for students from minority and under-represented
groups.