* 1213339
* RUI: Deployment of a simultaneous broadband gradiometers to quantify the effects of aperture and near-surface geology on gradient-derived wavefield attributes
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Christian Poppeliers, AUGUSTA UNIVERSITY RESEARCH INSTITUTE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 77,174.00

This is a two part project that will make use of a set of flexible, small scale
seismic arrays. The design of the arrays will be optimized to estimate the
spatial gradients of regional and teleseismic wavefields. In the first portion
of the project, a single, fourteen-element array will be deployed with the goal
of determining the optimal array geometry and aperture to estimate wavefield
gradients, as well as to quantify the uncertainty of these measurements. The
second portion will consist of two, simultaneous deployments of seismic arrays
in two adjacent locations. The first location is a former floodplain, with
approximately 700m of unconsolidated alluvium overlying bedrock. The second
location has bedrock within one meter of the surface. The goal of this portion
of the project is to rigorously document the effects of near-surface geology on
parameters estimated from seismic spatial gradients (such as strain, rotation,
P-S energy partitioning, etc). Up to now, there has been no study to quantify
the accuracy and/or precision of seismic wavefield gradients using small-scale
seismic arrays (termed gradiometers). However, previous studies suggest that
gradiometers are highly sensitive to uncertainties in instrument location, noise
in the recorded seismograms, and local subsurface geology. This study will
investigate these issues in detail and attempt to 1) produce a set of guidelines
for deploying seismic gradiometers, and 2) quantify the effects of local
geologic conditions on the estimation of seismic attributes derived from
gradient estimations. By developing a standard of seismic array design, future
gradient measurements will be uniform allowing a more direct comparison from one
experiment to another. Furthermore, by rigorously quantifying the effects of
subsurface geology on parameters derived from seismic gradients, our
interpretations of Earth structure will be more accurate, as well as our
interpretations of the nature of the seismic source.