* 1213243
* Structure and Dynamics at Organic Semiconductor Interfaces: The Influence of Molecular Electronic Structure
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Oliver Monti, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2016
* USD 405,925.00

With the support of this award from Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
program in the Chemistry Division of the National Science Foundation, Professor
Oliver Monti from the University of Arizona leads a team of scientists to
investigate the critical factors that determine charge-transfer at interfaces of
organic semiconductors. By choosing a class of related yet tunable organic
semiconductor molecules on surfaces with well-defined properties, this research
uniquely permits systematic control of the interface in order to extract the
influence of the molecular and surface electronic structure on interfacial
charge-transfer dynamics. Initial results show that easily accessible molecular
properties such as the molecular dipole and quadrupole moment, together with the
band structure of the surface, dictate in a predictive fashion the interfacial
electronic structure both in ground and excited states. Research will establish
how these properties determine the fate of electronic excitations at interfaces
and will make it possible to unravel the underlying physics of interfacial
charge-transfer in organic semiconductors. The highly controlled approach of the
proposed experiments will advance understanding of charge-transfer processes to
interfaces of extended pi-conjugated organic molecules with complex electronic
structure and rich thin film growth properties. &lt;br/&gt;While interfacial
charge-transfer is a crucial step in many chemical processes in general, it is
central in novel solar energy conversion platforms and catalysis based on
organic materials. The proposed research program will thus develop a deeper
understanding of one of the fundamental driving forces in chemistry. With its
focus on organic electronic materials it will aid in developing a scientific
workforce both at the graduate and undergraduate level in the broader area of
energy sciences, an area of critical national need. Findings from the proposed
research will flow conceptually also into "Solar Wizards", a hands-on science
show for children and their parents to discover the potential of sunlight as a
power source and developed together with the local chapter of the Student
Members of ACS (SMACS). "Solar Wizards" is anticipated to travel to "Solar
Rock," a yearly multi-day community-based music festival in Tucson dedicated to
alternative energy generation, and to after-school science programs in Native
Nations schools on the outskirts of Tucson.