* 1213772
* Photo-assembly and Efficiency of Photosynthetic Water Oxidases: Probing the Catalytic Core Atom by Atom
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,09/30/2016
* G. Charles Dismukes, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 09/30/2016
* USD 350,000.00

In this award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division, Drs. G. Charles Dismukes and Gennady M. Ananyev, from Rutgers, The
State University of New Jersey, seek to understand the physico-chemical
principles that govern the assembly of the inorganic cofactors to form the
water-oxidation complex (WOC) within Photosystem II (PSII) of photosynthetic
organisms. This complex is nature's sole enzymatic solution for splitting water
into molecular oxygen, protons, and electrons using sunlight. Despite apparent
conservation of the WOC catalytic core, comprised of a Mn4CaO5 cluster, two
chloride ions, and proximal amino acid residues, large differences in catalytic
turnover rates occur between PSII species in vivo, indicative of functional
differences that are not yet understood. The general experimental approach of
this project uses organismal, biochemical and inorganic chemical strategies. The
expected outcome will be to determine the allowed range of possible non-native
inorganic cofactors that can support catalytic functioning of PSII-WOCs,
determine their relative binding affinities and sites, and measure their kinetic
performance in catalysis across different species. A long term goal is to
understand the chemical basis for the evolutionary conservation of this enzyme
class. These studies will be conducted using model photosynthetic organisms and
using both native cells (in vivo) and isolated PSII complexes (in vitro). A
number of complementary techniques will be used that allow comparison of kinetic
performance over a wide range of flashing frequencies including: ultra-sensitive
electrochemical O2 concentration and rate measurements, chlorophyll-detected
Fast Repetition Rate fluorometry, and dye-detected kinetic pH measurements.
Because no single inorganic component of the WOC works independently, we will
conduct a systematic 'atom-by-atom' analysis that reveals their synergistic
contributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in our understanding of the
mechanism of photosynthetic water oxidation will inform alternative energy
research in two areas. First, insights from the experiments proposed here may
guide the design of genetically modified photosynthetic organisms that, for
example, are expected to have improved biomass accumulation. Second, elucidation
of the principles of photosynthetic water oxidation will guide the design of
water oxidation catalysts for artificial photosynthesis systems capable of
producing renewable fuels as alternative to fossil fuels. The proposed studies
would allow research training of Rutgers undergraduate and postgraduate
students, including women and those of underrepresented backgrounds, for future
careers and advanced training in the renewable energy field. These proposed
studies will leverage educational training programs sponsored by two NSF IGERT
grants at Rutgers. The new instruments built and upgrades to existing
instruments described in this proposal will improve the infrastructure available
in our laboratory and accommodate other users at Rutgers, while supporting
multiple collaborators and their funding agencies.