* 1213263
* Collaborative Research:  Multireference Studies of Organic Polyradicals, Radical Reactions and Graphene Nanoribbons
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Hans Lischka, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2016
* USD 226,752.00

Carol Parish at the University of Richmond and Hans Lischka at Texas Tech
University are supported by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and
Computational methods program to perform theoretical investigations of the
structures, reactivities and excited states of di-, tetra- and poly-radical
molecules important to understanding reaction mechanisms, pyrolysis and
combustion of alternative fuels, anticancer antibiotics and graphene
nanodevices. A fundamental understanding of the proper physical characterization
of polyradicals is critically important for the further development of
multireference (MR) electronic structure theory as well as understanding and
controlling chemical phenomenon involving these open-shell intermediates. This
proposal focuses on utilizing MR methods (MR-CI, MR-AQCC, CASPT2) to study 1.)
model systems such as the geometries and excites states of o-, m- and p-benzyne,
2.) diradical intermediates found in the pyrolyis of asphaltene heteroaromatic
compounds, 3.) novel electrocyclization reactions producing diradical
intermediates that may function as anticancer antibiotics, 4.) reactions
involving tetraradicals and the role that through-bond coupling plays in radical
electron interaction, 5.) diradical and multiradical defects in graphene and to
benchmark these MR methods against DFT results and 6.) developing input and
analysis tools for the COLUMBUS package to facilitate the use of these highly
correlated MR methods by the chemical community including undergraduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to characterize properly open-shell
polyradical species and the corresponding investigation of novel cyclization
reactions holds significant promise for advancing the fields of MR theoretical
chemistry, mechanistic organic chemistry, materials design and drug
optimization. The proposal delineates several carefully conceived theoretical
experiments designed to be performed by undergraduate researchers, graduate
students and post-baccalaureate or post-doctoral fellows. This will create a
community of scientists focusing on the proper characterization of interesting
polyradical species using state-of-the-art electronic structure methods.
Students at all levels will learn the details of computational quantum
mechanics, spectroscopy and methods development.