* 1213827
* The Emerging Commodity of Restored Streams: Science, Policy, and Econmics in New Markets for Ecosystem Service Commodities
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Matthew Zook, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/2014
* USD 540,596.00

The science and technology of stream restoration has matured alongside market-
based strategies for environmental protection, and the two approaches are
combined in the emerging stream mitigation banking industry. Stream mitigation
banking allows developers to offset stream impacts by purchasing restoration
"credits" produced by for-profit companies, essentially creating a market in
stream ecosystems. Assuring the quality and quantity of impacted and restored
streams, which is required by both market and regulation, is a task of
measurement that has drawn scientists into emerging ecosystem markets. More
generally, stream mitigation is a manifestation of ecosystem markets in their
infancy, such as carbon trading. This research project will examine the
application of science, policy, and markets at stream mitigation bank sites by
fully leveraging mixed quantitative and qualitative methods. The investigators
will combine field and modeling studies of hydrogeomorphic processes; interviews
with scientists, regulators, and entrepreneurs; and historical and archival
research to fully document and understand the practice of stream mitigation
banking. Their ultimate goal is to understand how policy, science, and markets
interact to leave a distinct imprint on the landscape. This research will draw
on sophisticated theory and methods in very divergent branches of geography and
related fields in the geosciences and social sciences to inform a vital
environmental policy issue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will shed light on
the new paradigm of using markets for environmental management. Theory derived
from this project will be scalable and transferable (with appropriate
modification) to emerging environmental markets in other locales and other
phenomena, such as carbon trading, water quality trading, and endangered species
habitat conservation banks. Because the stream mitigation banking industry is
relatively young, this project also can inform practical policy and processes.
In addition to benefitting researchers and students directly involved in this
project, it will help to build the growing community of interdisciplinary
scholars through a joint university short-course program.