* 1213439
* Quantitative Separation and Analysis of Nanoparticles and Hybrid Structures
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Mary Williams, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2016
* USD 382,000.00

In this project, analytical separation methods will be developed and applied to
purify, analyze and study nanoparticles and hybrid particle structures. This
work directly addresses existing challenges of understanding the role of
polydispersity in nanomaterial function; reproducibility of synthetic methods;
quantification of purity; and monitoring particle growth and reaction chemistry.
These problems are potentially compounded in hybrid nanocrystals, including
hetero-dimer, -trimer, and -oligomer particles, which are made by increasingly
complex syntheses that have the potential to form multiple species in the
reaction mixture in addition to the desired product. Growing interest and broad
potential for use of hybrid nanostructures make it essential to develop methods
for their purification and analysis. These major challenges will be addressed by
applying and extending differential magnetic catch and release (DMCR) for higher
resolution separation and analysis of magnetic nanoparticles and
heterostructures, and for studies of nanoparticle chemical transformations,
assembly, and morphology changes. Electric field separation tools will be
developed in parallel, enabling the purification and analysis of non-magnetic
particles. This proposed work addresses the critical need for techniques to
separate small particles, in approaches that are both quantitative and scalable,
and which report on differences in fundamental behavior.

A central goal is to develop and demonstrate the utility of quantitative
separative analysis methodologies for a broad range of particles for both
fundamental and applied areas of emerging nanotechnologies. Successful
demonstration of these methods will allow quantitative assessment and validation
of nanoparticle purity, which is critically needed in particular for
nanomaterials intended for biomedical applications. Students working on this
project are exposed to interdisciplinary research topics in nanomaterials
synthesis and characterization, learn to apply a wide range of methodologies,
and interact with scientists and engineers across the University and nation. As
part of this project, Penn State undergraduates will have expanded educational
opportunities by the incorporation of a new analytical separation experiment in
the Chemistry 227 Analytical Chemistry course. An inquiry based, open-ended
experiment that relates to the analytical separation of nanoparticles in this
project will be developed and implemented for the students in this course.