* 1213727
* Collaborative Research:   Tailoring organic/semiconductor interfaces by using tunable linker dipoles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Robert Bartynski, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2017
* USD 345,129.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program supports collaborative
research between Professor Robert Bartynski of Rutgers University at New
Brunswick and Professor Elena Galoppini at Rutgers University at Newark on the
synthesis and characterization of tunable linker dipoles for improved solar
energy conversion devices. This research, which brings together a synthetic
chemist and a surface physicist, aims to achieve precise control of the
electronic properties of the interface between an organic molecule and a
semiconductor by tailoring the properties of the organic overlayer at the
molecular level. Ultimately, this work will enhance the fundamental
understanding and performance of organic-inorganic and organic-organic hybrid
materials that are used in a wide variety of application areas including
molecular electronics and photovoltaics. By molecular design of a variety of
functional organic compounds, the research team will modify molecular energy
levels (HOMO-LUMO) alignment, tune the donation and withdrawal of charge, and
influence molecule bonding geometries at organic molecule/semiconductor
interfaces. This will be accomplished using compounds with a Head-Linker-Anchor
(HLA) configuration bound to metal oxide (TiO2 and ZnO) or organic (rubrene)
semiconductor surfaces. The head groups (H) will be either organic chromophores
or electron donor or acceptor groups, and the linker units (L) will contain an
internal molecular dipole. The rigid linkers will be designed to bind at a well-
defined orientation and distance from the semiconducting organic or inorganic
surfaces. The electronic structure, dye-oxide energy level alignment, binding
geometry, and effects of intermolecular interactions of HLA compounds on
semiconductor substrates will be studied using a wide array, state-of-the-art
ultrahigh vacuum-based surface characterization techniques. Spectroscopic and
electrochemical measurements will complement the surface studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this research, derived mainly from
molecular level control of the organic/semiconductor interface, will touch many
areas of science and technology including photocatalytic materials,
photovoltaics, light-emitting diodes, and other devices. The educational
component of the program will generate two innovative research modules where
students gain hands-on experience that will solidify the connection between
basic scientific research and technological advances that benefit society.
Students will build simple solar cells based on molecules similar to those used
in this research, but found in everyday items. The modules are easily adaptable
for undergraduate laboratories at the two Rutgers campuses, and for
demonstrations that will involve K-12 students. These activities will target
underrepresented groups including high-school students from the Newark urban
area. Student exchanges and co-advising of Ph.D. theses are integral to the
program and the interdisciplinary collaboration between a synthetic chemist and
a physicist will broaden the scientific education and training of the students
from both laboratories.