* 1213699
* Mechanisms of Co, Ni, and Mn based water splitting catalysts probed by advanced EPR spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Ralph Britt, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2016
* USD 449,999.00

With this award from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of
Chemistry, Professor R. David Britt from the University of California at Davis
will study an efficient solar water splitting catalysis that would serve as the
basis of a clean renewable energy technology, producing hydrogen gas, which
could be stored and then reoxidized to generate electricity in a fuel cell, or
used as a reductive intermediate in forming a liquid fuel. The studies are based
on the discovery by Kanan and Nocera that cobalt(II) in neutral phosphate buffer
spontaneously forms a water splitting catalyst on a polarized electrode surface.
The Britt laboratory will use multifrequency EPR spectroscopy to investigate
details of the structure of this cobalt catalyst and the mechanism by which it
splits water. Continous wave (CW) and pulsed EPR instruments of the CalEPR
laboratory will be used, over a frequency range from 8 to 130 GHz, as well as
higher frequency instruments at the NHMFL in Florida. Multifrequency EPR will be
used to examine the geometric and electronic structure of the cobalt catalyst.
Pulsed double resonance experiments (ENDOR, ESEEM, and HYSCORE) will be probing
the interaction of unpaired electrons on the cobalt ions with magnetic nuclei
such as cobalt(59), oxygen(17), and phosphorus(31), and the results will be
compared with model cobalt complexes of known structure. New studies on nickel
borate analogues will be complementing the cobalt film studies, and additional
work on a manganese catalyst formed in a Nafion membrane will help in bridging
between these self assembled inorganic catalysts and the important Photosystem
II Mn oxygen evolving complex.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the details of
the production of hydrogen gas is essential for energy generation and it is
important to motivate students on renewable energy and environmental issues.
Every year the PI teaches an honors general chemistry sequence, and the topics
covered; electrochemistry, transition metal coordination chemistry, chemical
kinetics, and spectroscopy, are ideally suited to tie lectures directly to
current research in inorganic approaches to water splitting and solar fuels, in
both synthetic and biological systems. The PI will integrate aspects of this
research project into the lectures. The PI plans to recruit several first year
students to work in the laboratory on these topics over the summer. In addition,
he is teaching an upper division instrumental analysis class, which will provide
a further opportunity to introduce undergraduates to electron paramagnetic
resonance (EPR) techniques and energy research. His research group is also
participating in the department's new NSF-REU program, which has an energy
emphasis.