* 1213135
* Ultrafast one- and two-dimensional infrared spectroscopic studies of electronic state dynamics in organometallics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Charles Harris, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2017
* USD 336,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program in
the Division of Chemistry, Professor Charles B. Harris of the University of
California, Berkeley and his research group will use ultrafast one- and two-
dimensional infrared spectroscopies to study the dynamics of electronic states
in organometallic systems. This work builds upon the group's extensive
experience and will explore the ways in which electronic transitions and
transfers, both photochemically-induced and at thermal equilibrium, dictate the
reactivity of organometallic complexes for catalytically-relevant systems. These
experiments will improve the current understanding of intramolecular electron
transfer in the context of molecular-scale devices, clarify the role of spin
state changes and external heavy atom effects on reaction dynamics, and
elucidate the dynamics of novel CO2 reduction catalysts. Ultrafast infrared
spectroscopy provides the perfect tool for developing a deep understanding of
these important classes of reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, this
research will benefit from a multi-faceted approach involving not only
experimental molecular spectroscopy, but also synthesis and theory. This
environment is supplemented by collaborations with faculty at other
institutions. Students (both graduate and undergraduate) will benefit from this
multi-disciplinary research setting. Finally, the Harris group is engaged in a
variety of community outreach and education activities that promote a broader
public understanding and appreciation for chemistry and science in general.