* 1213680
* Collaborative Research:  Redox Behavior of Heme-NOx Models - A Vehicle for Outreach and Discovery
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Michael Shaw, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2016
* USD 81,231.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Division of Chemistry supports the
collaborative research between the Richter-Addo and Shaw groups at the
University of Oklahoma and Southern Illinois University Edwardsville,
respectively. This research employs advanced electrochemistry techniques to
probe the redox and chemical behavior of heme models bearing nitrogen oxides as
ligands. Also investigated are the effects that nitrogen oxide ligands have on
metalloporphyrin redox behavior, and the effects of the porphyrin scaffold and
the trans ligands have on the chemical reactivity of the metal-bound NO groups.
Spectroelectrochemistry, using simultaneous chronoabsorptometry and
chronoamperometry techniques, will be utilized to derive the UV-vis spectra of
unstable redox intermediates to aid in their characterization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitrogen oxides are present in the urban atmosphere and in
living systems. Metal centers, such as those present in metalloporphyrins as
heme models, regulate the chemistry of these nitrogen oxides. This project will
shed insight on both the observed chemistry and redox behavior of newly
synthesized complexes containing nitrogen oxides as ligands. The varied
complexity of the sub-projects is ideal for the OU-SIUE collaboration, as it
provides training appropriate for students at both a Ph.D. institution (OU) and
an RUI (SIUE). Educational interactions with a minority-serving institution will
be strengthened, as will productive contributions to the Upward Bound programs
at both OU and SIUE.