* 1213957
* Synthesis and study of potential intermediates in gold(I) pi-activation catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Ross Widenhoefer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2015
* USD 456,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Ross A. Widenhoefer of the Department of Chemistry at Duke
University will explore the synthesis and study of potential intermediates in
gold(I) pi-activation catalysis, including pi-alkene, pi-allene, and sigma-vinyl
complexes. An understanding of the mechanisms of gold pi-activation catalysis
has lagged significantly behind the synthetic development of this chemistry, and
available information is largely derived from computational analyses. As such,
little experimental information is available regarding the behavior of gold pi-
and sigma-complexes generated as intermediates in gold(I)-catalyzed
hydrofunctionalization and likewise, experimental information regarding the
structure and reactivity of cationic gold carbene complexes germane to gold-
catalyzed alkene cyclopropanation and enyne cycloaddition is lacking. The
proposed research activities aim to fill these gaps and to develop an
experimentally-grounded understanding of the mechanisms of gold pi-activation
catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emergence of cationic gold(I) complexes as
catalysts for the functionalization of carbon carbon multiple bonds (pi-
activation catalysis) represents one of the most important developments in
homogenous catalysis over the past decade. These transformations often display
high efficiency, excellent atom economy, and high regio- and stereoselectivity,
making them particularly attractive for application in both target-oriented
synthesis and pharmaceutical development. The research activities undertaken in
this project will provide mechanistic information that will facilitate the
continued development of this important family of synthetic transformations. In
addition, the research activities related to this project are fully integrated
with the scientific education and training of the graduate and undergraduate
research participants including students from ethnic groups traditionally
underrepresented in the sciences.