* 1213084
* SHF: Large: Collaborative Research: Unified Runtime for Supporting Hybrid Programming Models on Heterogeneous Architecture
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Dhabaleswar Panda, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2016
* USD 1,045,822.00

Most of the traditional High-End Computing (HEC) applications
and&lt;br/&gt;current petascale applications are written using the Message
Passing&lt;br/&gt;Interface (MPI) programming model. Some of these applications
are run&lt;br/&gt;in MPI+OpenMP mode. However, it can be very difficult to use
MPI or&lt;br/&gt;MPI+OpenMP and maintain performance for applications which
demonstrate&lt;br/&gt;irregular and dynamic communication patterns. The
Partitioned Global&lt;br/&gt;Address Space (PGAS) programming model presents a
flexible way for&lt;br/&gt;these applications to express parallelism.
Accelerators introduce&lt;br/&gt;additional programming models: CUDA, OpenCL or
OpenACC. Thus, the&lt;br/&gt;emerging heterogeneous architectures require
support for various&lt;br/&gt;hybrid programming models: MPI+OpenMP, MPI+PGAS,
and MPI+PGAS+OpenMP&lt;br/&gt;with extended APIs for multiple levels of
parallelism. Unfortunately,&lt;br/&gt;there is no unified runtime which delivers
the best performance and&lt;br/&gt;scalability for all of these hybrid
programming models for a range of&lt;br/&gt;applications on current and next-
generation HEC systems. This leads&lt;br/&gt;to the following broad challenge:
"Can a unified runtime for hybrid&lt;br/&gt;programming model be designed which
can provide benefits that are&lt;br/&gt;greater than the sum of its
parts?"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A synergistic and comprehensive research plan,
involving computer&lt;br/&gt;scientists from The Ohio State University (OSU) and
Ohio Supercomputer&lt;br/&gt;Center (OSC) and computational scientists from the
Texas Advanced&lt;br/&gt;Computing Center (TACC) and San Diego Supercomputer
Center (SDSC),&lt;br/&gt;University of California San Diego (UCSD), is proposed
to address the&lt;br/&gt;above broad challenge with innovative solutions. The
investigators&lt;br/&gt;will specifically address the following challenges: 1)
What are the&lt;br/&gt;requirements and limitations of using hybrid programming
models for a&lt;br/&gt;set of petascale applications? 2) What features and
mechanisms are&lt;br/&gt;needed in a unified runtime? 3) How can the unified
runtime and&lt;br/&gt;associated extension to programming model APIs be designed
and&lt;br/&gt;implemented? 4) How can candidate petascale applications
be&lt;br/&gt;redesigned to take advantage of proposed unified runtime? and 5)
What&lt;br/&gt;kind of benefits (in terms of performance, scalability
and&lt;br/&gt;productivity) can be achieved by the proposed approach? The
research&lt;br/&gt;will be driven by a set of applications from established
NSF&lt;br/&gt;computational science researchers running large scale simulations
on&lt;br/&gt;Ranger and other systems at OSC, SDSC and OSU. The proposed
designs&lt;br/&gt;will be integrated into the open-source MVAPICH2 library.
The&lt;br/&gt;established national-scale training and outreach programs at
TACC,&lt;br/&gt;SDSC and OSC will be used to disseminate the results of this
research.