* 1213894
* SBIR Phase I:  High Efficiency Thermoelectric Converter
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Michael Staskus, NanoConversion Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2012
* USD 148,101.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is intended to establish
the feasibility of a 30% efficient electric power generator called the C-TEC,
for Concentration-mode Thermoelectric Converter. To date, we have built 18
working prototypes, but have none have been suitable for efficiency
measurements. The C-TEC directly generates electricity from heat using a
thermally regenerated concentration gradient across an electrolyte membrane,
rather than a thermal gradient across a semiconductor material, which offers the
potential for high efficiency like a fuel cell, with the low cost, maintenance
and long life of a thermoelectric device. Ford and NASA have researched the
AMTEC, a previous concentration-mode device, since the 1980s. Research papers
have used detailed theoretical models and calculations to show the potential for
greater than 30% efficiency for these devices, but in practice, only 15% to 19%
efficiency has ever been realized. A new design, along with a proprietary, high
conductivity electrolyte material, may allow the low cost C-TEC to break the 30%
efficiency barrier.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be the development
of low cost, high efficiency generators that can operate on any form of heat in
a wide variety of applications. C-TEC generators are inherently more versatile
than other technologies that require high-grade, specific fuels, such as engines
(gasoline), turbines (natural gas), fuel cells (hydrogen), or solar cells
(sunlight). The C-TEC makes no noise, has no moving parts and requires no
maintenance, making it ideal for long-term power generation. Clean, distributed
electricity provided by microCHP (Combined Heat and Power systems at less than 5
kW electrical power) enables breakthrough electrical efficiency in the home, and
will be a critical technology for the widespread adoption of the electric car.
The C-TEC-powered electric car will use domestic natural gas as a bridge to
renewables, reducing dependence on foreign oil and massive infrastructure
development costs associated with upgrades to our grid capacity. Other
technologies have been proposed as prime drivers for microCHP, including fuel
cells and engines, but these fall short in terms of cost and maintenance.
Ultimately, the cost and versatility of the C-TEC will provide economic
advantages such as fast payback to drive the adoption of new clean technologies.