* 1213157
* NeTS: Large: Collaborative Research: User-Centric Network Measurement
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Vern Paxson, International Computer Science Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 03/31/2017
* USD 721,636.00

What users perceive as the Internet is often dominated by the "last mile? and
increasingly the "last meter" that is the performance provided by their home
network, local network equipment, and Internet Service Provider. Failures,
outages, and limitations may arise from a variety of sources, including non-
compliant or misconfigured middleboxes, deliberate ISP manipulations, and
overbuffered access equipment. This project pursues three inter-related thrusts
toward facilitating user-centric network measurement tools and techniques that
develop an end-to-end view of how users actually experience the Internet.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The user's primary interface to the Internet is the web
browser -- a potentially powerful and ubiquitous measurement platform. The
project's first thrust, termed Fathom, will develop a set of new browser
extensions that enable comprehensive from-the-browser measurement, including
automatic failure-debugging tools. Further, the Fathom API will promote adoption
and innovation by allowing web developers to embed arbitrary diagnostics or
performance analysis code into their own websites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
second thrust is to extend Fathom to the mobile space to better understand how
mobile access affects and influences user experience. Mobile devices now define
the Internet for a large cohort of users, yet access via these networks is
particularly prone to manipulation and control. Fathom mobile will enable a
broad suite of active mobile network measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally,
the project seeks to inform future large-scale measurement platforms, especially
those utilizing customer premise equipment. As such equipment becomes more
powerful and widely deployed, it represents an unparalleled opportunity for
large-scale measurement research. This thrust will define the architecture to
support, secure, and multiplex active measurement experiments that utilize end-
user infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is the last mile and the last meter
that define the Internet for most users. This proposal involves a comprehensive
effort to measure the edge of the Internet, as this vantage point is often the
most fundamental source of limitations on the user's Internet connection. This
measurement program is comprehensive, encompassing new tools, enhancing existing
well-validated tools, and deploying a thousand persistent measurement nodes
within users'networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will enable significant
insight into how the Internet actually operates. Both users and researchers will
be able to test connections quickly and robustly for problems and limitations.
Further, the project will enable tools and infrastructure that other researchers
can use to further their own efforts.