* 1213970
* SBIR Phase I:  Pitch Reducing Optical Fiber Array for High Speed Digital Communications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Mitch Wlodawski, CHIRAL PHOTONICS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
the feasibility of a novel Pitch Reducing Optical Fiber Array (PROFA) technology
to meet the demands of next-generation telecommunications, data centers and
cloud computing. As signal rates increase above 10 Gb/s, designers are moving
from electrical to optical lines for intra- and inter-chip communication to
provide higher bandwidth density, lower power consumption and reduced
transmission loss. The challenge of interfacing photonic integrated circuits
(PICs) to data transport media has grown with the increased sophistication of
integrated PICs. Standard optical fibers, which have an outer diameter, of 125
um need to be matched to planar waveguides with high numerical aperture spaced
by approximately 30 um. Pushing this limit is critical to increasing the density
of active elements on a chip, reducing overall system size, and lowering power
requirements. State-of-the-art fiber connections, which utilize labor intensive
v-grooves, can achieve 127 um one-dimensional spacing. There is currently no
path to achieving the chip-limited density called for by the industry. In this
Phase I SBIR, PROFAs will be developed that will propel optical connectivity to
30 um spacing and two-dimensional arrays with orders of magnitude higher density
than is currently available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project will be to solve a key bottleneck of connectivity
between optical fibers and PICs to achieving exascale computing and high speed
communications. It will accelerate the development of next-generation high
performance computers by allowing the integration of more complex PICs into
telecommunications equipment. This technology will thereby spur the creation of
novel PICs which can truly exploit higher on-chip densities in applications that
will demand hundreds of thousands of PROFAs. As photonics becomes more
pervasive, moving beyond telecommunications into datacom, biomedical and a
myriad of industrial and military applications, the need addressed by PROFAs for
seamless integration of planar and fiber-based platforms, as well as disparate
fiber interfaces, including multi-core fibers, will increase. This technology
will enhance the integration of different families of materials and combine
their unique strengths. The know-how developed in the course of this project
will inform the development of other microformed fiber-based devices, including
filters, lasers, sensors and isolators for applications ranging from monitoring
nuclear radiation to early endoscopic detection of cancer. This technology is
expected to enhance the competitiveness of the United States in the next
generation of telecommunications and data processing equipment.