* 1213860
* Protein biosynthesis at the single-molecule level in live cells
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* James Weisshaar, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2014
* USD 200,000.00

In this award from the Chemistry of Life Processes in the Chemistry Division,
Drs. Silvia Cavagnero and James Weisshaar, from the University of Wisconsin,
Madison, will use single-molecule fluorescence microscopy to measure the time
required for the biosynthesis of one single protein molecule by one ribosome.
The timecourse of complex chemical and biophysical events in living cells,
including gene expression, is poorly understood to date, largely due to the
difficulties inherent in the interpretation of experiments performed in bulk
solution. Towards the goal of the proposal, Drs. Cavagnero and Weisshaar will
exploit unnatural amino acids bearing a fluorophore, and engineered to be
incorporated very early in the sequence of specific genes of interest via single
amber codons. This study will yield novel insights into the distribution of the
translation rates of genes of interest within live bacterial cells. Upon
incorporation into the nascent protein, the fluorophore-labeled unnatural amino
acid will diffuse very slowly until release from the ribosome. After release of
the fully synthesized protein carrying the fluorescent tag, diffusion of the
fluorophore will be much more rapid. Quantitative analysis of individual camera
frames will enable the determination of the residence time of the nascent
protein on the ribosome with about one-second accuracy. The in vivo synthesis of
the single-domain protein HmpH and the related three-domain protein Hmp will be
studied first, to test and optimize the novel methodology. The translation rates
of other multi-domain proteins may also be investigated. The ultimate goal is to
develop a novel set of biological and spectroscopic tools to understand how
pause sites affect the translation time of individual genes in live cells, and
to learn how these pauses are distributed across different translating
ribosomes. This novel approach is expected to open up opportunities for future
studies of many other multi-step biochemical events in live cells, including
folding, co-/post-translational modifications, and a wide variety of enzymatic
reactions.

The time required for the stepwise buildup of proteins, i.e., the main
components of living cells, is essential for the cell's well being and healthy
function. If a protein is made too slowly it may never be able to contribute to
cell's activity before the cell dies. Conversely, if a protein is made too fast
it may never be able to achieve its correct three-dimensional shape because the
fast synthesis does not allow enough time for proper three-dimensional folding.
The protein may thus aggregate and irreversibly compromise the cell's function.
In summary, it is clear that the timing of protein biosynthesis in the cell has
to be just right, i.e., tightly regulated for correct cell function. The goal of
this project is to measure the rate of protein synthesis in living bacterial
cells, one molecule at a time. The single-molecule approach is the only way to
measure synthesis times, given the complexity of the process in vivo. Each
protein will be 'lit up' via labeling with a fluorescent tag directly in the
living cell. This novel approach will open up unprecedented opportunities to
explore the origin of cell's function and misfunction at high resolution. This
study will thus enable Drs. Cavagnero and Weisshaar to interrogate the
timecourse of one of the most important processes for life on earth, protein
biosynthesis. This project will offer highly interdisciplinary opportunities to
students and postdocs, who will synergistically integrate concepts from biology,
fluorescence and microscopy, while carrying out this research. Drs. Cavagnero
and Weisshaar will be very active in encouraging women, underrepresented
minorities and undergraduate students to participate in this research and pursue
careers in science. Together, they will also develop a new graduate recruitment
event called CHOPS, standing for CHemistry OPportunitieS. A few college juniors
and seniors interested in chemistry will come to visit the University of
Wisconsin-Madison for a weekend in the fall. By providing hands-on single-
molecule microscopy workshop for the visitors, the investigators will tie this
research to the broader goal of enhancing underrepresented minority
participation in science at the interface of chemistry and biology.