* 1213464
* Workshop: Executive Leadership in Academic Technology and Engineering (ELATE), Winter 2012 - Spring 2013, Philadelphia, PA
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Nily Dan, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 02/28/2014
* USD 49,925.00

1213464/ Dan

The Executive Leadership in Academic Technology and Engineering (ELATE) program
will address the currently acute need for a stronger presence of women in
leadership positions in academic engineering. ELATE will recruit, nationally,
faculty in mid-career (at the associate or full professor level) from a broad
range of engineering disciplines and academic institutions. Nominations of ELATE
fellows must be submitted and sponsored by a leader in their university
typically the Dean of Engineering - thereby ensuring institutional commitment to
their career development and demonstrating institutional commitment to their
promotion and success. The part-time, annually recurring, year-long program will
be based on three components:

Instructional: Fellows will build competencies in management and leadership
skills, while working in interdisciplinary peer teams. Instructional topics will
be introduced during three week-long workshops interspaced throughout the
fellowship year, and built upon throughout the year.

Institutional: Fellows will conduct interviews with key institution leaders to
get familiarized with the workings of their university, and provide them with
institutional visibility. Fellows will also develop an Institutional Action
Project (IAP) in conjunction with an institutional leader, to address a need in
research or leadership and provide a path for career development. Examples of
IAPs include the initiation of a new research center, development of a strategic
plan for a department or unit, or the development of a new academic program.

Mentoring and networking: Fellows will be mentored during all stages of the
program (including the institutional components) by senior engineering leaders,
benchmark coaches, and peers. They could choose to stay in contact with their
peer teams (using a conference line provided) and, as the program matures, with
other ELATE graduates across the nation.

These three linked components will result in a unique and effective leadership
program that differs significantly from other, currently available leadership
programs for engineering women. It is modeled after the highly successful ELAM
(Executive Leadership in Academic Medicine) program for women in academic
medicine, dentistry and public health. ELAM alumnae now number over 700 and
include 50% of all women deans of dentistry and 25% of all women deans of
medical schools.

ELATE will increase, nation-wide, the numbers of women leaders in academic
engineering, while providing them with the necessary skills and a long-term
mentoring and networking system. As a recurring program, it will help build over
time a significant cohort of capable women engineering leaders.