* 1213287
* RUI: Development and Study of Chiral Organocatalysts for Asymmetric Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Allan Headley, Texas A&M University-Commerce
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 12/31/2016
* USD 329,681.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program in the Chemistry Division at the National Science
Foundation supports Professor Allan Headley and co-PI Bukuo Ni from Texas
A&amp;M University-Commerce to develop, synthesize, and study application of
homogeneous organocatalysts that are effective at accelerating asymmetric
reactions. These organocatalysts are unique in that they contain ionic liquid
moieties, which convey a wide range of properties to the catalysts. These ionic
liquid-supported (ILS) organocatalysts are tunable and their properties will be
adjusted to meet a wide variety of reaction conditions, including being
effective in aqueous media and thus be readily recyclable. Since the asymmetric
carbon-carbon forming reactions are cornerstone reactions in synthetic organic
chemistry, the reactions that will be investigated utilizing these
organocatalysts include the asymmetric aldol, Michael, Mannich, and the Diels-
Alder reactions. In addition, computational modeling studies will be carried out
to determine the nature of the transition states leading to the formation of
stereochemical products to better understand the nature of the interactions
involving these organocatalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge gained from
this research will advance the field of synthetic organic catalysis by providing
fundamental insights to better understand how new categories of chiral
organocatalysts influence the outcomes of asymmetric reactions and also
determine the factors that influence asymmetric synthesis. Even though present
catalysts can be used to accomplish these transformations, the organocatalysts
of this research have the added advantage of being recyclable and are also
effective under aqueous conditions, making them environmentally friendly "green"
organocatalysts. These recyclable organocatalysts have the potential to
transform organic catalysis, especially in industry, where large amounts of
catalysts are utilized. The proposed research not only serves to increase our
knowledge in the field of organic catalysis through the development and study of
new types of recyclable catalysts, but also will give students at this primarily
undergraduate institution the opportunity to gain valuable research experience.