* 1213189
* Titanium Dioxide Photocatalysis:  Interactions of band edge carriers with molecules by ultrafast photoemission spectroscopy and theory
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Hrvoje Petek, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2016
* USD 450,000.00

With this award from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division of
the National Science Foundation, Prof. Hrvoje Petek, his collaborator Dr. Jin
Zhao and their students at the University of Pittsburgh will study by experiment
and theory the electron driven processes in photocatalytic chemistry on rutile
titanium dioxide surfaces. Excitation of carriers across the band gap of
titanium dioxide with near-ultraviolet light is known to initiate a variety of
photocatalytic processes involving interaction of adsorbed molecules with
energetic electrons and holes. The timescales of photophysical and photochemical
processes span femtoseconds to seconds. The interaction of photoexcited
electrons with adsorbed molecules and defects will be studied for molecule
covered single crystal titanium dioxide surfaces under ultrahigh vacuum
conditions by time-resolved two-photon photoemission spectroscopy. The extension
of the two-photon photoemission technique to 4.6 eV will enable the study of
dynamics of the most chemically significant conduction band edge electrons with
chemisorbed molecules. In parallel, advanced theoretical methods will be used to
study how photoexcited carriers initiate chemical reactions of chemisorbed
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Titanium dioxide is a model photocatalyst of
significant fundamental interest for the conversion of solar to chemical energy
starting with abundant chemical feedstocks such as water and carbon dioxide. A
central issue in photocatalysis is how photoexcited carriers (electrons and
holes) interact with adsorbed molecules to initiate chemical reactions. Such
knowledge can be used to design more efficient photocatalyst materials and
practical solar energy conversion processes. The potential advances in
harnessing solar energy can conceivably reduce our reliance on fossil fuels and
convert potentially harmful byproducts of combustion into valuable chemical
fuels. This research will be used to train the next generation of scientists
since students will be exposed to high-level experimental and theoretical
methods for investigation of ultrafast interfacial dynamics. They will explore
research areas that can have major impacts on society, and will be exposed to
international collaboration with colleagues at the University of Science and
Technology of China.