* 1213879
* Controlling Surface Functionalization at the Molecular and Nanoscale Level Via Molecular Layer Deposition
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Stacey Bent, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2016
* USD 441,000.00

This project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Stacey Bent of Stanford University
will carry out studies to better understand the mechanisms of nucleation and
growth in molecular-layer deposition (MLD) and to develop new coupling
chemistries for the process. Fundamental mechanistic studies will be carried out
using well-defined surfaces, in situ and ex situ surface spectroscopies, and
carefully chosen molecular systems. Studies are designed to investigate the
relationship between competing effects, such as site nucleation and chain
termination, in determining how nanoscale organic films grow in MLD and to
expand the types of coupling chemistries that allow both monolayer and
multilayer film formation at important surfaces. The results will inform
molecular and nanoscale surface functionalization for future applications. The
broader impacts involve training a diverse group of graduate students,
undergraduate researchers, high school teachers and community college interns;
broadly disseminating research concepts and results to the scientific community,
to the public, and to students; and the potential impacts of MLD research on
molecular and nanoscale surface functionalization for applications in
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coating solid materials with organic films as
thin as a few nanometers (about 10,000 times smaller than the width of a human
hair) is a useful way to modify the properties of the solid and to introduce new
behavior. The composition of the nanometer-thin coatings can be controlled by a
method in which different organic molecules are deposited onto the surface of
the solid in a layer-by-layer fashion. This layer-by-layer method of forming
organic films is being explored for a range of applications including integrated
circuits, protective coatings, lithographic patterning, and solar cells. A
deeper understanding of this process is needed to gain better molecular-level
precision and control. This project will study how nanometer-thin organic films
grow using these methods and will also develop new chemistries to form the
films.