* 1213696
* Mechanistic Probes in Main Group Chemistry Employing Highly Reactive Species Containing Electron-Deficient Atoms
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2018
* Peter Gaspar, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2018
* USD 478,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanism Program (CSDM) supports Professor
Peter Gaspar of Washington University in Saint Louis to use physical organic
chemistry concepts in the study of covalent bonds in the heavier elements.
Modern organic synthesis and materials chemistry are used to study molecules
incorporating main group elements below the first row of the periodic table.
Whether it is new stereoselective routes to natural products, electronic
materials, drug delivery systems, or bio-inspired nanofabrication of silicon-
based materials - success in these endeavors depends on the evolution of main-
group mechanistic chemistry through the understanding of the making and breaking
of bonds to heavier elements. The proposed research synergistically combines
mass spectrometric elucidation of ion chemistry, gas- and solution-phase study
of chemical reactivity, and computational modeling. The strategy is to study
heavier-element analogs of electron-deficient and multiply bonded species whose
structure and reactivity are well described by the mechanistic ideas of organic
chemistry. The parent species, such as carbenes and nitrenes, react in such a
distinctive manner that mechanistic changes can readily be recognized in their
heavier analogs. The observed changes will not only broaden our mechanistic
ideas, but also lead to the discovery of new synthetically useful reagents.
Among the species to be studied is a family of extremely electron-deficient ions
and molecules with only four electrons in their outer shells. These have the
potential for participating in reactions that form three new bonds
simultaneously, processes never previously observed and rarely suggested. They
represent a three-dimensional extension of pericyclic reactions with
considerable synthetic interest.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Included in the broader
impacts of this work are the prospects for discovery of basic principles that
will help us to better understand the covalent bond, its formation and
reactivity throughout the periodic table, and to use that knowledge to find
useful, new chemistry, and to make new molecules. For the coworkers trained on
this project, their experience provides a diverse background, encouraging them
to develop a versatility and confidence that prepares them to tackle a broad
range of problems and launch diverse careers. Throughout his career, Gaspar has
been involved in the training of under-represented groups at the graduate,
undergraduate, postdoctoral and high school levels. These have included
undergraduates honored as Rhodes Scholars, Pfizer Summer Research Fellows, and
as winners of NSF and NIH graduate fellowships. Graduate students in the Gaspar
group have had considerable success in competing for postdoctoral fellowships,
and postdoctorals have secured excellent appointments in industry, research
institutes, and academia.