* 1213758
* Correlation of Quantum Dot Photophysics and Structure with Atomic Precision
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* James McBride, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah L. Stoll
* 06/30/2015
* USD 495,000.00

This research aims to elucidate how the atomic structure of core/shell
nanocrystals (quantum dots) impacts their photophysics. In this work, Prof.
Sandra Rosenthal and Prof. James McBride of Vanderbilt University leverage
modern chemical techniques to synthesize quantum dots of varying composition and
shell coverage, which will then be imaged with atomic resolution via aberration-
corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM). Further, these
structures will be characterized utilizing single nanocrystal spectroscopy as
well as ultrafast fluorescence upconversion spectroscopy to obtain blinking
statistics in addition to exciton dynamics. Ultimately, methodologies to perform
correlated single nanocrystal spectroscopy and aberration-corrected STEM will be
developed in order to precisely determine which specific nanostructures provide
the highest fluorescence yield, photostability and reduced blinking; information
that is lost in ensemble measurements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The utilization of
state-of-the-art electron microscopy in conjunction with single molecule
fluorescence techniques will clarify the true effect of shell coverage and
composition. This will have immediate impact on commercial applications
utilizing quantum dot fluorescence as biological probes and current efforts to
incorporate highly fluorescent and stable quantum dots for solid-state lighting.
Improvement in fluorescent probes will lead to higher sensitivity for drug
discovery applications as well as allowing for direct measurements of biological
dynamics at the single molecule level. Additionally, perfecting quantum dot
design will greatly enhance the efficiency and extend the lifetime of quantum
dot-based solid state lighting devices. Undergraduate research will play an
integral role in the synthesis and characterization of the nanocrystals, while
fostering an understanding of how to devise, implement an experiment, and how to
interpret and present data. A kit demonstrating the size-dependent quantum dot
fluorescence as an introduction to 'nano' will be developed for the Vanderbilt
Students Volunteers for Science organization (VSVS), which arranged more than
four hundred classroom visits last year and will be extended to rural TN via an
NSF EPSCoR award.