* 1213594
* Metal-based Electron Transfer Processes under Confinement: A Kinetic and Spectroscopic Study of Modified Reactivity in Oil-water RM Microemulsions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* David Richens, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2017
* USD 240,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program supports Professor
Michael D. Johnson of New Mexico State University to investigate and
characterize the location of redox active metal complexes in reverse micelles
(RMs) using a combination of NMR, UV-vis and FTIR techniques. The goal is to
better understand complex reactivity as a function of compartmentalization via
interfacial penetration, and to investigate catalysis via increased ion pairing
at the interface. Microelectrode electrochemistry will be used to establish
whether modified reactivity in RMs is due to a change in the Marcus driving
force. Professor Johnson will also measure the rates of electron transfer for a
set of complexes with systematic variation in complex charge (local
electrostatics at the interface), location, hydrophobicity and ligand
nucleophilicity. The aim is to correlate reactant location with thermodynamic
parameters such as redox potentials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has
potentially broad biological impact in the refining of metallodrug uptake
efficiency and assimilation when redox chemistry precedes the onset of
physiological activity, e.g., in anti-cancer agents (PtIV/II, RuIII/II) and
vanadium agents for diabetes (VV/IV). The results may also help predict the
rates of redox reactions in vivo within small molecule siderophores (FeIII/II).
Non-biological applications include predictions of aqueous chemical reactivity
within the cavities of catalytic microporous solids, and within the water
droplets formed during electrospray MS, which have been assumed (but not
verified) to be representative of the chemistry in bulk
solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Johnson has extensive experience in
student training and outreach and is especially committed to undergraduate
research involving underrepresented groups, particularly Hispanic and Native
American students. He is directly involved in a Minority Access to Research
Careers program at NMSU - one of the largest MARC programs in the country,
sending 8-10 graduating senior students per year to graduate programs in the
physical and life sciences. Other students have gone on for MD, DDS, DPharm.,
D.Psy. or other post graduate degrees. Through this program Professor Johnson
has impacted over 200 undergraduates during the past 15 years. Professor Johnson
also participates in the Bridges programs at NMSU, whose mission is to increase
the transfer rate of Native American Students in Arizona and New Mexico from
area community colleges to 4-year degree programs. He is also active in the
annual Undergraduate Research and Creative Arts Symposium (URCAS) at NMSU.