* 1213362
* Characterization of Biomolecular Interactions at Interfaces Using Sum Frequency Generation Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,10/31/2014
* Victor Batista, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 10/31/2014
* USD 271,145.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes is supporting Professor Elsa
Yan and her co-PI, Professor Victor Batista, to develop an optical method to
characterize protein structures at interfaces. Characterization of protein
structures at interfaces is important for understanding biological functions of
proteins associated with cell membranes. It is also important for developing
biomaterials and biosensors to meet the needs in biotechnology. However, there
has been a lack of real-time and in situ method that can provide selectivity of
both interface and protein secondary structures. To bridge this technological
gap, this proposal seeks to establish chiral sum frequency generation (SFG)
spectroscopy into a robust method for unambigiuous identification of protein
secondary structures in situ and in real time at interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project is expected to have broader scientific impact as it may
lead to related approaches to study other chiral macromolecules at interfaces,
including native biopolymers (e.g., DNA and RNA) and synthetic polymers and
supramolecular assemblies at interfaces. The method provides optical signatures
of protein secondary structures free of optical background from aqueous solvent
and achiral solutes. The proposed research applies quantitative physical methods
to study biomolecular systems, which is incorporated into the education
activities conducted by the principle investigator both in classrooms and
laboratories. These activities target students at the levels of high school,
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral, providing them multidisciplinary
training at the interface of biological and physical sciences.