* 1213835
* Nanocrystal growth and exotic doping at extremely high-pressure hydrothermal conditions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Hengzhong Zhang, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2016
* USD 354,305.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Hengzhong Zhang and Jillian Banfield of the
University of California at Berkeley will investigate titania nanocrystal
growth, structure and morphology evolution, and structural incorporation of
impurities under extremely high pressure hydrothermal conditions. The approach
is to synthesize titania nanoparticles with and without the presence of dopants,
to employ a special diamond anvil cell in performing an in situ synchrotron
X-ray diffraction study of nanocrystal growth and structure change in
supercritical water at very high temperatures and pressures, to perform ex situ
microscopy and X-ray absorption studies on the nanocrystals to determine dopant
distributions, and finally to use theoretical modeling methods to understand the
physical and chemical properties of titania nanoparticles under such conditions.
The broader impacts involve the integration of undergraduate student training
and education into the research project, the incorporation of research results
into the undergraduate laboratory curriculum, the broad dissemination of
research results through publications, presentations and a nanogeoscience
website, and the potential impacts of the research in many areas of science.

Nanocrystals are small pieces of material with dimensions on the order of 1 to
100 nanometers, which is about 10,000 times smaller than the width of a human
hair, and they are important for a wide range of technologies including
pigments, electronics, and medical imaging. The ability to control nanocrystal
growth to achieve required specifications such as phase, size, and morphology
and defect structure is key to the realization of their use nanotechnologies.
Nanocrystal growth under extreme temperature and pressure conditions is largely
unexplored, and this project will pursue this research topic using both state-
of-the-art experimental techniques and theoretical and computational modeling.
Such research will enhance our knowledge about manipulating nanocrystals and
potentially lead to the discovery of new nanocrystal structures and
compositions.