* 1213926
* Structure and Catalytic Property Relationship of Core-Shell Metal Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Hong Yang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2016
* USD 375,255.00

With this award from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division
Professor Hong Yan of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign will
develop new heterogeneous, metallic catalysts as well as fundamental
understanding of the structural origins of their high performance in oxygen
reduction reactions (ORR) and in chemical conversion of major by-products from
biomass. Specifics aims are: 1) study of the preparation and fine nanostructures
of M@Pt (core@shell) particle-on-particle heterogeneous nanostructures; 2) study
of the structure and catalytic property relationship of M@Pt or M@PtM catalysts
in ORR; 3) design, synthesis and ORR catalytic property of faceted heterogeneous
Pt multimetallic nanocrystal catalysts; and 4) thermal chemical conversion of
glycerol using on Pt-based core-shell heterogeneous catalysts. Preparation,
atomic level characterization and structure-catalytic property relation of core-
shell, heterogeneous nanostructures will be examined. Effect of particular
structural issues such as facet and surface distortion on catalytic performance
will be carefully studied.

New production technologies using alternative energy sources, including hydrogen
and biofuel, heavily depend on the development of new generation of advanced
catalysts to facilitate and accelerate reactions using less energy than
conventional systems. This project will directly address this technological
challenge through the design and understanding of new bimetallic nanostructures.
It will also serve as a training platform for students at all levels and with
different social, economic backgrounds to become able scientists to carry out
life-long research in the utilization of new sustainable energy sources. The
knowledge gained during this work will be rapidly disseminated through
scientific publications, conference presentations and web-based media.