* 1213768
* Surface Rupture Earthquakes and the Mechanics of Earthquake Faulting
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Steven Wesnousky, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2015
* USD 168,902.00

The proposed work will develop new observations and data from historical ground
rupturing earthquakes to improve understanding of the earthquake rupture
process. Prior observations have worked to define the role of fault geometry in
rupture propagation, addressed and discounted self-similarity in the description
of surface rupture slip distributions, shown clearly that fault rupture is not
consistently uni- or bi-lateral, that earthquakes do not consistently initiate
on the section of fault ultimately recording maximum slip, and thatthe
relationship between average coseismic slip and rupture length for large strike-
slip earthquakes appears to require coseismic slip at progressively greater
depths below the seismogenic layer as a function of rupture length. Previous
work was been limited by time and funding to a set of about three dozen large
continental earthquakes which shared the characteristics that there existed (1)
maps of the surface rupture trace, (2) maps of the nearby active faults that did
not rupture, and (3) measurements of coseismic offset at many points along the
strike of the rupture to define the surface slip distribution. The resulting
compilation has already become a heavily cited and widely used resource for the
larger earthquake physics community. This work will extend previous analyses to
a list of more than twice as many earthquakes that have produced surface
ruptures but for which documentation may not simultaneously satisfy all three
criteria. The premise of this proposal is that many observations and insights
are yet to be gained in following a similar approach and extending the analysis
to these additional surface rupturing earthquakes.

Broader Significance: Placing observational bounds on our efforts to understand
the physics of the earthquake process is at the heart of quantifying earthquake
hazard imposed by mapped active faults; this is the broadest and most practical
impact of the proposed research. Other researchers have developed numerical
models of earthquake rupture behavior, but knowing how well they predict real
earth behavior depends on observational data from real ground ruptures. Research
questions include how far a rupture can jump from one fault to another, how
angle deviations in a fault trace affect rupture, how deep into the crust
rupture extends, and how surface rupture correlates with expected ground
motions. As a practical example, the empirical observations will improve tools
to define the expected endpoints and thus rupture lengths of earthquakes in
California. Funding will also contribute to the training of a graduate-level
geoscience student.