* 1213480
* Neutrinos and New Particles in High Energy Physics, Astrophysics and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2013
* Irina Mocioiu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

High energy physics and particle astrophysics are very dynamical fields that
have revealed evidence of physics beyond the standard model of particle physics
through the discovery of neutrino oscillations, dark matter and dark energy.
This project is aimed at advancing the theoretical understanding of such aspects
of physics beyond the standard model and at maximizing the amount of information
that can be obtained from the experimental data by considering new analysis
frameworks and exploring new connections between different phenomena. The
project integrates an educational outreach program aimed at high school
teachers. Neutrino experiments are a large component of both the intensity and
cosmic frontiers of exploration in particle physics. The research covers
theoretical aspects of several different science topics that can be studied
using large neutrino detectors. More specifically: The PI will work on
optimizing the next generation of neutrino experiments and developing a better
framework for understanding the data and its implications for theoretical
models. An extensive study of atmospheric neutrino oscillations in present and
future large neutrino detectors will be performed, extending the PIs
investigation of such oscillations in the Ice-Cube Deep Core detector. Topics to
be explored include: non-standard neutrino interactions in matter; tests for the
existence of new species of sterile neutrinos; the value of the atmospheric
neutrino data, which covers a large range of energies and propagation distances,
in combination with precise neutrino data from long baseline neutrino
experiments and other observations. Supernova neutrinos from a galactic
explosion would be observed in very large numbers by present and future neutrino
detectors. The PI will explore possible analytic solutions to the flavor
oscillation equations for streaming neutrinos in a supernova, especially the
effects of neutrino-neutrino scattering, by employing methods used to study
collective effects in other fields of science. Such solutions could help in
simplifying the very involved numerical simulations of supernova neutrino
propagation and thus lead to a better understanding of the information that can
be obtained from a supernova neutrino detection. The project will address the
potential for indirect dark matter detection in large neutrino detectors.
Investigation of its value in the context of a general theoretical framework and
in connection with other dark matter searches and potential discoveries is also
proposed. High energy physics, astrophysics and cosmology and the questions they
are trying to address are very exciting and capture the interest of a larger
public, providing excellent outreach opportunities. Penn State University and
the Pennsylvania Space Grant Consortium coordinate an annual series of summer
Science Workshops for Educators aimed at secondary school teachers. The PI and
her experimenter colleagues and have successfully developed such a workshop in
particle astrophysics. For the future they will continue organizing such summer
schools and expand the interactive activities.