* 1213561
* Collaborative Research: System Optimization and Data Analysis in Two-Dimensional Liquid Chromatography
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Peter Carr, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 07/31/2017
* USD 377,100.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Sarah Rutan at Virginia Commonwealth University,
Professor Peter Carr at University of Minnesota, Professor Dwight Stoll at
Gustavus Adolphus College and their groups will address the challenges of
performing quantitative comprehensive two dimensional liquid chromatography
(LCxLC). This technique carries out separations of the component molecules
present in complex mixtures using two very different liquid separation systems,
and offers a more powerful method for separating complex mixtures such as urine.
The proposed research will enable LCxLC to become a practical technique for the
analysis of small molecule metabolites, which will therefore lead to more rapid
and facile discovery of molecular markers of disease and treatment. The
intellectual merit of the work carried out by this team of investigators lies in
the development of a fundamental understanding of how changes in the chemistry
of the chromatographic separation processes affect the characteristics of the
resulting data, developing an understanding how these chemical factors affect
the performance of the data analysis methods, and tuning the data analysis
methods to adapt to these data features. These efforts will transform a time-
consuming process that is at best semi-quantitative, into a rapid and efficient
method that will provide precise, quantitative results for biomarker
identification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the work lie in
providing biological scientists with the tools needed to characterize the
amounts and relationships of various molecular players as they vary depending on
growth, disease state and environmental exposure. This research will contribute
towards reaching a holistic understanding of complex biological systems. This
knowledge will contribute to refined technologies that have tremendous promise
for understanding and curing diseases, enhancing agriculture and preserving the
environment. In order to make chromatographic concepts more accessible to
students, a series of dynamic, online homework problems will be developed based
on online LC simulators. There is also a strong component of human resources
development in the training of graduate and undergraduate students, and post-
doctoral scholars for careers in chemistry and biology. The students working on
this project will benefit from the synergy of working with three talented and
creative researchers in separation science.