* 1213047
* Shape-Responsive Fluorophores
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Kyril Solntsev, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2016
* USD 586,099.00

With the support from the Chemical Dynamic, Structure and Mechanisms Program at
the National Science Foundation, Professor Laren Tolbert of the Georgia
Institute of Technology will take advantage of the photophysics of the green
fluorescent protein (GFP), which contains an embedded chromophore that exhibits
an excited-state proton transfer (ESPT) cascade through a relay mechanism, as
well emission quantum yields and vibronic structure that make it a unique probe
for its environment. Methods developed in the Tolbert laboratories for excited-
state proton transfer (ESPT) will be extended to biology, taking advantage of
these properties, using supramolecular constructs to reproduce the GFP
fluorescence. These studies will use large-scale synthesis and screening
techniques to replace the protective protein barrel in GFP by new hosts,
particularly proteins, but also other macromolecules and polymers which turn on
fluorescence. Of special interest are a number of proteins, e.g., beta-
lactoglobulin, which have "natural" ligands and may be expected to "turn on" in
the presence of a chromophore similar to the natural ligand. On the one hand,
this activation event serves to make the chromophore a probe for the host. On
the other hand, the type of fluorescence, whether proton-transfer mediated or
driven by solvent effects, provides clues as to the nature of the host-guest
interaction. Whereas other analogous studies have focused on the structure of
the host, Tolbert will use the availability of an almost infinite variety of
guest molecules, testing various features of the non-bonding interactions within
the complex and allowing a direct examination of the how subtle changes in the
guest molecule impact the photophysics of the complex. These studies will
include the design, synthesis, and exploration of a large variety of new
chromophores which are chemically and topologically responsive to their
environment. Some are non-emissive in the absence of a host, but can be
activated by their environment and thus will create a versatile basis for the
wide exploration of the effect of cavity shape, polarity, and acidity on
fluorescence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tolbert and coworkers will collaborate with
scientists in a number of laboratories, and will train a set of future
scientists skilled in organic synthesis, spectroscopy, mechanistic chemistry,
and collaborative research. The involvement of the investigator and the students
in such close interdisciplinary international collaborations will help develop a
diverse, globally-engaged, U.S. science and engineering workforce. Several
specific outreaches will be pursued, including the involvement of undergraduate
students in research, both during the year and during the summer through our
Research Experience for Undergraduates Project. First, a group of senior
undergraduate students at Georgia Tech will participate in the current project
through a senior laboratory as part of their graduation requirement. Second,
graduate students in the Tolbert group will participate in high school chemistry
teaching in schools with high proportions of students from underrepresented
groups.