* 1213814
* Interfacial water from molecular to mesoscopic scale and its relation to tunable hydrophobicity
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2017
* Alenka Luzar, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2017
* USD 425,000.00

Alenka Luzar of Virginia Commonwealth University is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
Division to carry out research on reversible wetting transitions and nanowetting
of surfaces with topological and chemical heterogeneities. The methodologies
include a combination of theory and simulation techniques in statistical
mechanics and development of computational algorithms to deal with interfacial
properties of water in nanoconfined spaces. Three specific problems are being
investigated: (1) electric field or pressure-induced transitions on
superyhdrophobic surfaces to achieve reversible switching between contrasting
Cassie and Wenzel states; (2) nanodroplet actuation on an electrode to provide a
detailed and self-consistent microscopic picture of drop and electrode dynamic
responses under applied voltage, at conditions where continuum physics offers at
best very crude predictions; and (3) probing the extent of surface force
additivity on chemically heterogeneous substrates to address how well they can
predict forces between mixed surfaces from those between pure
ones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has broad impact on many disciplines
including materials science, engineering, and biology. Molecular level
understanding of intelligent control of surface hydrophobicity by external
stimuli can find real-world applications in nano-fluidics and electro-optics.
The first topic elucidates if reversible switching between wetting-resistant and
hydrophilic behavior of a material is achievable at the nanoscale under electric
and/or pressure control, and what are the time scales involved. The second topic
concerns the design of nano-sized optical elements under electric control. They
want to learn if tunable optical devices can be miniaturized to the nanoscale
level, and what could be the essential advantages or challenges in comparison to
macroscopic ones. The third topic impacts research into self-assembling
materials studied in nanotechnology, as well as biophysics.