* 1213329
* Quantitative characterization of weak interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* A. Alan Pinkerton, University of Toledo
* Continuing Grant
* James Lisy
* 07/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

Through this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Prof. A. Alan Pinkerton and Dr. Elizabeth
Zhurova from the University of Toledo, will quantitatively characterize
important weak interactions between atoms or molecules in the solid state using
advanced, high resolution, X-ray crystallographic techniques. The electron
density distribution will be determined from the intensities of the X-rays
scattered from single crystals, and quantified by fitting the parameters of an
atom-centered multipole expansion to the observed data. A range of intra- and
inter-molecular interactions that have been previously identified from
structural data, many with "non-bonded" distances significantly below the sum of
the Van der Waals radii, will be studied. Currently potential interactions
between 20 different atom pairs have been identified for 20 different molecular
solids. Information from this study will provide new insight into a wide
spectrum of scientific areas such as materials design/crystal engineering and
biological ligand-receptor binding/cell signaling.

Properties of all materials are intimately related to the distribution of
electrons between the atoms and molecules. For example, diamond and graphite are
composed entirely of carbon atoms, but have vastly different properties, diamond
being very hard, and graphite being a soft lubricant. This is easily understood
as the distribution of electrons in diamond leads to strong covalent bonds in
three dimensions, whereas graphite is strongly bonded in two dimensions, and
weakly bonded in the third. The importance of strong chemical bonds has been
recognized by generations of chemists, and their characterization by theory and
experiment is the material for text books. The importance of weak interactions,
with the exception of hydrogen bonds, has not been systematically studied using
X-ray diffraction techniques until now, and represents a new investigative
direction in chemistry. This pursuit will allow graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows to acquire specialized training in cryogenics, and in high
resolution X-ray crystallography. The new methods for cryogenic data collection
and analysis, followed by workshops to train others, will push the limits of
what is experimentally obtainable. This project will also be integrated into an
outreach program to introduce high school students to the science of
crystallography.