* 1213141
* Quantum Phases of Rotating Multipolar Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* K. Birgitta Whaley, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2015
* USD 420,000.00

Birgitta Whaley of the University of California, Berkeley, is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Chemistry division to use ground state Quantum Monte Carlo techniques for the
study of novel quantum phases formed by multipolar molecules. Professor Whaley
and her research group study dipolar and quadrupolar molecules at densities
where the interactions provide significant anisotropic orientational
contributions to the energy, resulting in strongly interacting quantum molecular
systems. Their goal is to determine the behavior and properties of these systems
with special attention to the interplay between translational and rotational
degrees of freedom in determining the quantum properties in the degenerate
quantum regime, i.e., at the lowest possible temperatures. They are using a new
path integral ground state Quantum Monte Carlo code developed by the researcher
and her coworkers that incorporates full rotational and translational degrees of
freedom with a high accuracy "any order'' propagator. The new high accuracy
rotation/translation code allows exploration of the novel chemistry and physics
of these systems without constraints on dipole orientation and allows
calculation of off-diagonal matrix elements giving access to study of large
scale quantum coherences in molecular systems, allowing them to investigate for
the first time how molecular rotations might modify the well-known off-diagonal
long range order of translational degrees of freedom in quantum gases and
fluids.

Recent growth of experimental methods that not only probe and reveal the
microscopic behavior of quantum phases but also enable emulation of new phases
in Feynman's original sense of quantum simulation, which makes theoretical
research in novel molecular quantum phases an essential component of the
chemical physics landscape for the near future. This research brings together
molecular chemistry with quantum physics to extend the realm of molecular
chemistry to cold molecules in strongly quantum regimes. It thus embodies the
interdisciplinary view of science that is an essential aspect of scientific
research in the twenty-first century. The anticipated results form a base for
quantum simulation of biological and novel condensed phase materials and reveal
opportunities for creating unusual materials with tailored quantum properties
and diverse applications. The research involves students from chemistry and
physics, and will be linked to education and outreach activities on the Berkeley
campus.