* 1213443
* Controlling olefin selectivity in electrocatalytically-assisted alkane dehydrogenation
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Umit Ozkan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

With this award from the Chemical Catalysis Program, Prof. Umit S. Ozkan from
the Ohio State Uinversity and co-PI Anne Co will investigate, in an
interdisciplinary setting, the factors that control olefin selectivity from the
electrocatalytically-assisted dehydrogenation of lower alkanes. The primary
challenge in alkane dehydrogenation is selectivity control. The proposed
research will combine two different strategies to tackle this problem. (1) Using
an electrocatalytic reactor scheme will prevent hydrocarbons and oxygen coming
in contact in the gas phase, hence limiting further oxidation of olefin
molecules. At the same time, voltage control will provide a steady-flux of oxide
ions to the anode, lifting the thermodynamic limitation, which governs non-
oxidative dehydration reactions. Also, controlling the transfer of oxide ions to
the anode surface could limit any carbonaceous species depositing on the surface
in the form of coke. (2) By focusing on the surface properties of the anode
electrocatalysts, it will be possible to tailor its activity to promote alkane
activation, but inhibit C-C bond cleavage and complete oxidation of olefins.
Understanding the structure/function relationship will guide this tailoring. To
achieve this goal, the co-PIs will combine their expertise from two different
fields, namely heterogeneous catalysis and electrochemistry. The interface of
these areas will provide a unique approach to tackle the problems inherent in
alkane dehydrogenation. The work plan will combine materials synthesis, detailed
characterization and electrocatalytic activity measurements in an iterative
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alkane activation and dehydrogenation are
reactions of great importance to the chemical industry. Selective conversion of
alkanes to olefins may have significant economic impact. The fundamental
understanding which will be acquired in this study can be extended to other
catalytic oxidation reactions such as production of aldehydes, ketones and
alcohols from lower alkanes. Many of the results from this project will be used
to enhance the contents of a new course on electrochemistry, developed by the
co-PI. The PI has well-established partnerships with two local high schools to
provide research internship experience to senior high school students. One of
the schools, Columbus School for Girls, is a college preparatory school
dedicated to girls' intellectual and social growth from infancy to the twelfth
grade. Other programs that focus on human resource development will include
College of Engineering Summer Orientation for Female Engineering Freshmen and
"Energy and Environment Day" for ninth grade girls as part of a "CheME &amp; YOU
@OSU" summer camp at Ohio. Both PI and co-PI have an existing track record of
involving undergraduate students in hands on research, leading to co-authorship
in research publications.