* 1213655
* Mechanistic and spectroscopic investigation of sulfur-oxidizing non-heme iron enzymes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Brad Pierce, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

In this award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Dr. Brad Pierce, from the University of Texas at Arlington, will
study the mechanism and regulation of mammalian thiol dioxygenase (TDO) enzymes.
Characterization of transient non-heme iron [Fe-O] intermediates has
historically attracted considerable interest within the area of bioinorganic
chemistry. This intense focus of research efforts can largely be explained by
the vast number of functionally (and structurally) diverse non-heme iron enzymes
and the incredible versatility exhibited in chemical oxidations they initiate.
In contrast to the canonical 2-His-1-carboxylate facial triad motif exhibited by
nearly all members of this enzyme class, the active site of mammalian TDO
enzymes utilize a neutral, all-His (3-His) facial triad motif. Furthermore, TDO
enzymes also have an unusual covalently cross-linked cysteine-tyrosine pair in
close proximity to the non-heme iron active site. One objective for this
proposal is to identify and spectroscopically characterize transient
intermediates produced during TDO-catalyzed thiol-oxidation. An additional area
of focus is the role of a rare post-transcriptional cysteine-tyrosine covalent
modification within the active site of TDO enzymes. Specifically, steady-state
O2-coupling efficiency of TDO enzymes will be determined for comparison to C93
and Y157 mutants. These results will be correlated to specific molecular
interactions within the active site as observed by spectroscopy to evaluate the
role of outer-sphere interactions on native TDO catalysis. In contrast to
oxygenase/oxidase enzymes, synthetic non-heme iron model complexes are unable to
gate O2-reactivity through substrate-binding. As a consequence, model systems
are poor catalysts for oxidative transformations. Currently, this poorly
understood aspect of non-heme iron catalysis represents one of the most
significant hurdles in the development of industrially useful O2-dependent iron
catalysts. Therefore, an additional area of investigation will focus on the
mechanism by which TDO enzymes modulate O2-reactivity through protein-substrate
interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Pierce's research is potentially
technology-enabling in that results obtained could be applied to the design of
biologically inspired catalysts for oxidative transformations. The award will
contribute significantly to the University of Texas at Arlington's strategic
plan of becoming a national research university and a source of well-prepared
STEM students. Furthermore, given the high population of first-generation
students at the University, a significant impact can be made toward increasing
diversity within STEM fields by sponsoring undergraduate and graduate research
opportunities. Mentoring future scientists is a significant priority, and this
award will provide continued research opportunities and support for both local
area high school students and undergraduates at the University. The
interdisciplinary nature of the proposed research will provide a wide breadth of
research training for students at every level (high school, undergraduate, and
graduate).