* 1213236
* RUI: Systematic Analysis of the Photodegradation of Pesticides on Heterogeneous Surfaces: The Photolysis of Imidazolinone Herbicides on Two Midwest Crops
* MPS,CHE
* 10/15/2012,09/30/2016
* Amanda Nienow, Gustavus Adolphus College
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 09/30/2016
* USD 152,950.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Chemistry Division at the
National Science Foundation supports the research of Professor Amanda Nienow
from Gustavus Adolphus College who will explore the heterogeneous chemistry of
pesticides sorbed to the crop/plant surfaces to which they are applied with a
focus on the photolysis mechanisms and photoproducts formed when one class of
pesticides, the imidazaolinone herbicides, is applied to plants. The
photochemistry of some imidazolinone herbicides has been examined in aqueous
systems but not on plant surfaces; this examination will provide insight into
the photodegradation mechanisms and photoproducts of these herbicides at crop
surfaces, thereby enhancing current understanding of the environmental chemistry
of the imidazolinone herbicides. In addition, the knowledge gained from this
work will inform reconnaissance missions for measurement of organic pollutants
in the environment, provide a molecular understanding of the chemistry occurring
at the plant surface, and potentially influence regulation of pesticide
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide a more realistic
picture of the environmental fate of pesticides by examining photolysis of
pesticides sorbed to cuticular wax and plant foliage. The research has
implications for environmental modeling and pesticide regulation. In addition,
the methods and protocols developed under this project will be a model for
studying a wide range of pesticides or other environmentally relevant organic
molecules, and may be extended to study the photochemistry of organic molecules
on other surfaces, (e.g., urban buildings). The undergraduates will participate
in all aspects of this interdisciplinary project and will gain experience in a
wide range of fields including spectroscopy, chromatography, microscopy, and
statistical data analysis. The students' experiences will improve their ability
to plan, analyze, synthesize and communicate scientific results. In addition,
they will gain experience presenting at national meetings and co-authoring peer
reviewed journal articles. All of these experiences will position them well for
future graduate studies or professional careers. The principal investigator is a
faculty member early in her career, so this project will benefit her by
supporting foundational research and establishment of a sustainable research
program. The results will be disseminated through publications and presentations
at scientific conferences. Aspects of the project will also be used to enhance
the Chemistry Department's established community outreach into local elementary
schools.