* 1213912
* Selenium Antioxidant Mechanisms: Metal Binding vs. Reactive Oxygen Species Scavenging
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,05/31/2017
* Julia Brumaghim, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 05/31/2017
* USD 402,080.00

As a result of this award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program, Dr.
Julia L. Brumaghim, from Clemson University, will study the molecular
determinants of selenium antioxidant activity. Iron and copper-generated
hydroxyl radical causes DNA damage and cell death under oxidative stress
conditions, and controlling this damage is a vital cellular process. Selenium
antioxidant treatment to prevent DNA damage is an active area of research, and
multiple studies are yielding promising but often contradictory results that
highlight the need for additional research into the fundamental mechanisms of
selenium antioxidant activity. Dr. Brumaghim has recently established that
selenium antioxidants prevent oxidative DNA damage by binding metal ions,
preventing generation or release of damaging hydroxyl radical. The new project
will investigate metal coordination as a novel selenium antioxidant mechanism
and compare it to more traditional mechanisms of selenium antioxidant activity,
such as glutathione peroxidase activity and reactive oxygen species scavenging.
For this work, Dr. Brumaghim and her students will synthesize coordination
complexes of selenium antioxidants with Fe2+ and Cu+ ions to determine how metal
binding results in antioxidant activity, and quantify the ability of selenium
antioxidants to inhibit copper-, iron-, and peroxynitrite-mediated DNA damage.
This research represents the first systematic comparison of selenium antioxidant
mechanisms from basic coordination chemistry to DNA damage studies, and the
results of this research will extend the fields of coordination chemistry,
oxidative damage, and selenium biochemistry. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In addition
to the scientific advances this research represents, performing these studies
will promote graduate and undergraduate student training in a broad variety of
techniques related to the growing fields of inorganic and biological chemistry.
It will also establish or expand research partnerships between Dr. Brumaghim and
Profs. Craig Bayse (Old Dominion University), Pamela Riggs-Gelasco (College of
Charleston), and R. Kenneth Marcus (Clemson University). Research results will
be disseminated broadly through scientific publications and seminars at
scientific conferences and universities, as well as through seminars for the
general public. Dr. Brumaghim will also develop a summer teacher-training
workshop on antioxidants and their ability to prevent DNA damage in conjunction
with the South Carolina DNA Learning Center at Clemson University. This workshop
will provide high school teachers with hands-on activities and state-of-the-art
knowledge about the popular topic of antioxidants.