* 1213358
* Developing New Photoswitchable Chromophores for Frequency-Domain Imaging: Signal Amplification, Interference Suppression, and Sensitive Detection
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Alexander Li, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2016
* USD 430,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Alexander Li at Washington State University and his
group will develop new analytical methods for sensitive detection using
photoswitchable probes. Specifically, the project will first prepare
photoswitchable probes, aiming at optimizing those properties associated with
photoswitching, such as the bright-to-dark contrast. Subsequently, samples
labeled with such photoswitchable probes will be investigated using fluorescence
microscopes. The fundamental principle to be demonstrated is that
photoswitchable probes offer much enhanced sensitivity while compared to
conventional fluorescent probes. One of the advantages of using photoswitchable
probes is that photoswitching can effectively provide means to rid of false
positives, a very important attribute in real-world detections. Another
anticipated outcome is that photoswitching enables frequency-domain imaging,
which amplifies the signal while suppressing other noise. The key to the success
resides in the chemistry because preparation of such photoswitchable probes is
at the focal point at solving real-world problems like false positives and
signal amplification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and undergraduate students
who will be involved in this project will be trained in chemical synthesis,
biological sample preparation, optical instrumentation, laser spectroscopy, and
photonic measurements. Outreach to middle school and high school students
through workshop will help to stimulate scientific interest of the younger
generation and broaden impacts to general public.