* 1213771
* Atomistic Mechanisms of Gold Nanoparticle Reactivity: Growth, Decomposition, Catalysis, and Ligand Exchange
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,09/30/2016
* Christine Aikens, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 09/30/2016
* USD 345,000.00

Christine Aikens of Kansas State University is supported by the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program in employing a variety of theoretical
methods in order to investigate fundamental questions related to the atomistic
mechanisms of gold and silver nanoparticle growth, decomposition, catalysis, and
ligand exchange. Density functional theory will be utilized throughout the
project since it provides a good balance of accuracy with a reasonable
computational cost. Continuum solvent models such as COSMO will be used to
examine how solvent polarity affects reaction energetics. Coupled cluster
calculations during the catalysis work will improve the accuracy of barrier
heights and reaction energies. We will refine parameters for ReaxFF, a classical
force field, in order to apply this method to molecular dynamics simulations of
large gold nanoparticle systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small gold and silver
nanoparticles with diameters on the order of 1-2 nanometers have a wide array of
applications such as selective catalysis. Previous theoretical studies on these
nanoparticles have primarily focused on their structure and/or physical
properties rather than reactivity. In this research, the PI will examine factors
that affect nanoparticle reaction mechanisms. This research will lead to better
control of size and monodispersity of gold and silver nanoparticles. In
addition, it will identify factors leading to nanoparticle toxicity.
Furthermore, this research will lead to better control of nanoparticle catalysis
and assembly into arrays. In addition, this proposal will enable the PI to
continue broadening participation through the inclusion of female and minority
students in research. Funding from this proposal will be used to assist
undergraduate and graduate students as they perform research and disseminate
their results. These results will be broadly circulated through peer-reviewed
papers and through presentations at a variety of institutions and conferences.