* 1213955
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  The La Consentida Archaeological Project
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2013
* Arthur Joyce, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2013
* USD 24,901.00

Under the direction of Dr. Arthur Joyce, Mr. Guy Hepp will collect data for his
doctoral dissertation. His research will investigate the origins of sedentism,
the transition toward reliance upon agriculture, and the origins of hierarchical
social inequality in initial Early Formative period Mesoamerica. He will
undertake surface survey, mapping, and excavations at the archaeological site of
La Consentida in coastal Oaxaca, Mexico. La Consentida offers a promising
opportunity to promote new understandings of the birth of Mesoamerican culture
in a region and ecological setting never previously included in the canon of
Mesoamerican scholarship for this important early time period. The project will
employ cutting-edge archaeological techniques to address its research
objectives, including topographic mapping using a light-emitting mapping
station, neutron activation analysis to identify exchange networks that
mobilized ceramics and social interaction, analysis of stable carbon and
nitrogen isotopes to reconstruct ancient diet, AMS carbon dating for
chronological control of excavated contexts, and analysis of macrobotanical
finds to identify the food remains in domestic garbage
deposits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mesoamerican Formative or Preclassic period
(c.a. 1900 BCE - 250 CE) which is represented at La Consentida is widely
regarded as an important transitional phase between the nomadic horticulture of
the Archaic period (9000 - 1900 BCE) and the complex Mesoamerican societies that
flourished, independent of influence from the Old World, until the arrival of
Spanish conquistadors in the 16th century. Despite the general recognition of
the significance of the Formative period, key scholarly debates concern the
interrelatedness between transitions in domestic practices, subsistence, and
social organization during this time. The archaeology of the initial Early
Formative period (c.a. 1900-1500 BCE) in particular appears to be a promising
venue of research for informing these dialogues regarding Mesoamerican social
change&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;In addition to its relevance for Mesoamericanist
scholarship, the La Consentida Archaeological Project offers an opportunity for
United States-based scholars to collaborate with Mexican archaeology students
and to engage with local communities in Oaxaca who are interested in learning
more about their region's ancient past. Outreach with local communities will
include an educational display proposed for a local community museum and a
public talk proposed for a local community anniversary festival. US-based
student volunteers on the project will receive valuable training in a variety of
standard archaeological field techniques. The results of the project will be
disseminated in a report to the Instituto Nacional de Antropolog√≠a e Historia
(INAH), the branch of the Mexican federal government overseeing archaeological
research. Research results will also be presented in peer-reviewed journals in
both English and Spanish, in edited book chapters, and in the form of bilingual
(Spanish/English) webpage content designed to showcase archaeological research
by various scholars working in the region.