* 1213175
* Chemical Biology of Energy-Dependent Proteolysis in Mitochondria
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Irene Lee, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2015
* USD 270,000.00

In this award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division, Dr. Irene Lee, from Case Western Reserve University, will develop a
chemical biology approach to evaluating the contribution of ATP-dependent
proteolysis in the maintenance of mitochondria homeostasis at a post-
translational level. The mitochondrion is an important organelle that provides
energy to sustain life. One of the key biochemical reactions is oxidative
phosphorylation, which frequently generates reactive oxidizing species (ROS) as
by-products. If allowed to accumulate, these ROS threaten the integrity of
mitochondria by damaging the chemical integrity of lipids, nucleic acids and
proteins in the organelles. In the matrix of mitochondria, protein quality
control is presumably maintained by two energy dependent proteases, one of which
is known as ClpXP (caseinolytic protease complex XP). Dr. Lee's work will
generate selective substrates and inhibitors of human ClpXP to allow for
evaluation of protease functions in mitochondrial protein lysates and intact
mitochondria in the model cell line HeLa. Once proven to be effective, the
strategy proposed in this study will find broad applications in generating tools
to elucidate the roles played by non-proteasomal ATP-dependent proteases in the
maintenance of cellular homeostasis in the future.

This project employs a multi-disciplinary approach to develop selective activity
probes and inhibitors that will be used to address the physiological functions
of a protease machine in mitochondria. Students will acquire training in enzyme
kinetics, protein chemistry, liquid chromatography, mass spectrometry, chemical
synthesis, solid phase peptide synthesis, fluorescence spectroscopy, protein
purification and molecular cloning. These research activities provide excellent
training opportunities to undergraduate and graduate students in chemical
biology. Each graduate student in Dr. Lee's group will also be involved in
undergraduate education, as each student will train and work with an
undergraduate researcher for at least one semester. This endeavor is designed to
provide graduate students teaching and mentoring experiences. Taken together,
this project will provide students with the technical and social skills needed
to enter a research or science education career. Additionally, all personnel
working in the Lee group serve as volunteers to the National Youth Sports
Program (NYSP), a summer program offered to children of low-income families in
the Greater Cleveland area between the ages of 10 and 16. The Lee group teaches
these children chemistry of daily life through experimentation with household
chemicals and dry ice. This annual outreach activity has become a tradition in
the Lee group, where undergraduate and graduate students learn to become more
involved in the community and education for the underprivileged.