* 1213114
* Chapman Conference on Volcanism and the Atmosphere; Selfoss, Iceland; June 11-15, 2012
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Brenda Weaver, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 04/30/2013
* USD 40,000.00

This award is towards support of a Chapman Conference on Volcanism and the
Atmosphere, to be held June 11-15, 2012 at Selfoss Iceland. It is now well-
established that volcanic eruptions can have a significant effect on the Earth's
atmosphere and global and regional climate. Larger eruptions in the distant past
may have caused major changes in global and regional climate, and possibly
changes in human populations. In order to detect modern anthropogenic influences
on climate, including effects of greenhouse gases, aerosols, and ozone-depleting
chemicals, and to evaluate proposals for stratospheric geoengineering, it is
crucial to quantify natural fluctuations such as volcanic eruptions so as to
separate them from other natural and anthropogenic factors in the climate
record. Since the Chapman Conference on Volcanism and the Earth's Atmosphere a
decade or so ago, there have been advances in our understanding of volcanism and
its effects on the atmosphere. The vulnerability of the aviation industry to
volcanic eruptions has also received attention in recent years. The conference
will bring together experts to examine issues such as mechanisms of super-
eruptions and climatic effects as evidenced in model simulations; high-
resolution Holocene records of explosive eruptions; volcanism in the last
millennium; improved proxy records such as ice-cores; climatic response to high-
latitude eruptions; geoengineering using stratospheric aerosols and volcanic
eruptions and aviation. A review article will be written for dissemination to a
wider audience.