* 1214861
* An Experimental Study on the Strength of the Lithosphere: Large-strain shear deformation experiments of olivine + orthopyroxene aggregates
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2012,09/30/2014
* Shun-ichiro Karato, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 09/30/2014
* USD 334,999.00

Although plate tectonics is well documented on Earth, the reason why plate
tectonics works on Earth but not on other terrestrial planets such as Venus,
Mars is not well understood. In fact, plate tectonics is not an obvious mode of
tectonics on Earth-like planets. On Earth-like planets, the near-surface layer
is strong because of low temperature and the most 'natural' mode of tectonics is
the so-called 'stagnant-lid' convection where the surface layer is rigid and
does not deform (this is a case for Mars and most of other planets). In fact, if
one uses a standard model of the strength of the lithosphere, the oceanic
lithosphere on Earth will be too strong for plate tectonics to operate.
Consequently, some weakening processes need to be invoked in order to understand
why plate tectonics operates on Earth. After reviewing various new observations
on the strength of Earth materials, we believe that the reduction in the
strength in the deep lithosphere is a key to the operation of plate tectonics,
and focus our attention to this issue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on our
previous studies, we hypothesize that the presence of a secondary phase mineral
orthopyroxene (the primary one being olivine) might have a key influence on the
weakening. Consequently, we will conduct systematic experimental studies on
deformation of a mixture of olivine and orthopyroxene for various ratios with a
range of water contents. Rheological behavior (i.e., the stress-strain
relationship) and the micro-structural evolution will be investigated. The
results will then be interpreted by a model of weakening, and applied to Earth
and other terrestrial planets. The results of this study will shed some lights
on the reason for the operation of plate tectonics on Earth but not on other
terrestrial planets.