* 1214766
* Symphyseal Placsticity Properties and Performance in Primate and Non-Primate Mammals
* SBE,BCS
* 06/30/2011,09/30/2013
* Matthew Ravosa, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 09/30/2013
* USD 242,357.00

Bioanthropologists studying skeletal function typically infer behavior and
performance from bony size and shape. This approximation has fostered a basic
notion of how primate skeletons relate to their growth and lifestyles. However,
estimating performance from skeletal shape becomes difficult when one examines
structures that are oddly-shaped, differ in growth patterns, or vary in tissue
composition. The primate mandibular symphysis is one such joint that defies
simplistic modeling of its performance. Symphyseal anatomy ranges from the
primitive mammalian condition of smooth, opposing right and left jaws loosely
connected by fibrous tissue, fibrocartilage and some ligaments to a tightly
bound joint with greater sutural complexity consisting of interlocking bony
rugosities and numerous calcified ligaments to the more unique condition of an
ossified joint seen in humans and various other primates. The behavioral and
mechanical correlates of this remarkable variation are poorly understood.
Indeed, failure to relate symphyseal form to joint integrity undermines our
knowledge of the function and evolution of the feeding apparatus and behavioral
reconstructions of fossil primates. The first objective is to quantify
symphyseal strength during simulated loading regimes in primate and non-primate
mammals. Measures of joint performance will be integrated with data on joint
proportions, biomineralization and internal anatomy. The second goal is to
examine the plasticity and properties of symphyseal tissues. To obtain variation
in joint loads, cohorts of genetically similar rabbits will be raised on foods
of different consistencies. By quantifying joint integrity within and across
species, this experimental study links load-resisting properties and performance
to joint shape, addresses major issues involving the symphysis, and serves as a
model for future work on joint function. A broader impact of this study is its
expansion of an ongoing multidisciplinary partnership between bioanthropologists
and engineers. Its educational merit is that students and teachers, especially
under-represented groups, will benefit via long-term apprenticeship,
interdisciplinary training, and outreach. The benefit to society includes
providing key basic data for future evolutionary and clinical projects on joint
loading, tissue responses, and performance.