* 1214239
* NeTS: Small: An Efficient Reachability Analysis Method for Large Dynamic Networks and Its Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Simon Lam, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 08/31/2016
* USD 350,000.00

Enterprise and campus networks are often large with many having hundreds of
routers and thousands of switches which interconnect tens of thousands of hosts
and servers. The IP network for an enterprise is not only charged with
delivering IP packets but also blocking packets based on security and policy
considerations. The set of packets that can travel from one node to another node
(reachability set) is controlled by router configurations and by packet filters
that guard the outgoing and incoming interfaces of routers and switches. The
ability to compute reachability sets is valuable not only for troubleshooting
reachability problems but also for debugging and redesigning access control
lists (ACLs) in case of link/router failures or before new links/routers are
deployed. At present, there is no method fast enough for online computation of
reachability sets for large dynamic networks. This project will leverage a novel
idea for very fast computation of reachability sets as the basis for developing
a theoretical foundation for both transforming network design and configuration
into a science and for developing software tools for monitoring, diagnosing, and
configuring of large dynamic networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives and
activities in the project include the following: (i) Design and implementation
of algorithms fast enough to compute reachability sets and answer an online
reachability query in milliseconds; (ii) design and implementation of methods
and algorithms to update reachability sets of large networks with dynamic
changes in topology, packet filters, and forwarding tables at a frequency of
once every few seconds; (iii) analysis of ?atomic packet sets? computed from
configuration files of operational networks for knowledge discovery and
identifying network reachability structure; (iv) design and implementation of a
network-wide reachability policy language such that automated tools can be used
to check that a network configuration satisfies stated policies; (v)
investigation of a top-down design approach for configuring new networks with
software tools used by network designers to generate packet filters from
network-wide reachability policies, with ACLs generated automatically to
implement the packet filters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;The
results of this project will contribute towards a scientific foundation for
network design and management and the creation of a top-down design approach for
configuring networks, which are key aspects of building more secure and reliable
networks. It will also educate undergraduate and graduate students on new
concepts, formal analysis methods, and software tools for network design and
configuration. In particular, the results of this project will be incorporated
into the undergraduate and graduate classes being taught by the principal
investigator at the University of Texas at Austin. The investigators will
actively seek out involvement by high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students, especially students from under-represented minorities. The software
tools to be created from the project?s research findings will be made available
to other researchers under a license of the Free Software Foundation.