* 1214881
* SBIR Phase I:  Next Generation Vertical Cavity Surface Emitting Lasers
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Majid Riaziat, OEPIC SEMICONDUCTORS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to use a
novel design and fabrication approach that will bring Vertical Cavity Surface
Emitting Lasers (VCSELs) out of their current niche applications and will open
the way to their widespread use where currently edge emitting lasers are
utilized. These VCSELs can be designed over a broad range of wavelengths
covering near-infrared and approaching mid infrared (800nm to 2,500nm). The
narrow linewidth and stable linear polarization of these VCSELs make them
suitable for use in spectroscopy, communications and solid state laser pumping.
What makes this possible is substrate flexibility combined with a special High
Contrast Grating (HCG) mirror used for single-mode linearly polarized output.
High efficiency and high output power are achieved by very low electrical
resistance and efficient heat sinking. The first prototype will have an emission
wavelength of 1550nm with the goal of offering a more compact and lower cost
alternative to DFB lasers in long-haul fiber optics.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project extends to the fields of
fiber communication, spectroscopy, and high power solid state lasers. Next
generation VCSELs to be developed in this project will have the single mode and
narrow linewidth of a Distributed Feedback (DFB) laser and the beam quality and
low cost of a VCSEL at any near infrared wavelength. Of particular interest in
communication systems are the reduction of cost per bit, and power consumption
per bit of transmitted data. Implementing the proposed VCSELs in fiber optic
transceivers results in reduced cost and reduced power consumption over existing
edge emitter based solutions. Reducing power consumption in turn leads to
miniaturization and high density assembly, which further reduces the cost.
Particularly challenging requirements for long wavelength VCSELs to meet are
high optical output power and narrow linewidth. The proposed approach makes
possible for these VCSELs to meet both of these requirements and to become an
attractive candidate not only for fiber communications, but also for use as pump
sources for high power solid state lasers. Furthermore, the lack of wavelength
constraints makes these devices ideal as sources for overtone spectroscopy in
the near infrared.