* 1214082
* Collaborative Research:  Probing Dark Lights with Big Bang Nucleosynthesis and the Cosmic Microwave Background
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Brian Fields, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2016
* USD 105,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Brian Fields at the
University of Illinois and Professor Lloyd Knox at the University of California
Davis.

The theory of big bang nucleosynthesis (BBN) describes the production of the
lightest elements--hydrogen, helium, and lithium--in the first seconds of the
big bang. BBN predictions for cosmic light-element abundances are in broad
agreement with observations; this concordance is a major success of the hot big
bang model. Moreover, BBN provides a measure of the ordinary matter ("baryon")
content of the universe, as well as total content in relativistic particles
("radiation") in both visible and invisible form (e.g., neutrinos and any other
forms of "dark light"). In the past decade, the cosmic microwave background
(CMB) has emerged as a precise and independent measure of cosmic baryons.
Comparing BBN and CMB baryon measures thus has provided a new fundamental test
of the hot big bang cosmology, and reveal a "lithium problem." This BBN/CMB
connection is now poised to open qualitatively new possibilities. Recent and
upcoming measurements of the CMB for the first time will simultaneously probe
not only cosmic baryons, but also cosmic radiation as well as the helium
abundance itself. This will enable powerful new tests of cosmology: for the
first time, the predictions of BBN can be tested entirely with very precise CMB
data. Agreement would dramatically demonstrate the consistency of the standard
cosmology, while any difference probes new physics. Professors Fields and Knox
will both evaluate and interpret the BBN-CMB comparison, develop tools to
efficiently and accurately compare BBN and CMB data. For the first time, a
Markov-chain Monte Carlo approach will be used to evaluate BBN uncertainties;
this will allow a direct and consistent means of combining BBN predictions and
CMB data and statistically characterizing the results. As part of this analysis,
a new open-source BBN code will be produced, tested, and publicly released.

It is expected that this work will have substantial broader impacts. A publicly
available open source BBN code will be released. Moreover, new and strong links
will be forged among the CMB and early-universe particle astrophysics
communities, and more widely among the particle astrophysics, cosmology, and
astronomy communities. Graduate students, both in formal courses in research
mentoring, will be trained to synthesize these approaches and to work in an
interdisciplinary way. In addition, Profs. Fields will maintain vigorous,
sustained outreach programs which include school visits and public lectures
bringing this forefront science to a wider audience.