* 1214780
* SBIR Phase I:  Interleaved Magnetic Motor Using Flex Circuit Coil
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Thomas Heed, Custom Transit, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2013
* USD 146,704.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
linear, interleaved magnetic motor (LIMM). Magnetic motors are transducers,
which convert electrical power into mechanical power according to the Lorentzian
force function,F=BÃ—li, where F is Force, B is magnetic flux, l is the length of
wire in the gap, and i is the current. Magnetic motors are used in devices such
as electric motors in hybrid vehicles, disk drives, linear actuators, and
loudspeakers. The LIMM is a unique topological arrangement of the magnetic gap,
which creates a long, narrow, serpentine gap. The LIMM's topology allows for the
design of transducers, which increase the force, F, faster than the system adds
mass, without affecting the width of the air gap. This allows for compact, high
power transducers, with almost any quality factor, Q, needed for the system. In
order to realize the potential of the LIMM, this Phase I project will focus on
selecting an appropriate flex circuit drive coil for use in the serpentine gap.
A cascaded design of experiments will be used to identify the correct flex
circuit substrate and adhesive, conductor, and forming method, amongst other
attributes, to create a repeatable, high-quality
transducer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is the ability to create compact, high power, low Q transducers using
ferrite, rather than neodymium, magnets. China controls 97% of the world supply
for neodymium and, recently, has artificially limited supplies. China's cutback
in supplies during 2010 sent market prices soaring-neodymium jumped from $41 per
kilogram in April to $92 per kilogram in October. The United States has stable
access to ferrite magnets. By creating a transducer that exceeds current
performance demands while using ferrite, instead of neodymium, magnets, the LIMM
will reduce our dependence on China as a source of raw material. Additionally,
the efficiency gains inherent in the LIMM will also lower the power consumption
of the transducer in high current applications. For example, a loudspeaker built
from a LIMM can easily attain a sensitivity of 96 db at 1 W and 1 m. This is a 6
db increase (or 4x the acoustic power) in output power from the current state of
the art loudspeaker. Due to the ease of implementation, speed to market, and
performance improvement over current technologies, the first implementation of
the LIMM will be in a loudspeaker.