* 1214948
* SBIR Phase I:  Interactive Multi-Touch Collaborative Table for Classrooms
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Michael White, Templeman Automation LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,989.00

Templeman Automation (TA) and Tufts Center for Engineering Education and
Outreach (CEEO), propose using TA's open-architecture touch-table for STEM
educational applications. The ?STEM-Table? applies multi-touch computing to
collaborative learning, project-based engineering education, individual-within-
group skills assessment, and across-sciences visualization and augmented
reality. These applications will leverage students? natural fascination towards
touch interfaces and direct them through STEM educational goals using multi-
touch-specific curriculum modules. With the benefit of SBIR funding, a multi-
touch toolset and activities/curriculum will be developed that are designed
within the multi-touch table environment to provide augmented science activities
for STEM education.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that STEM-Table (1)
brings high-end interactive experiences to diverse classrooms; (2) enables out-
of-the-box (engineering) and end-result (instruction) science learning; and (3)
will provide a new paradigm for collaborative STEM activities while providing
teacher workload reduction and targeted skills assessment.

The intellectual merit of the proposed research lies in the melding of the
multi-touch table environment with the educational experience of the CEEO.
Working together, a new model of classroom interaction will be created to
provide the access, supports, and scaffolds that students need to make sense of
science and become excited by STEM's creative opportunities.