* 1214714
* SBIR Phase I:  Biosensors to Detect and Characterize Genotoxins
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Christopher Hopkins, Knudra Diagnostics
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,930.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project creates GeniStress
Responder. GeniStress Responder is part of EkaTox, a family of toxicology
diagnostics harnessing the power of comparative genomics in nematodes to make
toxicology predictions in humans. GeniStress Responder identifies and
characterizes mutagenic and carcinogenic compounds (genotoxins) using
bioengineered nematodes. Multiple types of bioengineered nematodes are created
and arranged into a GeniStress Responder panel. The panel's bioengineered
nematodes become biosensors of genotoxic activity. Each biosensor works by using
a specific genotoxin-sensitive gene to drive expression of a fluorescent-protein
coding sequence. Exposure to a specific genotoxin elicits a specific pattern of
activity in the GeniStress Responder panel. Feasibility is demonstrated when
known genotoxins create specific toxicogenomic responses in the GeniStress
Responder panel.

The broader/commercial impacts of this research are introduction of improved
genotoxicity diagnostics in the marketplace. Current technologies are
inadequate. No single test is available to comprehensively profile different
types of sample genotoxicity. The market needs an easy-to-use test for
genotoxicity profiling. GeniStress Responder fills the market need for
genotoxicity profiling in one simple diagnostic kit. With GeniStress Responder,
a toxic compound's mechanism-of-action is determined in a shorter time and with
fewer resources, than what can be achieved with current technology. GeniStress
Responder's ease-of-use will accelerate drug discovery (cancer therapeutics) and
environmental toxicology testing (cosmetics, plastics, super-fund site cleanup).