* 1214081
* Sensitivity and Selectivity Enhancement Strategies for Silicon Photonic Biosensor Arrays
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Ryan Bailey, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 07/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Ryan Bailey and his group at University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign are developing a scalable and cost effective chemical and
biochemical analysis platform based upon chip-integrated silicon optical
devices. The intellectual merit of this scientific program lies in the
application of novel mechanisms for detecting very small numbers of analyte
molecules from within highly complex sample matrices. Fundamental advances in
these approaches, which center around the monitoring of dynamic, rather than
steady-state, sensor responses, will broadly facilitate the ultrasensitive
detection of chemical and biomolecular species in a range of demanding
analytical applications, including food quality assurance, homeland security,
forensics, medical diagnostics, and environmental monitoring.

Beyond the scientific goals of this project, which offer significant potential
benefits to society, this award also supports a rich interdisciplinary training
environment for graduate and undergraduate students. In particular, students
from diverse backgrounds benefit from hands-on education, mentoring, and active
research training towards future careers as measurement scientists. Students are
also actively encouraged and supported to participate in a multitude of local
educational outreach opportunities that work to improve science education at the
primary, high school, and undergraduate levels. Dissemination of program
successes to both technical (scientific publications and conferences) and non-
technical (popular press and educational outreach) audiences helps maximize the
broader impacts that this research has in meeting our country's current and
emerging scientific and educational needs.