* 1214788
* SBIR Phase I:  Safe, Portable, Non-ionizing Bone Imaging with an Ultrasound-based X-ray Replacement Device
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Frank Mauldin, Rivanna Medical
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2013
* USD 179,883.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the
clinical need for an X-ray replacement technology that is portable, low-cost,
and safe. X-ray is the dominant modality currently in use for diagnostic imaging
of bone despite its many limitations: emission of radiation, bulky, and
relatively expensive. The research objectives of this feasibility study include:
1) Design, integrate, and test a low-power consumption mechanically scanned
ultrasound transducer; 2) Demonstrate a handheld ultrasound system with free-
hand three-dimensional (3D) bone reconstruction in in vitro phantoms; and 3)
Demonstrate a free-hand 3D bone imaging system in ex vivo whole porcine models.
It is anticipated that the mechanically scanned ultrasound transducer will yield
frame rates &gt; 15 frames/s and resolution &lt; 2.5 mm at imaging depths &gt;
10 cm. In vitro phantom experiments will be performed using a computer aided
design model of the human spine. Error between 3D ultrasound reconstructions and
the computer model is anticipated to be &lt; 2.5 mm. Finally, the proposed
device is anticipated to yield &gt; 0.90 correlation to CT reconstructions of
whole porcine spinal bones. Overall, this project is anticipated to demonstrate
feasibility of a handheld 3D ultrasound-based bone imaging technology with high
correlation to CT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential
of this project includes safer, less expensive, and more accurate imaging of
bone anatomy in medical imaging technology applications: spinal anesthesia,
orthopedic, emergency medicine. In applications such as emergency care, the
technology would enable patient-side imaging of bone anatomy, which is currently
unavailable due to the bulkiness of X-ray machines. Additionally, the public
would benefit by an overall reduction in ionizing radiation exposure from X-ray
and a subsequent reduction in cancers. The estimated market potential for the
proposed ultrasound-based bone imaging technology is estimated at approximately
$580 M/yr in the United States. The primary target market for the technology is
the lumbar spinal anesthesia market. Currently these procedures exhibit failure
rates of 40% - 80% in the obese, which results in poor patient outcomes and
higher costs for health care providers. The general scientific and technological
understanding of acoustics will be enhanced through this project by a better
understanding of ultrasound interactions with specular reflecting surfaces, such
as bone.