* 1214227
* SBIR Phase I:  Electric Field Driven Magnetoresistive Random Access Memory Based on Synthetic Multiferroics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Alexander Khitun, Andromeda Scientific LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2012
* USD 140,962.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
novel type of Magnetoresistive Random Access Memory based on synthetic
multiferroics. Magnetic memory commercially used today exploits an electric
current for magnetization switching. The bulk of the consumed energy is wasted
due to the relatively low switching efficiency. This project investigates the
feasibility of using synthetic multiferroics comprising piezoelectric and
magnetostrictive materials for magnetization switching. The key advantage of
using multiferroics is the ability to control magnetization state by an electric
field. The utilization of electric field instead of electric current makes it
possible to significantly reduce the energy per switch. There is an urgent need
in low-power consuming memory devices, which would be of great benefit for a
variety of practical applications including wireless devices such as cellular
phones as well as other devices biased by the portative energy sources. It is
the goal of this Phase I project to provide the feasibility study of the
electric-field driven magnetic memory.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes fundamental
advances in portative electronic devices and systems enabling lower power
consumption and providing longer operation before battery recharging. The
development of fast and low power consuming multiferroic memory has the
potential to eventually replace the existing memory elements in a market. If
successful, this project will lead to a revolutionary change in the data storage
technology by providing fast, scalable and non-volatile memory devices. It is
fair to say that the development of low-power consuming memory is of great
benefit for society offering better performance for a variety of electronic
devices and the overall reduction of electricity consumption.