* 1214065
* New Chemical Diversity from Coastal Myxobacteria
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Phillip Crews, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program is supporting Professor
Phillip Crews in the Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry at the University of
California at Santa Cruz. The focus is on myxobacteria, which represent a unique
system for the study of bio-complexity. They spread over a surface by swarming
and often out-compete other organisms for nutrients. Fundamental knowledge about
their basic physiology including colonization processes, prokaryotic
development, genetics, and chemotaxis is emerging but at a rather slow pace.
This study aims to increase fundamental knowledge on the myxobacteria taxa
obtained from the ocean/land interface, and seeks to uncover new biological
systems possessing functional pathways for secondary metabolites. The project
invokes a combination of environmental sampling, bioorganic functional chemistry
analysis, and microbial taxonomy. Identifying and characterizing unique
myxobacterial strains obtained from untapped ecological niches with the capacity
to biosynthesize novel chemical scaffolds is the core activity.

The Broader Impact of this project involves developing unique research tools and
technology to allow discovery and characterization of molecular structures that
will be new to science. It is anticipated that unprecedented structural chemical
results will be obtained. Thus, the project design will provide opportunities
for the Crews team to discover, share, and inspire others. The prospects for
training are also important and will accelerate the scientific growth of all
project participants anticipated to include young scientific professionals,
postdoctoral fellows, PhD candidates, and undergraduate students. Also of note
is that the PI is one of the few at UCSC from an underrepresented group. He
continues to work diligently to insure that UCSC persists in a strong tradition
of leadership to promote the advancement of minorities and women in the fields
of bioorganic chemistry and chemical biology.