* 1214157
* State-Resolved Photodissociation Dynamics: Probing Nonadiabatic Processes in Polyatomic Free Radicals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jingsong Zhang, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2016
* USD 449,420.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
(CSDM) Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Jingsong Zhang of the
University of California at Riverside investigates the light-driven dissociation
of polyatomic free radicals (photodissociation dynamics). Free radicals are
important in many reactive environments such as combustion and atmospheric
chemistry, and it is still challenging to understand their photochemistry,
excited state dynamics, and nonadiabatic interactions. The goal of this project
is to provide detailed information on the spectroscopy, structures, energetics,
photochemical reactivity, and nonadiabatic dynamics (especially via conical
intersections) of the benchmark polyatomic radicals with quantum accuracy. High
resolution high-n Rydberg atom time-of-flight spectrometry will be utilized as
the main tool to study the spectroscopy and state-resolved photodissociation
dynamics of reactive intermediates important in combustion and atmospheric
chemistry. The systems to be examined include formyl radical, small diradicals,
and alkyl radicals. These experimental studies can also provide stringent tests
for high-level quantum mechanical theories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor
Zhang will work closely with Professor C. Brazier and his students at California
State University at Long Beach to enhance the research and educational
activities at this Hispanic Serving Institute. Through this project, Professors
Zhang and Brazier mentor graduate students to become community college teachers,
collaborate with the current and future instructors, and share their knowledge
with a highly diversified student population at Riverside and local community
colleges that serve a large population of minority students will participate in
the research during summer.