* 1214303
* EAGER: Developing a model for transmission of an infectious disease of marine sponges
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Julie Olson, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 03/31/2015
* USD 299,997.00

Diseases of marine invertebrates have been shown to be primary causes of the
accelerating destruction of Caribbean coral reef systems. Diseases affecting
natural populations threaten biodiversity, resilience and the ecological balance
of communities, as well as the ecosystem services they provide. To date, most
studies of diseases on reefs have focused on corals, however, reports of sponge
diseases have also increased across the globe. On Caribbean reefs, sponges are
often a dominant component of the reef biomass,and thus play an important role
in the ecology of these ecosystems. The most well described disease affecting
Caribbean sponges is Aplysina Red Band Syndrome (ARBS), which affects sponges of
the genus Aplysina, resulting in reduced growth, tissue necrosis and breakage at
the site of the lesion, particularly during storm events. Understanding how
diseases emerge and are transmitted within marine ecosystems is critical for
maintaining a healthy level of biodiversity, particularly if we are to gain any
predictive power in a rapidly-changing environment. Testing models of disease
transmission using extensive field observations and laboratory analyses will
contribute to a better understanding of disease processes and developing a
transmission model for ARBS requires detailed knowledge about the pathogen-host
interaction and pathogen reservoirs in the environment. While a large body of
information regarding the ecology and physiology of ARBS-infected sponges is
available it is recognized that modeling the transmission dynamics requires a
more focused and collaborative approach. This project will develop and test a
model of marine disease processes that includes the role of polymicrobial
infections, sources and sinks of the pathogen(s), and the ontogeny of this
disease within a model host sponge species (Aplysina cauliformis). This novel
approach is a high-risk venture (i.e., a timely idea lacking requisite results)
with high pay-off potential (i.e., the results will fundamentally enhance our
understanding of disease transmission within marine sponges). In this respect,
the proposal is appropriate for EAGER funding. The principal investigators will
use modern techniques such as high throughput sequencing and incorporate these
approaches as a new tools in their laboratories as well as in their
undergraduate and graduate courses. Graduate and undergraduate students will
also be provided with multidisciplinary hands-on research experiences and will
participate in sponge disease surveys to test the newly developed transmission
model. Public seminars will be presented to discuss the implications of marine
diseases coral reefs and to highlight the potential utility of disease models
for the effective management of marine resources. Results from the proposed
research will further our knowledge of disease transmission dynamics and enhance
our understanding of the role of diseases in the ecology of coral reef
ecosystems.