* 1214737
* SBIR Phase I:  MEMS Resonant Nanobalance Dew Point Meters
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Paul Neilson, FemtoScale Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

SBIR Phase I:MEMS Resonant Nanobalance Dew Point Meters

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
micro-electro-mechanical-systems (MEMS) based moisture (dew point) measurement
instrument. Measurements of trace moisture are needed in a variety of different
industrial sectors, including semiconductor manufacturing, pure gas supply,
atmospheric and climate research, aerospace, petrochemical processing, power
generation, air filter and purifier manufacturing, and supply of reference
standards for other trace gases. Most of the commercially available moisture
sensors lack the required accuracy, sensitivity, and responsiveness for many
existing applications, or are too costly. The proposed approach utilizes micro-
electro-mechanical resonant balances coupled with a cooling element. The
instrument will measure dew point using the standard chilled surface technique
to deposit a layer of moisture on the surface of the resonant balances. Mass of
the deposited moisture causes a shift in the resonant frequency of the micro-
resonator that indicates reaching the dew point. Because the nanobalances are
capable of weighing as little as a few femto-grams of deposited moisture, only a
very small amount of gas needs to be chilled to deposit sufficient water to
indicate the dew point. Preliminary prototype assembly and reliability and
response time characterizations will be performed in this Phase I effort.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is development of more
accurate, responsive, stable, robust, and versatile moisture measurement
instruments than currently available instruments at the same price range.
Chilled mirror dew point sensors generally provide higher accuracy compared to
other categories of moisture sensors. Such devices however suffer from long
response times and vulnerability of their optical sensing mechanism to debris
and contamination. The proposed MEMS based technology combines the advantages of
the chilled mirror sensors along with faster response and improved robustness
provided by the MEMS resonant nanobalances. The reduced chilling needs allow for
faster response to changes in moisture content, reduced power consumption for
the cooler and novel uses such as battery powered spot sampling systems. An
important immediate market for the proposed instrument with great national
significance is the measurement of moisture in natural gas. In cold climates
excess water in the gas pipeline can freeze the pipe shut, rendering the
pipeline useless until the frozen point can be located and cleared. The battery
powered, spot checking, robust operation and low cost nature of the proposed
instrument will allow widespread use in the upstream Natural Gas pipeline system
to measure moisture at points of custody transfer.