* 1214509
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Folsom Settlement Organization in the Southern Rocky Mountains: An Analysis of Dwelling Space at the Mountaineer Site
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2014
* Brooke Morgan, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2014
* USD 17,168.00

Under the guidance of Dr. David Meltzer, Brooke Morgan will analyze artifacts
recovered during eleven seasons of archaeological excavations (2001 to 2011)
from the Mountaineer Folsom-age (~11,000 to 10,000 BP) campsite near Gunnison,
Colorado. Perched at 2,630 meters above sea level on Tenderfoot Mountain, the
Mountaineer site is within the Upper Gunnison Basin of the Rocky Mountains, an
area that experiences some of the coldest winters in the contiguous United
States. This environment would have presented unique challenges for hunter-
gatherers living at the end of the last ice age. Folsom residential sites,
though rare, provide an exceptional opportunity to study a broad range of
behaviors - and, by extension, adaptive strategies- that may be unrepresented in
other Folsom contexts. The Mountaineer site is particularly important because it
is a large Folsom campsite with evidence of multiple architectural structures -
some of the oldest shelters in North America. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
has broader impacts beyond contributing to research of Folsom hunter-gatherers.
The Mountaineer site was occupied during the Terminal Pleistocene, a time of
climate fluctuation and restructuring of natural resources. It is possible that
adaptations of Folsom foragers may have operated outside the range of those of
modern ethnographic foragers. If this is the case, the project will demonstrate
that archaeologists must take a more critical view when comparing modern hunter-
gatherers societies with those of the past. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
archaeological signature of short-term Folsom sites is well-established, due to
the prevalence of kill sites and briefly occupied camps on the North American
Great Plains. These sites primarily show evidence of activity specialization
(namely, hunting and processing of bison), reflected by a limited tool
repertoire of projectile points (i.e. spearheads) and their associated debris.
Archaeological focus on these types of sites and the perceived importance of
projectile point technology has resulted in the interpretation of Folsom
adaptive strategies as minimally variable. However, the Mountaineer site
provides an opportunity to expand current knowledge of Folsom lifeways beyond
that of highly mobile bison hunters, especially due to the presence of shelters
that suggest this group camped for an extended period of time. Ms. Morgan will
analyze the Mountaineer stone tool assemblage and conduct spatial analysis to
determine the activities carried out by its Folsom occupants. Examination of
artifacts associated with the structures will provide important information on
how Folsom hunter-gatherers at Mountaineer maintained their camp while surviving
harsh environmental conditions. Further, Ms. Morgan will infer economic and
social relationships of the site's occupants based on campsite organization. The
proposed research will provide a foundation for future research of Paleoindian
residential sites and the investigation of hunter-gatherer shelters in other
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will be published in peer-reviewed
journals, and the raw data will be accessible both online and in tabular format
as dissertation appendices. This project contributes to training Ms. Morgan to
be an independent scholar and researcher so that she may acquire the necessary
skills of a professional archaeologist. Ms. Morgan will also serve as a guest
lecturer at Dallas-area universities to raise public awareness of archaeology.