* 1214187
* SBIR Phase I:  ASPOA: Applying Semantic Paradata to Outcomes-aligned Assessment
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Robert Robson, Eduworks Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 05/31/2013
* USD 149,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to improve
the quality of online education and training by making it easier to add relevant
quiz questions and knowledge checks to content as it is being created. The
project applies recent advances in the ability of computers to detect topics and
themes in text and to process natural language and builds on ideas from projects
such as the Federal Learning Registry that associate contextual data to
educational objects so that they can be better discovered and used. This Phase I
project will create a proof-of-concept system that applies these methods to
align existing questions to educational and training outcomes and to generate
new questions relevant to the text being authored. Research objectives include
validating that the system (a) effectively aligns content and assessments with
outcomes, (b) supports curriculum design and (c) generates quality questions.
The project will also research technical requirements for integration with
enterprise learning platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project comes from significantly lowering
the barrier to adding assessments to online content and from ensuring that these
assessments are aligned with educational and training outcomes. This will help
educational and commercial customers evaluate and demonstrate the effectiveness
of online programs. It will also reduce the time and cost required to develop
and deliver quality online training that focuses on specific competencies and
learning objectives. More generally, the proposed technology has the potential
to transform any content into an active and engaging learning experience by
adding assessments. The proposed technology will be designed for integration
into existing learning and learning content authoring systems as a software
service. Initial collaborators include the assessment subsidiary of one of the
largest learning management system companies and the National STEM Digital
Library Resource Center.