* 1214068
* Preparation method that enables control of morphology and porous structure with highly dispersed "robust" metal nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Ryan Richards, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2016
* USD 388,105.00

With this award funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program, Professor Ryan
Richards of the Colorado School of Mines will perform research directed towards
imparting stability to nanostructured catalysts. The work is based upon a
preparation method that enables control of the morphology and porous structure
of highly dispersed "robust" gold nanoparticles in the sol-gel process.
Characterization of this system provided evidence of the presence of nanoscale
gold particles (4nm) and that the mesoporous network is uninterrupted and
analogous to SBA-15. This system demonstrated higher activity for the oxidation
of n-hexadecane than systems with similar size gold particles immobilized in the
pore network of mesoporous silica. This suggests that some aspect of the
intercalated material greatly influences the catalytic properties (at least for
this reaction). Additionally, these materials demonstrated stability at
temperatures up to 750 degrees Centigrade without evidence of particle growth
and were recyclable. Thus, the basis for the proposed work is to pursue the
hypothesis that intercalation in mesoporous silica can yield highly active and
"robust" catalytic systems entailing development of a fundamental understanding
of their preparation, characterization, and behavior in select catalytic
reactions. Although numerous approaches for the immobilization of nanoscale
catalysts have been described in the literature, this approach offers a unique
combination of properties (i.e., tunable porosity, thermal stability, increased
activity, broad applicability).

An ideal "green" catalyst would use air as the oxidant under mild conditions for
oxidation reactions, be recyclable and avoid the wasteful addition of reducing
agents and solvents. This work aims to accomplish all of these goals and
represents the conceptual foundation for the ability to form intercalated
nanostructures. Further, the preparation methodology may be transferable to
other metal or alloy nanoparticles as well as discrete molecules. It represents
a new approach to imparting chemical and mechanical robustness, a current
impediment to the broad application of nanoscale materials in catalysis. The
envisioned materials may be employed under harsh reaction conditions
(temperature and pressure) in which they would typically sinter or aggregate.
Catalytic processes are of vital economic importance. The ability to develop
'green' catalysts with improved activity and selectivity may positively impact
the environment and improve the economic feasibility and resource efficiency of
important industrial processes. The project includes student training and
outreach programs to K-12.