* 1214158
* New Methods for Predicting Mechanisms for Complex Heterogeneous Catalysts with Applications to Metal Oxide Functionalization of Alkanes
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* William Goddard, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2016
* USD 390,000.00

With this award from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor William A. Goddard and colleague Robert Nielsen from the Departments
of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at the California Institute of Technology
will develop and apply reactive force field (ReaxFF), through Monte Carlo (MC)
and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, to determine the in situ atomic scale
structure of catalyst surfaces and heterogeneous interfaces in coordination with
quantum mechanical (QM) studies of reactivity. The multiparadigm ReaxFF/MC/MD
framework will be used to resolve the integral-occupation supercell structures
of occupationally disordered multimetal oxides responsible for propane and
propene ammoxidation. Most prominent among these are MoVNbTeO catalysts for
ammoxidation of propene to acrylonitrile. Combining high temperature reactive
dynamics trajectories with quantum-mechanical studies of key intermediates and
transition states, the metallic elements involved in rate- and selectivity
determining CH activation and carbon-heteroatom bond-forming steps will be
identified. Separately, the chemical mechanism by which vanadyl pyrophosphate
((VO)2P2O7) stores oxygen atoms at its surface for use in the 14-electron
oxidation of butane to maleic anhydride will be determined by simulating the
annealing and calcination of large unit cell models of the vanadyl pyrophosphate
and other high oxidation state V/P/O phases. New heterogeneous multimetallic
catalysts for hydrocarbon functionalization will be posited through the optimal
combination of the CH activation, radical trapping, ammonia activation and
oxygen activation functions of existing catalysts. This computational framework
has been validated on simpler bimetallic oxides, and will continue to be
optimized. Developmental work will focus on (1) streamlining the fitting of
force-field parameters for new combinations of elements against QM training sets
and (2) extending the MC application of ReaxFF to grand canonical
implementations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interfacial phenomena in catalysis and
applications necessary for sustainable energy consumption occur at a regime too
large for mature quantum mechanics-based simulations to play a predictive role:
passivation and band tuning at semiconductor surfaces, grain boundaries in
layered thermoelectric materials, semiconductor-metal and semiconductor
organometallic solvent interfaces which facilitate charge transfer between
photosensitive and catalytic components in photosynthetic or photovoltaic
devices. The broader scientific impact of developing the ReaxFF/MC/MD approach
to classical but reactive molecular dynamics simulations will be a tool for
addressing a limiting factor in many heterogeneous catalysis and interfacial
science applications: determining atomic-scale structures under operating
conditions. Multimetal oxide catalysts are used to produce the commodity
chemicals acrolein and acrylonitrile from propene, and even small improvements
in catalytic performance (i.e., selectivity and activity) will have a
substantial effect on energy consumption and yield. The economic impact of
replacing propene with propane cannot be overstated. Since propene is generated
from propane with an approximate cost of 10 ¢/lb, elimination of this step has
the potential to save the US chemical industry several hundred million dollars
per year. In addition, each quarter of Prof. Goddard's year long class is
informed by progress in the group's current research. Applications which
illustrate specific kinds of atomic interactions are discussed in the quarter of
lectures in chemical physics; new and established computational techniques are
taught in the quarter of lectures on methods; methods and software developed
through the group's research are applied by students from experimental groups in
the quarter of hands-on project work in students' respective fields.