* 1214993
* SBIR Phase I:  Polymer Mesocomposites: Novel Materials for Compaction-Resistant, High-Flux Water Treatment Membranes
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Joel Dulebohn, InPore Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is developing novel high
flux, compaction-resistant and durable polymer mesocomposite membranes for
sustainable drinking water purification and water reuse. The new membranes
exhibit 1) superior resistance to internal damage and pore compaction, 2)
increased permeability with retention of separation selectivity, and 3)
resistance to chemical degradation and mechanical wear with little or no
shedding of particles under pressure. The key to our innovation is the use of
mesoporous silica particle (MPS) as polymer reinforcing additives and surface
polarity modifiers. The MPS additives, which are prepared through surfactant-
templated supramolecular assembly processes, have precisely tailored pore sizes
in the mesometric range 2 to 50 nm and beyond. Because the MSP pores are larger
than the van der Waals diameter of the polymer chains, the polymer can partially
penetrate the particle mesopores and bind to membrane pores. The resulting
reinforcement, together with the accompanying densification of the membrane,
affords the aforementioned advances in water processing performance. To
illustrate the technological potential of the innovation, a 5 wt % MSP -
polysulfone membrane exhibits a two-fold increase in permeability, a concomitant
improvement in rejection selectivity, and a ten-fold decrease in membrane
compaction at 40 psi

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is its potential to ease
the world's growing needs for clean, potable water. The problems caused by a
lack of clean water are legion and include 1.8 million annual deaths from
diarrheal diseases, most of which are preventable with access to safe water. A
number of techniques are used for transforming non-potable water into potable
water. Of these, membrane filtration is widely used in industrial applications
due to its ability to efficiently remove virtually all particles larger than 0.2
um. However, for addressing the broader need for clean water, there remains a
need for new materials-based strategies for membranes which achieve extended
longevity and high flux separations without sacrificing selectivity. This
proposed SBIR project will demonstrate that the challenges can be overcome
through the invention of a new class of mesoporous membrane composites
reinforced with silicate mesophases. Products based on this technology will be
sold into the global water purification market, with key customers being some of
the world's leading companies in this field.