* 1214781
* Annual Phenomenology Symposia at the University of Wisconsin-Madison  Springs 2011 and 2012
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2013
* Tao Han, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 09/30/2013
* USD 16,373.00

This award provides funding for the PHENO 2010, PHENO 2011, and PHENO 2012
conferences to be held each May at the University of Wisconsin, Madison. These
annual PHENO conferences will be devoted, in large part, to studying the physics
that might emerge from the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at the European
Laboratory for Particle Physics in Geneva, Switzerland, and the connections
between these experimental results and results from other collider- and non-
collider-based experiments in both elementary particle physics and astrophysics
and cosmology. After nearly twenty years of plannning and construction, the LHC
is now the highest-energy collider in the world, and results from this machine
are expected to provide important insight into some of the most pressing
questions that confront particle physics at the TeV scale.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;NSF support for this conference is also vital in order to enable
young physicists to attend the Pheno Symposia. Indeed, the PHENO Conferences are
nothing less than the largest professional student meetings in high-energy
physics in the United States. Most of the student participants also present
their research work in the parallel sessions, providing them with valuable
opportunities to meet their peers, gain valuable research feedback, and develop
contacts with senior physicists. To encourage young participants to attend, the
tradition of the PHENO conferences is that graduate students can attend the
PHENO Conferences free of charge, and postdocs have a reduced conference fee
compared to more senior participants. As a result, many physicists gave their
first conference talk at a PHENO Conference.