* 1214952
* SBIR Phase I:  Agency, a Web-based Alternative Reality Game for Environmental Education
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* David Porcaro, Seward Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,747.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to motivate
middle-school students to engage in science. Specifically, many students lack
interest in environmental education, due largely to the increased time they
spend indoors engaging in digital media. Through the development of Agency, an
Alternate Reality Game (ARG), this project will leverage students? interest in
video games and social technologies to motivate them to spend more time outdoors
engaging in citizen science. In Agency, students use online technologies to
transform themselves into super-agents who must go outdoors and take real action
in their communities in order to play. Students gain points through peer-ranking
of their activities. After developing one level of Agency through 3 iterations
in schools, the researchers will conduct a feasibility study using pre/post
tests of student learning outcomes, and student-questionnaires on motivations
toward positive environmental behavior and time spent outside. Qualitative data
from observations and teacher interviews will be included. Because of the
infancy of the use of ARGs in education, this project will fill a research void
by identifying the factors that lead to a sustainable and motivating educational
ARG, and demonstrating the impact ARGs have on increasing science understanding
and time spent outdoors.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is its potential appeal
to teachers and students because of the highly motivating nature of ARGs.
Additionally, through careful and researched instructional design, this project
will develop a complete system that meets teachers? needs to produce
technologically rich and stimulating activities, while helping students meet
state standards for science. What sets Agency apart from other ARGs is its
strong foundation in the 6-8th grade state science curriculum standards around
ecosystems and watersheds, as well as scientific practices. Additionally, the
program?s online tools allow students and teachers to effectively interact with
science data and content in a repeatable and asynchronous manner, never found
before in an educational ARG. Through the 9-month, standards-based curriculum,
as well as a database connecting students to content, other classrooms, experts,
and local and global media outlets, students are scaffolded in their scientific
skills of observing, predicting, testing, acting, and reporting while gaining
environmental literacy. This product could easily be linked to existing
environmental education curriculums or science textbooks, adding value to
products marketed to K-12 schools. As students play Agency they will enjoy the
adventure of practicing science and the importance of responsible environmental
behavior.