* 1214592
* TAM Camp Workshop
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Kathy Licht, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* thomas wilch
* 07/31/2015
* USD 68,084.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes an interdisciplinary, two-day
workshop to be held in Indianapolis, Indiana in June 2012. The goal of this
workshop is to facilitate discussion of research opportunities available from
logistics hubs in the Transantarctic Mountains and reach a consensus on the site
with the highest scientific priority. This prioritization will be based on which
field site will provide a platform from which the most compelling mix of bio-,
cryo-, geo-, and atmospheric science questions can be addressed to advance
knowledge of the Transantarctic Mountains. This workshop will also develop a
long-range plan to capitalize on research opportunities at other sites. A small
group of scientists from the New Zealand Antarctic program will be invited to
attend the workshop to maintain this historically strong partnership. The PI
emphasizes that another objective of the TAM Camp workshop is to promote
participation by new Antarctic PIs. To support this objective, they will have a
special session on the third day of the workshop dedicated to logistics
planning. In advance of the workshop, information about each potential site will
be made available on a Google-based interactive website. The site will contain
places for experienced PIs to post information on each proposed site from their
past experiences and places for new investigators to post questions. This
approach should provide bridges between scientists of differing levels of
experience and possibly promote new collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: &lt;br/&gt;In addition to providing training in the area of field
planning for new investigators, this proposal would provide teaching and
training opportunities for several undergraduate and graduate students at IUPUI
who will help with website design and content development as well as workshop
implementation.