* 1214639
* SBIR Phase I:  Redesigning a Scientific Electric Field Instrument for use in Electronic Component Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* SIMEON ILIEV, Electric Field Solutions
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will modify an electric
field sensor, developed to study dust electrification for it be used in
industrial applications. The buildup of electric charges on the surface of
materials is frequently large enough to cause electrostatic discharge (ESD).
This is a serious problem in the semiconductor and the electronic industry
because ESD causes product damage ranging from immediate failure to performance
degradation and shortened lifetimes. At present, sensors are not capable of
monitoring work areas for the buildup of the charge that leads to ESD.
Therefore, industry focuses on ESD prevention without monitoring charge buildup.
This project will develop and demonstrate a user-friendly sensor that is
sensitive enough to monitor the buildup of charges that lead to ESD. In contrast
to other sensors on the market, this device measures not only the magnitude but
also the direction of the electric fields. This enables users to monitor work
areas and take corrective actions long before electric fields large enough to
cause ESD are produced. Through this effort, we will study the feasibility of
this sensor, and analyze the data collected by it to improve manufacturing
quality and performance.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that it will enable
electronics manufacturers to easily identify ESD hazards and to address
potential problems at their sources, reducing expenses and improving product
quality. The resulting product will also be useful in the electrostatic painting
industry because the quality of applied paint depends on the electric fields
generated by painting robots. Another industrial application is the prevention
of ESD during the handling of flammables and explosives. Besides these
industrial applications, there are many scientific applications for this
product. For example, there is evidence that electric forces play an important
role on the lifting of dust particles from surfaces. This is an important
process because dust aerosols play an important role in our climate. The
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change recognizes that the interaction of
aerosols with clouds is one of the most uncertain processes in our current
understanding of our climate. The large uncertainties in climate predictions
constrain their use by decision makers. Measurements made with our electric
field sensor could improve our understanding of the physics of dust lifting,
reducing the uncertainties involved in climate prediction.