* 1214145
* RUI:  Stationary phase development for chromatographic analysis of solute interactions with phospholipid membranes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Eric Ross, Gonzaga University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2016
* USD 241,494.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Eric Ross and his group at Gonzaga University are
developing new chromatography methods and materials for the evaluation of
binding and partitioning events at lipid bilayers. The materials under study are
based on dynamic phospholipid phases supported on aggregates of silica
nanoparticles which allow lipid bilayers and incorporated synthetic and natural
receptors to be assayed in a nano-volume liquid chromatography format. The high-
performance features of the solid support and the dynamic properties of natural
membranes that are replicated in the phospholipid coatings promise to extend the
capabilities of current biomembrane affinity stationary phases to probe the
influence of membrane and solution composition on the function of natural or
synthetic pores and channels within lipid bialyers or to screen substances that
modulate their function. Project goals include structurally and chemically
optimizing the stationary phases for the support of lipid bilayers and
functional embedded receptors, optimizing chromatographic procedures for studies
of membrane partitioning and binding with key model receptors both natural and
synthetic, understanding the separation mechanism associated with ion-channel
functionalized membranes, and establishing the compatibility of the system and
format with increasingly complex biomembrane systems.

Advances in research-enabling, cost- and time-effective technology that can be
used to investigate factors affecting the strength and selectivity of
interactions at biomembranes have the potential to broadly impact scientific
fields that study this crucial biological interface which is hampered by the
various analytical limitations of existing model systems. Engagement of
undergraduate students in all aspects of the research project beginning as early
as the sophomore year and continuing through graduation will provide structured
and advanced training in applied materials and bioanalytical sciences for
students largely from rural areas of the inland Northwest. Multi-year engagement
on collaborative projects will allow undergraduate researchers to engage in
vertical mentorship roles as they grow in scientific skill and ability.