* 1214848
* SBIR Phase I:  Dual-Wavelength Picosecond Fiber Laser Source for Label-Free Microscopy
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Christian Freudiger, Invenio
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
laser source for label-free microscopy technique, in particular coherent Raman
scattering (CRS) microscopy. In contrast to other techniques, CRS requires
excitation with two synchronized laser pulse trains (picosecond pulse duration)
with a difference frequency that can be tuned to the precision of a typical line
width of Raman spectra (&lt;1nm). The key innovation of the proposal is the
realization that the difference frequency of the two major gain media used in
the telecommunication industry, Erbium (Er) and Ytterbium (Yb), corresponds to
the high-wavenumber region of Raman spectra, where most CRS imaging is
performed. Based on recent advances in robust all-fiber design, the application
proposes to develop a novel dual-color Er-Yb-laser-system based on optical
synchronization of two picosecond power amplifiers using super-continuum
generation. While this could provide an elegant, economical laser source for
CRS, the physics associated with the required high peak powers in fibers is
challenging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project is in the area of biological and material science research, and
ultimately medical diagnostics. CRS allows microscopic imaging with chemical
contrast based on intrinsic spectroscopic properties of the sample. It
circumvents the issues associated with fluorescent labeling or dye staining,
which can be especially problematic for imaging of molecules that are smaller
than typical labels or for use in vivo in patients. Wide ranging applications
include studying lipid metabolism, trans-dermal drug delivery, biomass
conversion to biofuel, and tumor margin delineation during cancer surgery has
been demonstrated. While laser systems have come a long way and different
approaches exist at various degrees of commercialization, they are expensive
(~$300,000), require experienced optics personnel for operation, and are not
robust. This greatly limits the access to this exciting new technology and
prevents use in medical diagnostics. The light-source proposed in this SBIR
application aims to overcome these limitations, as it is based on a all-fiber
design from robust and low-cost telecommunication components.