* 1214152
* Achieving Molecular Level Control over the Chemical, Electrochemical, and Electrical Properties of Crystalline Si Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Nathan Lewis, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2016
* USD 555,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Nathan Lewis of the California Institute of
Technology will develop methods for the modification of Si surfaces that allow
for control over the direction, degree of, and chemical form of, charge flow
across such interfaces. The approach is to develop and demonstrate chemically
based methods that will allow the deposition of metals onto Si without formation
of metal silicides; to demonstrate chemical methods to utilize conducting
polymers as the charge acceptor, instead of metallic electrocatalyst particles,
to accommodate charge flow without metal silicide formation; and to elaborate
methods that will allow manipulation of the physical placement of conductive
metal particles based on light-directed surface functionalization of Si, so that
catalysts can be placed directly where the charges are flowing across
interfaces. The development of systems that control interfacial charge flow will
address some of the key barriers presented by actual use of Si surfaces in
several critically important applications. Other broader impacts involve
training graduate students and postodcotral researchers in interdisciplinary
surface and energy sciences, broadly disseminating research results and concepts
in publications and scientific presentations as well as TV, radio and electronic
media interviews, and educational outreach via the Caltech Chemistry Animation
Project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical modification of silicon surfaces is
important in interfacing with silicon-based circuitry, developing novel chemical
sensors, and obtaining higher efficiencies from existing photovoltaic cells,
among many applications. The goal of this work is to develop structure-function
relationships for such surfaces and to demonstrate new and beneficial device
behaviors that are enabled by virtue of having molecular level control over the
chemistry the silicon surface. Of specific interest in the proposed work is the
control over silicon surfaces in contact with electron conductors, including
metals, conducting polymers, and other charge acceptors.