* 1214070
* RUI: Spectroscopic studies of halogen substitution effects on covalent and noncovalent interactions in ionic and neutral species
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,02/28/2017
* Rebecca Peebles, Eastern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 02/28/2017
* USD 262,917.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms program
of the Division of Chemistry, Professors Sean and Rebecca Peebles of Eastern
Illinois University, together with their undergraduate and graduate student
researchers, will investigate the structures and spectra of novel, unstable
halogen-containing species, including carbocations, anionic dimers and neutral
C-H hydrogen bound complexes. These species will be studied using microwave
spectroscopic techniques coupled with computational chemistry. The goal of these
studies is to determine the effects of varying halogen substitutions on the
specific orientations of molecules within weakly hydrogen bound dimers, on the
type of bonding in carbocationic species, as well as investigating the preferred
orientations for interaction of halide ions with alkynes, aromatic compounds,
and other pi systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental information on the
properties of matter may be gained from the study of weak interactions between
molecules. These interactions drive the formation of molecular machines, the
properties of liquids and solids, the interactions of proteins, ions, and drugs
in biological systems, the ways chemicals in the atmosphere interact, and the
mechanisms by which chemical reactions such as combustion occur. Research funded
by this award aims to understand the strengths and physical properties of these
interactions. The undergraduate and graduate students working on these projects
will acquire hands-on experience in design and modification of sophisticated
spectroscopic apparatus in order to produce and trap the specific novel
chemicals of interest, and in acquiring, analyzing and interpreting data
collected using this apparatus. They will also gain experience presenting their
results at international, national and regional conferences.