* 1214819
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Low-Profile Miniature Wireless Pressure Sensor
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Alexander Chimbayo, Integrated Sensing Systems Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,567.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the
development of a novel low-profile miniature wireless pressure sensing system,
customized for industrial and medical applications where a small-sized, low
cost, low-profile (flat) sensor is required. These miniature wireless sensors
will contain all system components (sensor, electronics, inductor coil) in one
small system. The fabrication process for this wireless sensor is also designed
to be simpler and easier to manufacture than existing sensors. The most
important medical application being targeted for the proposed sensors is for
neurological pressure monitoring, namely intracranial pressure sensors for
patients with traumatic brain injury (TBI) as well as shunt pressure monitors
for patients with hydrocephalus. This technology will provide safe, chronic,
fast, detailed, real time, continuous, comprehensive, intracranial pressure
measurements, and supports the trend towards home health monitoring, with the
potential to revolutionize the way patients are treated. The advantages of the
proposed miniature wireless systems are: (a) low profile (flat) - ideal for
minimally invasive placement in neurological pressure monitoring applications,
(b) miniature wireless system which integrates all system components in one
small package, (c) low cost, robust, and manufacturable, (d) easily customized
for a variety of pressure monitoring applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
potential commercial value of this Small Business Innovation Research proposal
will be in several areas. The final goal is the commercialization of the
proposed wireless pressure monitoring systems for use in industrial and medical
applications. Commercial applications include any area that is in need of
wireless pressure sensing; for example, aerospace, automotive and industrial
applications. The larger market for the proposed sensors is for medical
applications. The medical markets are neurological pressure monitoring products,
namely intracranial pressure sensors for patients with traumatic brain injury
(TBI) as well as shunt pressure monitors for patients with hydrocephalus.
Approximately 1.4 million people are treated for head injuries, with over a
quarter million being moderate or severe injuries. TBI accounts for
approximately 70,000 deaths each year in America, with an additional 80,000
patients having severe long-term disabilities. Hydrocephalus is among the most
common birth defects, affecting 1 in 1000 babies, as well as many adults.
Approximately 70,000 patients are discharged from hospitals with the diagnosis
of hydrocephalus each year. Nearly 36,000 shunt-related procedures a year
translates to $100's million dollars worth of medical expense.