* 1214772
* SBIR Phase I:  Micro Laser Assisted Machining
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Deepak Ravindra, Micro Laser Assisted Machining Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2013
* USD 168,714.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate proof
of concept and determine the feasibility of a micro-laser assisted machining
(micro-LAM) process that will both reduce the time, cost, and effort, and extend
the capability, associated with machining of hard and brittle semiconductors and
ceramics. The proposed research is unique, and the research team is well-
qualified to perform the feasibility research around this innovative process,
which couples a laser to a diamond cutting tool in a hybrid package arrangement
to perform precision machining of semiconductors and engineered ceramics.
Experiments will be conducted, based upon a bench scale laboratory
configuration, to test and evaluate the micro-LAM process and system for
feasibility in an industrial setting on industrial processing equipment. Tool
wear, machined material surface finish and subsurface damage data, as a function
of laser and process parameters, will be evaluated relative to the potential for
the micro-LAM process to be developed into a successful commercial product. The
overall result of this project will be a cost-effective method for the
production of useful and commercially viable consumer and industrial products
manufactured from advanced semiconductors and engineered ceramics.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will occur in
semiconductor (micro-electronic) manufacturing, and for manufacturing of optical
(mirror and windows) and precision mechanical products (e.g. bearings and
seals), where the superior properties of advanced semiconductor and engineered
ceramic materials are required to achieve the desired performance. The micro-LAM
technology offers a new way to realize the high pressures and temperatures that
are needed for processing these hard and nominally brittle materials. This
technology will enable entirely new capabilities for production of materials and
products currently not viable or achievable due to processing or use
limitations. The new method has potential applications to emerging technologies,
such as wind turbines and plug-in electric vehicles, where high-power and high-
temperature operation of advanced devices is required. The served available
market that includes machine tools for diamond turning, milling, and drilling is
approximately $4.5 billion. The micro-LAM technology will initially target
existing (~10,000 units) and new ($150 million/year) diamond turning machines as
an add-on accessory.