* 1214793
* SBIR Phase I:  Learning Design Synthesis with a Mechatronics Kit
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Eric Schweikardt, Modular Robotics Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop and
test a construction kit toy and accompanying activities for teaching and
learning engineering design synthesis. Routine engineering analysis can be
automated, but design synthesis still remains largely the province of creative
and knowledgeable human beings. The problem is that design synthesis is taught
poorly, if at all. Construction kit toys offer a way to solve this problem: they
invite young people into engineering design synthesis in playful yet
intellectually challenging ways. Beyond teaching specific domain knowledge,
construction kits engage young learners in goal-directed experimental
exploration, acquiring and practicing skills central to creativity and invention
in engineering design. Current mechatronics construction kit toys are either too
simple or limited to allow serious designing, or they are powerful but so
technically demanding as to exclude many who otherwise might like to play. The
specific innovation of our EYVO construction kit for mechatronics through
elegant encapsulation of function and simplicity of physical design?will
dramatically lower barriers for young people to engage significantly with
engineering design synthesis. This project will develop the EYVO prototype and
accompanying educational materials, test it with children, and investigate its
commercial potential.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is as follows.
Throughout the twentieth century the US led the world in science and technology
innovation, but this competitive advantage is steadily eroding. US children lag
behind peer nations in STEM knowledge and skills, crucial for the nation?s
technological leadership and economic future. Many young people are discouraged
from pursuing STEM interests because, despite interest, early encounters lead
them to believe that they have poor aptitude. They turn away (or feel excluded)
from STEM fields because the barriers to entry seem too high or because they
think it?s boring or difficult. Unlike competing products such as LEGO
Mindstorms, VEX Robotics, and Meccano the EYVO construction kit developed in
this project invites young people to engage immediately?without prologue and
without need for prior technical proficiency?in serious yet playful engineering
design. Through play with EYVO they can learn that engineering design is fun,
and more importantly, a domain in which they can excel. By making the kit
affordable to individuals, schools, and informal science institutions, the
project will make engineering design synthesis skills attractive and accessible
to populations that historically have largely been excluded from, or
disinterested in, STEM learning.