* 1214987
* SBIR Phase I:  One pass dike and levee characterization system
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* John Foley, Sky Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,972.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
dike and levee characterization system. Hurricane Katrina and Rita and the
flooding and breaching of levees in the Midwest in 2008 clearly demonstrated the
impact of levee failures in the US, and the need for proactive levee assessment
and repair. Current approaches to dike and levee assessments are expensive,
invasive and lengthy and generally only provide sparse data. The system which
will be developed under this SBIR will provide actionable information in near
real time on the values of, and changes in, subsurface and surface properties of
dikes and levees. This will be done by semi autonomously collecting and
processing spatially and temporally coincident multi sensor datasets. Data
processing will be done through joint inversion and automated interpretation of
multi sensor datasets. Information will be made available to stakeholders in
dikes and levees through a web interface, and will allow stakeholders to make
informed and data based decisions on the need for corrective actions based on
property values and changes. This system should substantially improve dike and
levee assessment practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project will be the potential to provide dike and levee
characterization with improved quality and for substantially lower costs than
current approaches, and the associated confidence in levee performance. In the
US and in other countries such as the Netherlands, the UK, China and Japan
levees and dikes collectively protect tens of millions of lives and trillions of
dollars' worth of property. Currently dike and levee assessment costs between
$50,000 and $300,000 per mile. As the US levee inventory is over 100,000 miles,
the costs to assess these dikes and levees pose significant hardship for the
federal government, states and communities, and budget constraints sometime
result in deferred assessments with potential deadly and expensive consequences.
The system which will be developed here will provide in a single pass high
quality, affordable (approximately $3000/mile), readily accessible comprehensive
information on dike and levee subsurface and surface properties in near real
time. This will allow stakeholders to make informed decisions on dike quality
and the need for, and location of any corrective actions. The resulting science
and data based knowledge about levee strength will provide broad benefits to
society.