* 1214849
* SBIR Phase I:  Optoelectronic Solar Tracking Device
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* John Pender, Meridian Deployment Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project investigates a
novel optical element (OE) that uses liquid crystal (LC) in thin panels to steer
sunlight. Any technology using focused sunlight must account for the motion of
the sun. For decades this has been accomplished by physically moving the
focusing optics and/or the target (a photovoltaic cell, for instance) so that
the system is always aligned with the sun. This project develops a simple,
motion-free tracking system where the refractive index of the LC is continuously
varied with a low-voltage signal to keep the focused sunlight on the target as
the sun moves throughout the day. The technology is applicable to any
concentrated solar application. The project goals are to optimize design
elements of the OE with respect to materials configuration and manufacturing
technique, and to build prototypes for lab and field-testing. Phase 1 will
address three interconnected design issues. These are 1) maximizing solar
throughput of the device by eliminating unwanted reflections from various
interfaces, 2) maximizing the acceptance range of solar incidence angles, and 3)
lowering the cost of the finished device for commercialization. The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project will be its effect on the economics
of the energy sector, national energy security, and global climate change. The
unique beam steering technology developed in this project will make on-site
energy production more economically viable, which will have the immediate effect
of reducing the amount of power drawn from the grid. This will lower the demands
on centralized power plants, the vast majority of which produce electricity by
burning fossil fuels, and on the aging transmission line infrastructure.
Reducing the amount of electricity consumed in the U.S. will improve national
energy security not only by strengthening the economy, but also by reducing the
amount of fossil fuel the U.S. must purchase offshore. Reducing the amount of
fossil fuel burned to make electricity will reduce the carbon footprint of the
U.S., further mitigating the effect of global climate change.