* 1214854
* SBIR Phase I:  My Skin Technologies: Melanin Meter for a Growing Hyper-pigmentation Market
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Emel Bulat, My Skin Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 05/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
new instrument for detecting and measuring the melanin or pigmentation in human
skin. The intellectual merit stems from developing a deeper and more
quantitative understanding of the trade-offs inherent in creating a market
disruptive, low-cost melanin-measuring device. The technology is based on using
intensity-modulated light to detect melanin noninvasively. The technical
challenge for this project is to identify the optimal components and design
parameters of the prototype, using a flexible breadboard configuration and to
develop a roadmap for miniaturization. The R&D effort will include the
identification of components that result in an instrument that will yield a
repeatable and reliable melanin measurement that is designed for ease-of use by
the general public.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the extension of the
melanin measuring technology to the detection of incipient skin cancer (abnormal
melanin levels within localized areas of the skin is a key indicator of this
disease). Because of the estimated low cost of the instrument it has the
potential of being used by local pharmacies or by individuals at home. This
could have a major medical benefit by enabling regular personalized monitoring
to guard against this insidious condition that becomes more prevalent in an
aging population. It is well documented in the medical literature that early
cancer detection can result in more cost-effective treatments, helping to stem
the tide of rising health-care costs.