* 1214896
* SBIR Phase I:  Structural Health Monitoring using Embedded Frequency Steered Acoustic Transducers
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Michael Kranz, EngeniusMicro LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project investigates
high-temperature wirelessly interrogated acoustic sensors for monitoring
insulated structures such as piping and storage vessels that are in difficult to
access locations and operate at elevated temperatures. Current 2-D acoustic
imaging systems are wiring and data processing intensive, as well as difficult
to embed in a permanently installed structural health monitoring system. The
proposed innovation addresses this challenge through taking advantage of the
advanced capabilities of the frequency-steered acoustic transducer (FSAT). The
unique FSAT architecture allows 2-D imaging with a simple interface that can be
controlled by a low-power wireless system. This proposed effort will simulate,
design, and, demonstrate MEMS-based fabrication processes and material sets that
allow FSAT operation in elevated temperature applications. The effort will also
demonstrate low-power wireless embeddable interface electronics for simple
integration of multiple FSAT devices into a distributed structural health
monitoring system. If successful, this research will enable new in situ health
monitoring capabilities at high-temperature. This technology is highly scalable
and will provide these benefits at low capital cost and low ongoing
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is in the cost savings and energy savings that can be gained through
increased structural health monitoring of critical components and processes in
manufacturing facilities. Because the target market is high temperature
industrial process control and structural monitoring, these sensors would permit
savings in terms of production time, and reduced plant downtime, as well as the
energy required to maintain the process temperature. Within certain situations,
this sensor technology would enable wireless point measurements of structural
health that are currently not feasible or affordable. Relevant and affordable
monitoring solutions for low- to medium-cost industrial equipment will be
beneficial to rural facilities and small-scale manufacturers who tend to use
older technology, maintain small capital budgets, and operate under tight cash-
flow restrictions. Broader impacts of this technology to science and education
include a novel advance in existing structural health monitoring technology and
funding for continued research and education in wireless sensors, acoustic
imaging, and damage detection using acoustic methods.