* 1214763
* SBIR Phase I:  RALP + SAM: Reading For All Learners + Student Assessment and Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Alan Hofmeister, Academic Success For All Learners
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,453.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to address
the educational needs of children at risk of reading failure in early grades,
and specifically, to provide technology-based reading instruction, adaptive
instructional strategies, ongoing curriculum-embedded assessments with graphical
reporting, and instructional methods to support learning to read in early
grades. Substantial evidence supports the effectiveness of the print-based
Reading for All Learners Program (RALP) and its precursor, the SWRL little
books, as summarized in the proposal. The tablet version of RALP will
incorporate a student assessment and monitoring (SAM) system to ensure adequate
reading progress, including measures of reading fluency and comprehension, and
adaptive instructional recommendations based on student needs. Additionally, the
project will incorporate voice recognition software to add a test of reading
comprehension and to provide recorded student practice with feedback. Designed
for teacher-led instruction with large or small groups, or one-on-one
instruction with struggling students at school or home, RALP + SAM will provide
instructional prompts for effective teaching and implementation. This Phase I
project will investigate feasibility, identify needs and recommendations for a
tablet-based adaptation from users of the print-based product, and test tablet-
based adaptations and assessment, including voice recognition for reading
comprehension assessment.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project relates to students at
high risk for reading failure and the need for effective early intervention to
reach grade level reading, math, and science goals. On the 2009 National
Assessment of Education Progress (NAEP), 67% of students performed at or below
the basic level, and only 33% were proficient or advanced (NCES, 2010).
According to NAEP researchers, students performing at or below a basic level
only have ?partial mastery of prerequisite knowledge and skills that are
fundamental for proficient work at each grade.? Recently, Hernandez (2011) found
that children who do not read proficiently by third grade are four times more
likely to drop out before graduating from high school, and six times more likely
to drop out of they have not mastered even basic reading skills. This project
develops a cross-platform tablet-based reading curriculum program to assist
teachers and caregivers with delivery of effective instruction. This project
will build upon the RALP K-3 curriculum. By integrating effective reading
intervention with tablet-based computers, the reading program will have
streamlined data collection, enhanced data-driven decision making, tablet-based
assessment and reporting, and improved learner outcomes through adaptive
instruction based on individual learner needs.