* 1214634
* SBIR Phase I:  Electrochemical Systems for the Reduction of Oxyhalide Species
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Andrew Boal, MIOX Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,996.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to develop
novel approaches to water treatment that cost-effectively remove inorganic
disinfection byproducts (DBPs) in water. These DBPs, known as oxyhalides, are
typically associated with standard water disinfection methods but can also be
present in water as a result of industrial contamination. Oxyhalides present
known public health risks and are targeted for regulation by the US
Environmental Protection Agency as well as state environmental agencies.
Research in this project will focus on two electrochemical methods that mitigate
contamination of water with oxyhalides. The first is a novel electrochemical
system capable of directly reducing oxyhalides to their corresponding halide
ions while the second investigates unique preventative measures to minimize
oxyhalide formation during hypochlorite production using on-site electrochemical
generation systems.

The commercial impacts of this project are that the proposed research will
provide novel water treatment technology solutions that increase access to high
quality potable water. An electrochemical device capable of complete reduction
of oxyhalides will provide an effective, economical new technology that can be
used on scales ranging from individual households to major aquifer remediation
projects. Similarly, reduced production of oxyhalides during brine electrolysis
processes will help municipalities and industrial water producers meet current
and planned drinking water standards regulating the amounts of chlorate and
perchlorate allowed in potable water. Both of the technologies developed as a
result of this research will result in a broad impact on public health by
providing technological barriers to the exposure of toxic oxyhalides.