* 1214810
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a 32 Site Ion Channel Measurement Consumable
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Jason Poulos, Librede Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,995.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is aimed at developing
improved technology for drug discovery and safety screening of ion channels. Ion
channels are present in every cell and play key roles in a wide range of
physiological processes including the cardiac cycle and neural activity. Librede
Inc. is developing an ion channel screening platform based on artificial cell
membrane technology that has the potential for decreased instrumentation and
running costs with higher throughput and minimal training. In the work proposed
here, Librede will design and fabricate a consumable prototype ion channel array
plate with 32 measurement sites and measure an ion channel across the whole
plate simultaneously. At the completion of this Phase I work we will have an SBS
standard consumable array plate ready for integration into an automated platform
with solution perfusion to be developed in Phase II.

The broader/commercial impacts of this research are to decrease the cost and
increase the throughput of ion channel screening. These are well-recognized pain
points felt by pharmaceutical and academic researchers. This problem is shared
for screening of all drug candidates, since all drugs must be screened against
cardiac ion channels for issues of safety. Librede?s fundamentally different
approach to ion channel screening will streamline the screening process,
reducing its cost and time, resulting in better/safer drugs reaching the market
sooner. Our platform gives us a competitive advantage in cost, throughput, and
ease of use when compared to the state of the art.