* 1214122
* Workshop on Evaluating Approaches for Implementing Direct Potable Reuse, Summer/Fall 2012 in Southern California
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,10/31/2014
* William Cooper, National Water Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2014
* USD 49,419.00

1214122 (Mosher). Direct Potable Reuse (DPR) is the planned introduction of
recycled water directly into a public water system or into a raw water supply
upstream of a water treatment plant. DPR has the potential to provide a
reliable, sustainable local water supply; however, it is not easily
implementable in the U.S. due to scientific/technical knowledge gaps and public
perception. This multi-disciplinary workshop will bring together academics and
water professionals to focus on the technical and social challenges and either
directly address them or prepare guidance on means to address them. The workshop
will include review of background papers, working group sessions, group report
development, and presentations of group reports. A final report will be
accessible online. The workshop will advance knowledge in public perception
(social science) and technical issues (engineering). The public perception
outcomes will directly enhance outreach and educational activities in the water
industry. The technology outcomes will enhance scientific research and
engineering applications by identifying key issues that will allow for the
implementation of DPR and improve current water treatment technologies. DPR has
the potential to significantly improve and diversify sustainable water resources
management throughout the US, especially in arid regions like CA, AZ, and TX. It
can reduce the need for long-distance water conveyance (and associated energy
consumption). DPR implementation can also encourage the transformative view that
wastewater is a renewable recoverable source of energy, nutrients, and potable
water. The final product, a workshop report, will provide guidance on developing
protocols for addressing technical challenges to DPR (e.g., modifications needed
to upgrade existing advanced treatment facilities to DPR). It will also provide
outreach/education tools to better communicate and increase the public?s
understanding of DPR. The workshop report will be disseminated broadly to the
water community as a free internet download for the purpose of enhancing the
scientific and technical understanding of methods/facilities needed to undertake
DPR projects, as well as enhance the understanding of social aspects/activities
needed to gain public acceptance of DPR. The workshop has the potential to help
make DPR a viable option for communities seeking to augment/diversify potable
water supplies. Some benefits of DPR to society at-large include: providing a
water supply alternative for communities that lack groundwater aquifers or
surface water; reducing wastewater discharge to the ocean or inland surface
waters, reducing the extraction/depletion of water from aquifers and surface
waters, and reducing energy use.