* 1214235
* Ship Operations- R/V Atlantis Operations
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2019
* Timothy Twomey, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rose Dufour
* 03/31/2019
* USD 46,392,795.00

Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI) is awarded funding to support NSF
scientific research operations on R/V Atlantis in CY 2012. Eighty nine percent
of the 217 days scheduled will support NSF peer-reviewed programs; other funding
sources support the remainder of the year's schedule. An ONR multiple-ship
operation will be conducted along with R/V Knorr in the Atlantic in early Spring
which tie both WHOI ships to the Atlantic. R/V Atlantis will carry out two
cruises for the US Global Ocean Carbon and Repeat Hydrography program (CLIVAR;
lines A20 and A22. ROV Jason will deploy from R/V Atlantis to study Seep
Connectivity off Barbados for an NSF sponsored voyage in early summer. A
hydrophone deployment in the Equatorial Atlantic has been inserted on Atlantis'
schedule after the submission of the proposal. A final cruise to study the Plume
of the Amazon Basin will conclude the year's operating schedule. Work will then
be conducted to continue upgrading the Alvin Handling System on R/V Atlantis in
preparation for Alvin rejoining the ship in last 2012. This is a five-year
cooperative agreement, and funding for each year of the agreement will be
negotiated and is dependent on the number of days at sea in support of NSF-
funded research. R/V Atlantis operates as a UNOLS ship, adhering to the UNOLS
safety standards, INSURV and NSF
&lt;br/&gt;inspections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical and
Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;These peer-reviewed projects supported by
operations on R/V Atlantis in 2012 have been rigorously evaluated for scientific
and intellectual merit as an integral part of the NSF grant review and award
process. The competitive nature of the award granting process ensures a very
high level of intellectual merit. Knowledge gained and the discoveries made by
the research programs supported by R/V Atlantis will enhance understanding of
the oceans and address a broad range of important scientific questions. The goal
of this proposal is to provide funding support to safely and productively
operate and maintain R/V Atlantis in 2012 and to ensure it is maintained to
support its planned life-cycle. This support is an essential prerequisite for
safe and successful scientific missions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact
Statement &lt;br/&gt;WHOI research vessels provide at-sea laboratories necessary
to effectively and safely take science to sea. This community includes senior
oceanographic scientists, post-doctoral and doctoral students, graduate and
undergrad students as well as engineers, technicians, and teachers. These
intellectual endeavors have broadened our understanding and have spurred on new
questions and scientific theory. &lt;br/&gt;Research supported by R/V Atlantis
next year will be important in understanding the Earth?s climate and how it
changes over time. In 2012 R/V Atlantis will deploy Jason to sample 2
hydrothermal fields recently discovered on the Mid Cayman Rise and conduct Seep
Connectivity studies. R/V Atlantis will also conduct a project for the US Global
Ocean Carbon and Repeat Hydrography program (CLIVAR). R/VAtlantis will also
support plans to bring the Human Occupied Vehicle ALVIN back into
operations.Educational and outreach programs such as Dive &amp; Discover
http://science.whoi.edu/DiveDiscover,NSF?s COSEE Center, Ridge 2000, and Women
Exploring the Ocean will be featured on thesecruises. All of these intellectual
endeavors will continue to broaden our understanding of the oceans, stimulate
new questions, and confirm scientific theory for years to come, benefiting
society at large. Oceanographic expeditions are an extension of university
classrooms and are an extraordinary educational experience. Voyages expose
participants to new ideas, teach fundamental scientific &lt;br/&gt;principles
through observation and practice, and inevitably raise questions that stimulate
new thinking about how the oceans work. An increased awareness of our
responsibility to bring this science into the classroom and to the public has
resulted in the development of new avenues to share these scientific findings.
The cruise web site concept has effectively reached classrooms with real-time
images, data and two-way communication between scientists and students in
schools across the country. These efforts have extended the sea-going experience
from a handful of participants to thousands of students in classrooms across the
country, as well as to the general public. Scientists on WHOI vessels will use
this tool to present their data through web-based approaches either at their
home institution or through web sites maintained by community organizations. The
WHOI web site, http://www.whoi.edu, has pioneered efforts to present the results
of research expeditions to the public. Outreach programs continuing in 2012 from
WHOI vessels with the Perkins School for the Blind and Disabled represent
cutting edge efforts to broaden the experience of conducting research at sea to
every American.