* 1214248
* EAGER: Models of Gray and Green Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Dorothy Reed, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 03/31/2014
* USD 63,024.00

The objective of this EArly-Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
project is to study data collected after earthquakes and other events to create
a model to describe the behavior of the "gray", or built, and the "green", or
landscape systems, as a whole. "Civil infrastructure" is a term that describes
the engineering underpinnings of society such as water supply, power delivery
and roadways. Sometimes it is called "gray" infrastructure because it tends to
be built of concrete and other materials. Often, engineers analyze only one part
of the infrastructure at a time. For example, most traffic lights on roadways
are designed to work when power is available. Power outages are assumed to be
brief enough that a long-term back-up plan is not required. However, it has
become apparent in recent years that the functioning of built systems comprising
the infrastructure such as roadways and power supply are not independent, but
rather interdependent. Power outages affect roadways and vice-versa: If roadways
are closed, crews cannot fix damaged power lines. Also, recent disasters such as
the 2011 Tohoku earthquake in Japan indicate that it is important to include
green systems such as trees and rivers in examining the infrastructure after
major events. Closer to home, water systems for drainage in US cities include
both built systems such as piping as well as "green" systems such as forests and
other landscapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will significantly expand
existing databases, examine case studies and use mathematical methods such as
input-output models and influence diagrams to build a framework for describing
the behavior of the entire infrastructure. The results will include the creation
of a website for data collection and dissemination, published articles on the
research, and presentations to students and practicing engineers. A fully
operating infrastructure is critical for the proper functioning of society. This
research is a good investment because it provides a bridge between engineers and
others with different perspectives, such as biophysical and social scientists,
for the modeling of infrastructure behavior. Because the United Nations has
identified the lack of appropriate infrastructure as a global challenge, this
research is timely. This research will be a major step forward towards
cataloging data on and models of the green systems that are analogous to the
gray or built systems in the same format. With these data, the research
community will be better able to assess the performance of the infrastructure
for various natural hazards such as earthquakes and hurricanes. The research is
transformative because it will produce an approach to infrastructure design as a
whole. Results from the proposed project will transform the instruction and
implementation of the infrastructure system design process in academia and in
practice.