* 1214416
* SEES Fellows: Sustainable Development of Shale-gas Resources in Pennsylvania - Bridging Science, Policy and Economics of Hydraulic Fracturing
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2017
* Brian Ellis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2017
* USD 332,769.00

This research will address two questions related to the regulation and economics
of shale-gas development: 1) How would inclusion of hydraulic fracturing of
shale-gas formations under the federal Safe Drinking Water Act impact shale-gas
production activities and risks of fresh water contamination? 2) What are the
comparative long-term costs and benefits of the hydraulic fracturing of shale-
gas reservoirs compared to other energy development strategies? The approach
will combine comparative policy analysis with an economic assessment of the
environmental externalities and opportunity costs associated with the hydraulic
fracturing of shale-gas reservoirs. The goal is to develop an approach for
choosing regulations that minimize risk to the environment while allowing for
robust development of shale-gas reserves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances
in directional drilling have made unconventional extraction of natural gas from
organic-rich shale formations economically viable. The state of Pennsylvania
serves as a prime case study for sustainable shale-gas development because it is
underlain by one of the most promising shale-gas reservoirs in the United
States, the Marcellus Shale. The rapid investment in shale-gas extraction by the
oil and gas industry has outpaced the development of regulatory policy designed
to handle the unique environmental challenges associated with extensive
hydraulic fracturing activities. The assessments to be carried out in this
project will help guide the development of sound regulatory policy that will
ensure the security of fresh water resources and the safety of citizens in close
proximity to extraction wells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported
under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability Fellows
(SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to enable discoveries needed to
inform actions that lead to environmental, energy and societal sustainability
while creating the necessary workforce to address these challenges. With SEES
Fellows support, this project will enable a promising early career researcher to
establish themselves in an independent research career related to
sustainability.