* 1214877
* SBIR Phase I:  Efficient and Scalable Production of Functionalized Electrospun Nanofiber Felts of Regenerated Cellulose with Superior Capacity and Throughput for Bioseparations
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Nyle Hedin, Nanofiber Separations, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project from Nanofiber
Separations, LLC will establish an innovative type of bioseparation media
utilizing electrospun nanofiber felts of regenerated cellulose with high
specific surface area as the support for protein adsorption ligands. Compared to
competitive products (e.g., packed resin beads or microfiber adsorption
membranes), these nanofiber membranes/felts will provide greatly enhanced
throughput (i.e., shorter processing times), reduce the amount of waste
generated, and decrease the volume of media required (i.e., lower costs and
smaller operating footprints) for purification of high-value biopharmaceutical
products. The study of these separation materials and processes will increase
the scientific knowledge of the absorption characteristics of biomaterials at
the nanoscale. This SBIR Phase I project will focus on optimization of a
scalable production process for the felts, including pilot scale production of
the nanofiber mats, along with functionalization of the fibers for superior
capacity, elevated throughput, and highly selective bioseparations.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project centers on providing
advanced separation media for the biopharmaceutical, water purification, and
blood products industries. Because of the advantages of the proposed product,
the innovative adsorption felts produced from electrospun nanofibers of
regenerated cellulose have a tremendous amount of commercial potential.
Customers will come from companies within the biopharmaceutical industry, as
well as the established manufacturers of bioseparations adsorption media. In
addition, the underlying fundamentals associated with nanofiber adsorption media
will have a wide range of implications, including the water purification
industry and the blood products and/or blood purification industries. The
advantages achieved through this innovative work will lead to more efficient
separation technologies across many sectors, such as faster processes, reduced
energy consumption, lower materials requirements, and less waste generation. In
addition to the broader scientific impacts, Nanofiber Separations, LLC is
committed to creating jobs and and training highly technical staff members with
expertise in the interdisciplinary fields of nanoscience/nanoengineering and
biotechnology.