* 1214943
* SBIR Phase I:  Membrane-Permeable Nano-Materials for Cell Reprogramming Solutions
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Andranik Andrew Aprikyan, Stemgenics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop novel superparamagnetic biocompatible cell-penetrant bioactive
nanoparticles for reprogramming human somatic cells and generation of
pluripotent stem cells with intact genomes. To demonstrate technical
feasibility, the plan is to use the most promising routes for high-density
functionalization of nanoparticles. The resultant superparamagnetic
biocompatible bioactive nanoparticles (SPBBN) will be evaluated for their
efficiency in cell reprogramming and generation of induced pluripotent stem
cells. The goal is to obtain the proof-of-concept data documenting that SPBBN
produced by coupling cell penetrant and biologically active molecules can be
used successfully for generation of pluripotent stem cells and other cell types
with intact genomes, thereby suitable for research and preclinical/clinical
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this proposed project is the production of superparamagnetic biocompatible
bioactive nanoparticles (SPBBN) capable of penetrating through cell membrane and
delivering biologically active molecules to reprogram cells into stem or more
specialized cells while preserving the cell genome intact. Because this
innovative methodology does not use DNA or RNA, the resultant human pluripotent
stem cells (PSCs) and/or their progeny will have an intact genome, and,
therefore, will preserve their normal gene expression profiles. There is a lack
of alternative, effective non-integrating technology; a vast majority of
research laboratories in academia and private centers generate human PSCs using
viral delivery of reprogramming factors. Furthermore, advances in personalized
medicine are also hindered by the absence of effective cell reprogramming and
generation of safe PSCs and their progeny. The company's unique approach offers
cell membrane-penetrant bioactive nanomaterials for cell reprogramming solutions
focused on cellular therapy for academic research and pharmaceutical preclinical
and clinical applications.