* 1214817
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel Human Robot Interaction System Using Affective Theory-of-Mind Computing to Improve User-Responses and Efficacy of Automated Tutoring
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Kino Coursey, Hanson Robokind And Intelligent Bots LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project advances
artificial intelligence (AI) and robotics by developing the foundation for
emotionally responsive systems. Building on Theory of Mind research in
psychology and robotics, this project focuses on enhancing a robot's capacity to
integrate two pieces of information in order to determine a third piece. These
inferences can be concrete or as abstract as conjectures about another agent's -
including a human user's -beliefs, desires, and intentions. The project creates
a framework for the robot's AI system to maintain several competing models of
the world (particles) and select and modify those models that have a higher
likelihood of matching the real world (filtering). This method of "Particle
Filtering" is an effective strategy or navigating complex environments. The core
research focuses on adapting and assessing particle filtering methods within
abstract contexts including knowledge, emotional, and goal states. If
successful, as the robot gains additional information through sensors and
language processing, it will adapt its models of the users' emotional state and
adjust its interactions accordingly. Essentially, this integrative framework
will enable robots to understand human desires and frustrations to find creative
solutions in response to those needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is the evolution of an Artificial
Intelligence interface that emulates an empathic human-to-human experience.
Because the system will represent and track multiple dimensions about a human
user, the robot can recognize when a user is confused or frustrated and respond
accordingly. This intuitive, naturalistic AI platform has substantial research,
education, and therapeutic applications and commercialization channels. With its
open source software infrastructure and the relative low-cost of the platform,
the initial commercial targets are as a platform for robust Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) education and as therapeutic technology for
children and adults on the autism spectrum.