* 1214915
* SBIR Phase I:  Palatal Device Providing In-situ Sensory Feedback for Patients with Vestibular Imbalance
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Hui Tang, Innervo Technology LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a
hidden and noninvasive assistive device that can provide in-situ sensory
feedback of head movement for patients with vestibular imbalance. Loss of
vestibular feedback in the sensorimotor control loop of the human body causes
imbalance, which significantly increases the risk of falling, one of the leading
causes of death in the elderly population. Patients with vestibular imbalance
have reduced activity levels, which result in secondary problems including loss
of muscle tone, decreased body strength, fatigue, and headache, leading to a
significantly impaired life. The proposed device provides alternative sensory
feedback to the palatal surface, a site that has been shown to possess high
tactile sensitivity, but has not been explored for vestibular substitution. The
objectives for Phase I of the project include: 1) development of a compact and
energy-efficient electronic system that leads to a wearable battery-powered
balance device; 2) development of methods for optimal electrotactile
representation of the direction and range of head inclination and motion; and 3)
preliminary evaluation of the wearable prototype for alternative sensory
feedback and balance assistance in human subject experiments. The Phase I
project is anticipated to demonstrate the enabling palate-based technology for
cost-effective implementation of the device with desired dimensions and
functionality, and the usefulness of the device for balance control.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the improvement of
balance in patients with vestibular disorders, which are prevalent worldwide due
to aging, disease, ototoxicity, and surgery that cause degradation or damage of
the vestibular apparatus. Data showed that in US alone several millions of
American adults reported problem with balance. Currently no practical devices
are available to provide in-situ sensory feedback of head movement for patients
with vestibular loss. The proposed device captures this great market opportunity
with its unique feature of being hidden and noninvasive while assisting
vestibular patients in maintaining balance in various indoor and outdoor
activities such as walking in a park, street, or shopping mall. It helps them to
regain confidence in public settings, and increases their social participation,
which will bring enormous benefits to their health and make their daily living
more enjoyable. In addition, the device offers fresh opportunities for health
professionals in the field of vestibular rehabilitation to conduct research on
motion, imbalance, and treatments in uncontrolled settings. It provides a new
tool for neuroscience researchers to study mechanisms of brain plasticity and
perceptual learning involving use of palatal feedback in the sensorimotor
control loop.