* 1214290
* SBIR Phase I:  Printed 3-D All Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube Transistors and Integrated Circuits
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Huaping Li, Aneeve LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2012
* USD 142,950.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to undertake a
feasibility study of printing ultra-pure semiconducting and metallic single-
walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT) inks as channel materials and electrodes of thin-
film-transistors, and to fabricate all-SWCNT circuits such as inverters (&lt; 5
V) and ring oscillators (&gt; 1 kHz) in two-dimensional (2-D) and three-
dimensional (3-D) architectures. The current trend of increasing electronic
function per area, offering optical transparency, flexibility and lower cost, is
driving products to be produced using printed electronics. This project will
leverage existing inkjet printing technologies to implement all-SWCNT thin-film
transistors and integrated circuits. To increase areal functional density and
overcome interconnect parasitics, this project will aim to develop all-SWCNT
printed devices in a 3-D architecture interconnected with metallic SWCNTs that
will enable complete circuit transparency of the printed electronics for
optoelectronic and display applications. Areal functional density will be
increased, and functionalities such as signal delay and power consumption will
be improved as a result. Printed integrated circuits based on transistors
constructed and interconnected using single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) are
highly desirable for low cost, vacuum-less, scalable, and flexible applications
such as backplane displays, radio frequency identification tags, electronic
paper and disposable electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is all-SWCNT thin-film transistors
(TFTs) and circuits of fully-transparent, flexible, dense materials. Creation of
these devices will enable products in backplane displays and solar equipment,
non-volatile memories, disposable electronics, and semiconductor manufacturing
and will impact a plethora of low-cost consumer electronics products. Using
metal electrodes compromises a circuit's transparency, flexibility, and
mechanical strength. Our all-SWNCT devices will overcome these limitations, as
no solid, opaque materials will be employed. This project has the potential to
greatly augment the printed electronic industry that is expected to grow to $24
billion in 2015, with an astonishing current growth rate of over 30% per year.