* 1214990
* An integral approach to reveal the identity of light elements in the Earth's core
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Yingwei Fei, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2016
* USD 403,939.00

The Earth has an iron-dominant core that consists of a liquid outer core and a
solid inner core at the center. The Earth's core is the engine of the planet,
generating global magnetic field and driving large-scale plate motions on the
surface through mantle convection. A better understanding of its chemical
composition will help us to understand how the engine works. Current knowledge
of the core implies that incorporation of light elements (such as sulfur,
oxygen, silicon) in the iron core is necessary to explain the observed density
and velocities of the core, but there is considerable controversy over the
precise identity of the light alloying elements in the core because it is
experimentally challenging to precisely measure the density and sound velocity
of the iron alloys under core conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, I
am outlining a new approach to narrow down the identity of the light elements in
the core by combining dynamic and static compression experiments. The proposed
experiments will yield new density and velocity data obtained by shock
compression and static compression in the high-temperature diamond-anvil cell.
Specifically, I propose four types of experiments, (1) shock compression to
obtain densities of Fe-Si alloys, (2) in-situ x-ray diffraction measurements in
high-temperature diamond-anvil cell to obtain P-V-T data, (3) measurements of
the sound velocities of the alloys by shockwave experiments, and (4)
measurements of the compressional-wave velocity of alloys in the high-
temperature diamond-anvil cell by inelastic x-ray scattering technique. This is
our first attempt to integrate results from dynamic and static compression
experiments on the same samples, which allows us to obtain complementary data
over a wide P-T range and to establish self-consistent database from two
independent high-pressure experiments. The new data on Fe-Si alloys will be
integrated into our existing data to make comprehensive models of the core.