* 1214131
* Singlet Fission for Highly Efficient Organic Photovoltaics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,05/31/2017
* Charles Musgrave, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 05/31/2017
* USD 301,834.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanism program in the Chemistry
Division of the National Science Foundation supports Professor Charles Musgrave
of the University of Colorado Boulder to lead two closely related research
efforts on singlet fission (SF) and spin controlled exciton diffusion (SCED) in
organic photovoltaic (PV) materials. This effort focuses on using computational
quantum chemistry to explore the fundamental principles involved in these two
research thrusts to discover and understand phenomena that might be exploited in
future technological applications. The project aims to understand the mechanisms
of SF and SCED and the principles that govern these processes. SF involves
absorbing a solar photon to create a singlet exciton, or bound electron-hole
pair and then splitting this exciton into two coupled triplet excitons of lower
energy. The motivation for SF is the ability to absorb high-energy photons and
down convert their energy with little loss whereas the excess energy of the
high-energy photon would usually be dissipated through conversion into heat.
Thus, if successful, SF could lead to more efficient solar cells. A key to this
process is the possible role of an optically dark multiexcitonic state in the
exciton fission process. A major thrust of this project is to explore the nature
of this dark state in various organic PV materials and to determine its role in
governing the SF process. SCED is a proposed phenomena that may affect the rate
at which excitons, and thus energy is transported in organic PV where the
exciton transfer rate from molecule to molecule is affected by a local magnetic
field through spin-orbit coupling to create excitons that are no longer Born-
Oppenheimer pure spin states, but which can be quickly transported to harvest
their energy before they undergo non-radiative decay to dissipate their energy.
If the transport rate can be accelerated, it offers the potential to create
significantly thicker PV films that could capture a larger fraction of the
energy contained in solar radiation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to elucidate the governing principals of these processes to predict,
discover and understand new SF and SCED materials that can lead to new, more
efficient solar cells. These same phenomena might also be exploited to obtain
more efficient and environmentally friendly LED lighting. The work also aims to
integrate research with education and outreach to disseminate the new knowledge
obtained through this research and to educate future technology workers and non-
experts about the nature of interconverting solar energy into electrical energy
for PVs. Ultimately, this project aims to prepare diverse undergraduate and
graduate students for innovative and productive academic, industrial, government
laboratory careers.