* 1214816
* EAGER: Which Mechanical Signals do Bone Micro Damage near Microcracks Send to Osteocytes?
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Elisa Budyn, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 02/28/2015
* USD 77,713.00

The research objective of this EArly-Concept Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) is to validate theoretical hypotheses on bone failure mechanism at the
mineralised fibril level in order to precisely measure the in situ mechanical
signals to bone cells (osteocytes) and to detect possible variations among
humans in collagen and mineral strengths. Bone is a living tissue with a complex
and highly heterogeneous microstructure resulting from the continuous self-
healing process called remodeling. Osteocytes are mechano-sensitive cells
suspected to initiate remodeling upon detection of micro damage in their
environment that is composed of an organic phase of non-collagen proteins and
collagen fibrils that are mineralised by hydroxyapatite crystals. Studies under
this award will follow a top-down approach applying a dual experimental and
numerical method to test and model micro cracks and micro damage growing in
fresh human bone. The method will quantify in situ the local mechanical stress
field created by progressing micro cracks and micro damage near osteocytes in
bone under mechanical load. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research
will determine how human bone mechanically bears load at the collagen and
hydroxyapatite level and how the mechanical signals produced in situ by micro
damage could possibly stimulate osteocytes to initiate the tissue biological
response. The precise measurement of the mechanical effects of micro damage in
the osteocyte's natural environment is transformative in that it advances the
general understanding of the role of mechanical stimuli in cell biology. When
applied to elderly patients this will further help to genetically trace the
tissue mechanics changes in different components of bone to advance regenerative
therapies and bone tissue engineering. The educational plan includes the
mentoring of graduate students in bone micro biomechanics and an international
collaboration with leading institutions in bone experimental research.