* 1214855
* SBIR Phase I:  Green Nanotechnology for Medicine: Scaling up the Synthesis of Novel Poly(ethylene glycol) Based Dendrimers for Targeted Drug Delivery Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Kwang Su Seo, Arbomatrix, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 03/31/2013
* USD 149,367.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is aimed at the
demonstration of the feasibility of pilot scale production of a novel
multivalent theranostic (combination of therapeutic and diagnostic) agent,
capable of controlled presentation of multiple targeting ligands by a single
nanosized macromolecule for chemotherapeutic applications. The proposing company
was founded in 2011 with the objective of developing and marketing a range of
biomedical products, based on technologies developed at the University of Akron
(UA). The key outcome of the proposed research will be a novel poly(ethylene
glycol) (PEG)-based dendrimer, produced by a "green" process using enzyme
catalysis under solventless conditions. Specifically, a PEG-based dendrimer with
8 functional groups in the outer corona, available for the conjugation of
targeting, imaging/diagnostic and therapeutic agents, will be produced at the
two-gallon pilot scale for full characterization by the proposing team. The
initial targeted market segment consists of researchers, research chemical
suppliers, and companies and organizations doing research to develop new
products for targeted drug delivery.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is significant. Based on
data from the National Cancer Institute, the number of Americans who are
diagnosed with cancer will grow to 18.2 million. One specific benefit of this
technology relates to its potential effects on breast cancer treatment. Breast
cancer is the most frequently diagnosed cancer in both white and African-
American women. One in eight American women develops breast cancer, and every
three minutes a woman in the United States is diagnosed with breast cancer.
Systemic treatment of cancer by chemotherapy has many side effects, requiring
extended patient care. Targeted cancer treatment and diagnosis will have a major
impact by minimizing the devastating side effects on the patient and his/her
family. In the near term (3-5 years) we estimate a market potential on the order
of $1-1.5 million, based on sales to researchers. In the longer term, the market
size can potentially be in the hundreds of millions as the technology becomes
embedded in specific products. Finally, the solventless "green" technology will
have a positive effect on the environment.