* 1214721
* SBIR Phase I:  Mesoporous Nanoparticle Flame Retardants
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Gerald Roston, InPore Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project investigates the
properties of mesoporous silicate nanoparticles and the use of these particles
as non-toxic, char-forming flame retardants (FRs) for thermoset and
thermoplastic polymers. The project elucidates the relationship between the
physiochemical properties of the silicate compositions (e.g., surface area, pore
size, pore volume, surface polarity and chemical composition) and the
effectiveness of the mesophases in forming carbonaceous and ceramic chars that
function as a barrier toward the three components that support combustion (heat,
oxygen, and volatile fuel). In order to accomplish this objective, the quality
of the two forms of char is being improved by doping the silicate surfaces to
enhance catalytic surface acidity (carbonaceous char) and by integrating the
silicates with low temperature inorganic sintering aids (ceramic char). The
research program also investigates the dispersion of conventional FR agents
within the framework's pores and surfaces for improved flame retardant efficacy
through synergistic and additive interactions with the silicate mesophase. The
multi-component FR formulations of interest include agents that function in the
condensed phase (e.g., intumescent polyphosphates, endothermic metal hydroxides)
and the gaseous phase (e.g., molecular phosphorus agents and halogenated
compounds).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is to further the global efforts to reduce the consumption of
halogenated flame retardant agents in polymers, due to their negative impact on
the environment when they are produced, discarded, and/or burned. Manufacturers
are further challenged because the addition of all existing FR compounds
diminishes the mechanical properties of the polymer into which they are
compounded. The outcome of this project will directly address both of these
concerns. Our completely non-toxic, silica-based, mesoporous nanoparticles
provide both flame retardation and mechanical property enhancement for a broad
range of polymers. The proposed research provides a number of broad, societal
and commercial impacts. Further improving the efficacy of mesoporous silicate
compositions as FR agents for polymers will advance knowledge by yielding a
better understanding of the mechanisms underlying the combustion of plastics.
Scaling our production facility to meet customer demand will result in job
creation and increased use of environmentally friendly and domestically sourced
raw materials. As these products become broadly adopted, both domestically and
around the world, human exposure to endocrine-active chemicals will be reduced,
in accord with the anticipated reduction of dependence on halogenated FR agents.