* 1214446
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultra-Thin Silicon Solar Cells with Novel Junction Design
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Anthony Lochtefeld, AmberWave, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,997.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a silicon
solar cell with unique junction design that provides synergistic benefits as the
thickness of the solar cell is reduced. Thin silicon solar cells are currently
the subject of intense interest because, in comparison to conventional bulk
silicon solar cells: (a) they can be produced by "kerfless" techniques that
result in a tiny fraction of silicon usage, as compared to conventional cells,
and (b) their reduced recombination volume leads to higher open circuit voltage
and therefore higher efficiency. To date, however, the open circuit voltages and
efficiencies of thin silicon solar cells have generally not exceeded their bulk
silicon counterparts. Our junction design will help fulfill the promise of high
open circuit voltage in these systems, ultimately enabling greater than 20%
efficiency with less than 5% of the silicon usage of conventional silicon solar
cells. The Phase I effort will achieve open circuit voltage greater than 700 mV
and efficiency greater than 19% for ultra-thin (10 micron) cells with an
industrially feasible solar cell design. In Phase II and beyond, we will
transition these findings to pilot-scale production tools and demonstrate
greater than 20% efficient ultra-thin silicon solar
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is as follows. If successful, this project will help enable lower-cost
generation of electricity by photovoltaics, by radically reducing the amount of
silicon used in the solar cell and by boosting cell efficiency. In addition, our
process leads to a uniquely physically robust thin Si wafer, which will lead to
increased downstream manufacturing yield, further lowering cost. This project
will also advance the basic science of solar cells by exploring a novel junction
design. In Phase I, our team will present results at prominent conferences
devoted to photovoltaics, and publish articles on this technology in peer-
reviewed technical journals. Commercially, we plan to partner with manufacturing
tool suppliers to demonstrate the new integrated wafer at pilot scale. The solar
cells and modules can be readily finished using stranded solar manufacturing
assets in the United States. We will further partner with large-scale
manufacturers to bring this technology to market. It is uniquely suited to
rooftop products, which will create an opportunity to partner with manufacturers
who are not presently in the solar products business.