* 1214594
* SBIR Phase I:  A MEMS-based device for counting airborne nano particles
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Fredrick Brechtel, Brechtel Manufacturing Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 05/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will support the
development of a new airborne particle counter to allow rapid observations of
ambient nanoparticle size and concentration. The device will be highly
sensitive, simple to use, inexpensive, and easily deployed for remote,
autonomous operation. The key component of the instrument is a new Micro-
Electro-Mechanical-Systems (MEMS) sensor that will eliminate the need for
expensive, bulky, condensational-growth-based techniques that require consumable
working fluids and complex optical detectors. The new technology will largely
eliminate the cost, size, weight, and operator-expertise constraints of
currently available technologies. Phase I of this project will include
development of mechanical designs and computational fluid dynamics models of the
various key systems and construction and laboratory testing of prototypes of the
aerosol sizer and MEMS sensor. Applications of the new technology include
aerosol health effects studies, routine continuous monitoring of ambient
ultrafine particle size distributions, studies of rapid aerosol evolution in
power-plant and other exhaust plumes, creation of data sets for climate change
models, drug development by pharmaceutical firms, and indoor air quality
monitoring for silicon wafer processing, green building, and household
applications.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impact/commercial potential of this
project includes satisfying the need for increased spatial and temporal coverage
of aerosol data while creating a measurement technique accessible to a more
general group of users through its reduced cost and ease of use. Initial
customers include air quality researchers at universities and within federal and
state governments. As the technique is validated through peer-reviewed
publications, the customer base will expand to air quality monitoring network
administrators and wafer processing firms. As the device operation is proven in
routine monitoring applications, its application will be extended to green-
building and household indoor air-monitoring applications. Broader application
of the device will serve as an educational tool for students and investigators
leading to more widespread understanding of the processes that influence
particle size and concentration in ambient, laboratory and industrial settings.
Increased understanding of atmospheric aerosol processes will serve as important
information for investigators in the areas of global climate change and aerosol
health impacts. Industrial applications include remote operation for monitoring
of clean room contaminants and evaluation of the dose-delivery of aerosolized
pharmaceutical drugs.