* 1214590
* SBIR Phase I:  Hybrid Human-Machine Vision System for Convenient and Accurate Image Annotation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Boris Babenko, Anchovi Labs, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 0.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to investigate the
viability of a system for image annotation via a combination of machine vision
and crowd-sourcing. Annotating a large body of images quickly, accurately and
inexpensively would be a valuable capability in scientific, medical and other
commercial applications. Examples include: medical diagnosis (e.g. trace the
vasculature in a slice of cancerous tissue), neuroscience (e.g. count and locate
all cells marked with a given antibody), and urban planning (e.g. count all
houses that have private pools in a neighborhood). Machine vision is making
progress towards delivering such capabilities. However, accuracy is not yet
sufficient for many applications. In recent years a complementary solution has
become available: crowdsourcing, that is, dynamically recruiting thousands of
people to carry out an assigned task from their home computer. Our research (at
Caltech and UC San Diego) suggests that it is possible to combine the
complementary strengths of human annotators and machines into a hybrid system
that is flexible, accurate, fast and inexpensive. We will build a prototype to
test this hypothesis.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project affects a wide array of
domains and applications. As imaging becomes more available and storage
inexpensive, the amount of image data will continue to increase. This is true
for the scientific research market (e.g. the advent of high-throughput
microscopes and automated telescopes), the geospatial information systems market
(e.g. the advent of commercially operated satellites with on-board imaging
systems), and the consumer market (e.g. the advent of smart phones with
cameras). The proposed venture will fill the need to scale annotation and
analysis of this data, and keeping this process as inexpensive and fast as
possible. By combining computer vision and machine learning automation with
humans, both experts and non-expert annotators, our system will be quickly
configurable and trainable by the users to address virtually any image analysis
challenge. Easy, accurate and inexpensive image analysis will revolutionize many
areas of scientific research and commerce.