* 1214985
* SBIR Phase I:  Efficient Structural Mass from Microstructural Design
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Jay Hanan, MetCel LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,600.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes high specific
strength composite sandwich panels using a new form of manufacturing, tailored
for Amorphous Metal Honeycomb (AMH) cores. Previously it was impossible to form
these alloys as honeycombs since they do not behave like crystalline metals.
Yet, amorphous metals offer mechanical properties far beyond other materials.
With the patent-pending technology developed by our team, metallic glass
honeycombs can now be manufactured. However, the added mass resulting from the
current method of adhesive bonding of cells has been a limiting factor in
achieving maximal specific strength of the panels. New options are needed to
accurately hold and form individual cells. One option is heat fusing the cells,
but this method can lead to solidification shrinkage, crystallization induced
embrittlement, and surface cracking. This Phase I work will focus on the use of
welding as an inter-cellular joining technique, and will also investigate
alternative methods for forming AMH cores. Research objectives for the Phase I
work include the design and development of a customized processing method that
can form AMH panels using an automated manufacturing process. A novel pre-
processing route for AMR precursors to form curvatures and contours on resulting
AMH panels will also be developed. The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project includes a scalable bottom-up manufacturing approach, the first of
its kind, resulting in materials with unprecedented specific strength for their
density. An immediate market for AMH is already identified in the aerospace
sector. Low cost composite materials are finding increased use in both civil and
military aircraft. A lightweight sandwich construction having high specific
strength and impact mitigating properties can optimize the upfront airframe
design. Low-cost and more rapid manufacturing techniques will also enable new
and innovative designs, in addition to enhancing airframe cost versus weight
trade-offs. The achievable specific strengths of AMH will improve the efficiency
of aircraft through reduced mass as well a reduction in fuel requirements. Most
importantly, in the short term it can offer additional structural protection
against catastrophic failures caused by bird strikes or similar impact damage.
Mechanical energy absorbers in the automobile industry, ballistic protection in
the personal and vehicle armor industry, heat exchangers, and sporting goods
(such as surfboards) are some of the other potential applications of these
materials.