* 1214876
* How anisotropic is the viscosity of Earth's mantle?
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* David Kohlstedt, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2017
* USD 320,000.00

Evidence from field, laboratory, and numerical studies indicates that rock
strength varies with the direction of the applied force. This anisotropy in
viscosity (the ability of a rock to flow) influences large-scale geodynamic
process and is integral to the operation of plate tectonics. Anisotropic
viscosity arising from pre-existing heterogeneities in mantle structure strongly
correlates with both ancient and present-day plate boundary formation.
Anisotropic viscosity also markedly affects the location and dynamics of
formation of shear zones such as the San Andreas fault. Despite the major
influence of anisotropic viscosity on large-scale geodynamic processes, there is
a paucity of data quantifying its magnitude in deformed rocks. With our
experiments, therefore, we will explore the extent to which anisotropic
viscosity influences the weakening of such plate boundaries, enabling them to be
localized and narrow, the essential feature of plate tectonics. Consequently,
the research outlined in this proposal directly addresses the question "How
anisotropic is the viscosity of mantle rocks, and how does this anisotropy
evolve during deformation?" We emphasize that our experiments break totally new
ground and will provide the first experimental results on viscous anisotropy.
This research will impact not only our understanding of the dynamic evolution of
Earth's interior, it will also provide important constraints on the mechanical
properties of structural ceramic materials used in high-temperature
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most important sources of anisotropy in
viscosity are strong alignment of the grains that make up a rock and stress-
driven segregation of melt into melt-rich layers. Our research utilizes an
innovative experimental approach to determine the anisotropy in viscosity
resulting from either a strong crystallographic preferred orientation or a
pronounced layering of melt-rich bands. Experiments will be carried out on solid
aggregates of olivine and partially molten aggregates of olivine plus basalt. A
thin-walled cylindrical sample is first deformed to high strain in torsion to
produce significant anisotropy in the microstructure and determine the shear
viscosity parallel to either the dominant orientation of the easiest
crystallographic glide plane or the layering defined by the melt-rich bands.
This sample is then deformed to a small additional strain in tension to
determine the viscosity normal to the easy glide plane or melt-rich bands,
respectively. The degree of anisotropy in viscosity is expressed as the ratio of
these two viscosities. Our initial results indicate that viscous anisotropy is
both stronger and evolves on a different timescale than predicted by models
based on results from traditional experimental approaches. One long-term goal of
this research is to provide insight into the anisotropy in rheological,
transport, and seismic properties of deformed partially molten regions of the
lower crust and upper mantle. A second goal is to furnish constraints for
theoretical analyses that are critical for understanding the underlying physical
mechanisms involved in mantle dynamics. A third goal is to develop scaling laws
for extrapolation of experimental results from laboratory conditions to mantle
temporal and spatial scales.