* 1214244
* Conference Grant: Student Travel Awards for the 15th International Workshop on Computational Electronics (IWCE 2012). To be held May 22-25 at University of Wisconsin Madison
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Irena Knezevic, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 03/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

The International Workshop on Computational Electronics (IWCE) covers all
aspects of advanced simulation of electronic transport and optoelectronic
processes in semiconductors and semiconductor devices based on both inorganic
and organic materials. The scientific program consists of invited lectures,
contributed talks, and poster presentations. The workshop is held in a single-
session format and is intended to be an international forum for discussions on
the current trends and future directions of computational electronics. The 15th
International Workshop on Computational Electronics (IWCE 2012) will be held
between May 22 and May 25, 2012 at the University of Wisconsin ? Madison. In
recent years, the IWCE community has been increasingly active in the field of
energy harvesting, especially thermoelectrics. Therefore, at IWCE 2012 there
will be a companion two-day "School on Phonon Dynamics, Heat Transfer, and
Thermoelectric Phenomena in Nanostructures" held May 21-22, 2012 before the
workshop. Funding is requested to support student participation at the IWCE
conference and the Phonon School. The grant will be used to issue student travel
awards that will cover lodging and registration fees up to $750 per student.
Awards for 20 students will be provided by this grant. Following the program
committee's review of all submitted abstracts, authors of the top ranked student
abstracts will be selected as the travel award recipients. In the case of
multiple similarly ranked abstracts, priority for the travel award will be given
to an underrepresented minority student or a female student.

Intellectual merit. IWCE 2012 will draw particular attention to the frontiers of
computational electronics that connect to materials science, physics, and energy
applications. Three focus sessions, with only invited talks, and the Phonon
School will offer an infusion of potential new research directions for the whole
community. There is a lot of challenging computational work to be done in
spintronics, thermal transport in nanostructures, and materials for energy
applications. This workshop will serve as a starting point for many exciting
avenues and an evolution of the topics addressed by the computational
electronics community. In addition, with a strong focus on thermal and
thermoelectric phenomena, IWCE is poised to make a bridge between the heat
transfer and electronics communities, which will strengthen both in the quest
for nanomaterials solutions to energy problems.

Broader impacts. By enabling students to take part in the conference, we will be
help the new generations of researchers to come onto the stage early in their
career and be recognized for their work among peers and senior researchers. This
grant will enable 20 students to attend the conference, thereby increasing
student participation, improving their exposure in the professional community,
and benefiting their careers in the long term. We will ensure participation of
women and underrepresented minority scientists as invited speakers at the event.
Prominence of these role models will have a beneficial effect on the female and
minority students whose participation at the IWCE will be supported by this
grant.