* 1214376
* Collaborative Research: Physical properties and structure of silicate melts and supercooled liquids at high pressures
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Yanbin Wang, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2014
* USD 123,636.00

The thermal evolution and chemical differentiation of the Earth involves the
segregation of silicate and metallic melts, and coexisting minerals due to
differences in their density. This single factor impacts the initial condition
as the Earth formed its hydrosphere and biosphere (to become a habitable
planet), the efficiency of magmatic differentiation, evolution of volcanic
systems and character of eruptions, formation of some economic ore deposits,
transportation of volatiles through the deep mantle, and heat transfer across
the core mantle boundary which, in turn, impacts generation of the magnetic
field. The buoyancy relations between minerals and melts are strong functions of
pressure caused by the greater compressibility of melts compared to minerals.
Quantifying the response of increasing pressure on melt properties is
challenging given the refractory nature, absence of long range structural order,
and complex structural change that accommodates densification of melts. Critical
measurements must be made under well-controlled laboratory conditions. The
results of this research will greatly improve our understanding of dynamic
processes within our planet and links to motions of the tectonic plates and
global geochemical cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research employs novel high-
pressure experimental methods utilizing in situ X-ray techniques
(microtomography, absorption and diffraction) and acoustic velocity measurements
to determine the volumetric properties and structural changes in melts at deep
Earth conditions. The results will help place tighter constraints on properties
of the magma ocean, core formation, segregation and convection dynamics, and,
ultimately, the thermal and chemical evolution of the Earth. These data will
also contribute to our understanding of present-day dynamics involving the
storage and transport of magma through the crust and mantle, spreading of
tectonic plates from mid-ocean ridges, mantle plume upwelling, and possible
reactions at the core-mantle boundary. Additionally, our efforts in connection
with this project will help to further expand the opportunities for
microtomography research at high pressures for the study of partial melting and
deformation, among other phenomena at high pressures requiring detailed
microstructure characterization in 3D. It is anticipated that the results of
this work will have long-term benefits in the search and characterization of new
exotic materials synthesized at high temperature and pressure for industrial
applications.