* 1214066
* Harnessing Nonclassical Metal-Arene Interactions to Achieve Enantioselective Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,05/31/2014
* LeGrande Slaughter, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 05/31/2014
* USD 283,948.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program in the Chemistry Division at the National Science
Foundation supports Professor LeGrande M. Slaughter of Oklahoma State
University, for studies aimed at utilizing nonclassical interactions of metals
with aromatic groups on chiral ligands to achieve enantioselective catalysis.
These poorly-understood secondary interactions could augment the steric
interactions typically employed in chiral catalyst design, potentially leading
to highly enantioselective reactions that are not achievable with conventional
chiral ligands. The research will use a set of new chiral binaphthyl synthons to
create chiral acyclic diaminocarbene and phosphinite ligands that are optimized
to support metal-arene interactions. The ability of these interactions to
promote synthetically useful enantioselective reactions, including
hydrofunctionalizations of carbon-carbon multiple bonds, asymmetric carbon-
carbon couplings, and electrocyclizations, will be investigated. Structural,
spectroscopic, and computational studies will probe the nature of weak metal-
arene interactions and their role in catalysis, focusing on the catalytically
important metals palladium and gold. New catalytic methods for the synthesis of
chiral, medicinally important complex molecules from inexpensive achiral
precursors are an expected outcome of this research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ability to synthesize chiral molecules in enantiomerically pure form is
important, because the two enantiomers or 'mirror images' of a drug molecule can
have very different effects on the human body. This research could provide new
tools to prepare complex molecules as pure single enantiomers, potentially
providing significant benefits to society in the form of new chiral drug
precursors. These studies will be closely tied to an outreach program entitled
'The Magic of Catalysts' that will use hands-on experimentation to introduce
middle school students to concepts of research and science using catalysis as a
focus. Schools with high percentages of Native American students will be
targeted with the help of established collaborators in public education, with a
goal of broadening participation of Native Americans in activities that could
lead to attainment of higher education and careers in science. The development
of metal-arene interactions as a novel motif for achieving enantioselective
catalysis could have a transformative impact on technologies for the synthesis
of useful molecules by stimulating further study of the little-investigated role
of secondary interactions in transition metal catalysis.