* 1214457
* Sharing the Energy Landscape for Folding and Function: from Proteins to Biomolecular Machines.
* BIO,MCB
* 11/08/2011,01/31/2018
* Jose Onuchic, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 01/31/2018
* USD 1,239,052.00

The goal of this project, which is jointly supported by Molecular Biophysics in
the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences and the Physics of Living Systems Program in the Division of
Physics in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, is to investigate
how proteins share their energy landscape between folding and function. This
research is guided by the dual goal of learning new physical principles
governing protein landscapes and utilizing this theoretical machinery to move
towards complex and not yet understood biological applications. It is amazing
how cells have created a number of molecular machines specialized for
undertaking tasks needed to control and maintain cellular functions with
exquisite precision. Due to the fact that biomolecules fluctuate via thermal
motion and their dynamics are diffusive, biological machines are fundamentally
different from conventional heat engines or machines in the macroscopic world.
One of the key features of biological machines is the conformational changes
triggered by the thermal noise under weak environmental perturbation. Therefore
their behavior can be explained using ideas borrowed from the energy landscape
theory of protein folding and polymer dynamics. Under this framework, energy
landscape theory can be generalized to investigate how proteins share their
energy landscape between folding and function. The current SMOG suite of
structure-based models (SBM) will be generalized to investigate important
features necessary for complex biological function. Especially important will be
to increase the ability of these models to incorporate the multiple
conformations occupied by many functional proteins. To fully explore the
interplay between energetic and geometrical contributions, SBM's will integrate
multiple levels of coarse-graining; lower resolution models handle larger
systems and longer times while higher resolution ones focus on details. At the
same time, structural constraints will be reduced, requiring less structural but
more physical information. A key step in this transition is the integration of
SBM and explicit solvent simulations. SBM models probe long-time and large-
length scale molecular motions while explicit solvent simulations deal with
shorter times and smaller systems. A combination of this suite of methods with
new state of the art experiments will be used to investigate problems that
integrate folding and function.

The PI's energy landscape theory has had an enormous impact in the protein
folding community. Software developed by the PI is freely disseminated, which is
widely used by theoreticians and experimentalists. These advances will continue
to drive successful collaborations with experimental groups. The PI has an
outstanding track record in training students and postdoctoral fellows in the
highly interdisciplinary field of molecular biophysics. Many of the PI's
students and postdoctoral fellows are now professors at major universities. The
PI has always had a good representation of women and members from
underrepresented groups in his research. This strong training effort will
continue during the next period.