* 1214109
* "Photo-click" - Photocatalysis, Photopolymerization, and Photomodification via the Cu(I) Catalyzed Azide-Alkyne Reaction
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Christopher Bowman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2016
* USD 420,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Christopher Bowman of the University of
Colorado will develop methodologies for photoinitiating the copper-catalyzed
alkyne-azide cycloaddition (CuAAC) reaction. The approach to this research
problem involves understanding and broadening the chemical mechanisms needed to
photogenerate the copper(I) complex that ultimately initiates this reaction;
scoping the capabilities of this process; elaborating techniques that enable the
photopatterning of surfaces and 3D substrates with maximum precision and
resolution; and developing simultaneous radical polymerization reactions that
accompany the CuAAC reaction with independent control of the relative rates of
the two processes. The broader impacts involve training and mentoring
undergraduate and graduate students, broadly disseminating research results, and
starting a "redshirt" program to enlarge the pool of students qualified for a
Ph.D. program and thereby providing more opportunities to diversify the graduate
student body in chemical sciences and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymers
are found in many aspects of everyday life, including food packaging, structural
materials for automotive and aerospace transportation, and lightweight
electronic devices. This research may lead to the development of simple, robust
reaction chemistries that are readily and cheaply implemented across a broad
spectrum of polymer applications. By using light to control when and where the
reaction proceeds, polymer networks can be formed with a great deal of three-
dimensional precision. Such chemistry would impact a range of technologies
including coatings, biomedical materials, and flexible electronics.