* 1214339
* SBIR Phase I:  Engineering Microbial Biosynthesis of a Non-caloric Natural Sweetener
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Christopher Pirie, Manus Biosynthesis, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will address the
potential of synthetic biology and metabolic engineering technologies to
generate microbial strains over-producing a non-caloric natural sweetener.
Current production and utilization of natural sweeteners is limited due to the
high cost of the cultivation and production from native plant sources. So,
although natural sweeteners have been used for thousands of years, and are known
for their healthy and non-caloric properties, their high production cost
prevents them from directly competing with synthetic sweeteners extensively used
in beverages and carbonated soft drinks. Our objective is to develop a
fermentation process for biosynthetic production allowing increased adoption of
low-calorie, natural sweeteners in consumer markets. Metabolic engineering
approaches will be used to transfer the natural biosynthetic pathway from the
plant to a bacterial host and optimize the metabolic flux for the overproduction
at a commercially viable level. We anticipate that a high-productivity strain
will be obtained, suitable for continued commercialization efforts. Overall,
this project, if successful, will provide a new sustainable production route to
the non-caloric natural sweeteners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is the development of a microbial
process for the economical and sustainable production of non-caloric natural
sweetener, with a potential $3 billion global market. The use of this sweetener
will improve taste profiles and expand adoption of low-calorie beverages,
confectionaries, baked goods, dairy products, and so on, thus benefitting public
health by reducing incidence of diabetes and other obesity-related diseases.
Such benefits will translate to reduced healthcare cost both in the U.S. and
globally. Additionally, this research will develop generalizable synthetic
biology techniques for the high-volume production of natural products with many
applications for human health and wellness.