* 1214134
* Fundamental Studies of Protein Aggregation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,12/31/2016
* Mary Cloninger, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 12/31/2016
* USD 315,984.00

In this award from the Chemistry of Life Processes in the Chemistry Division,
Dr. Mary Cloninger, from Montana State University, will study multivalent
interactions that can be used to cluster proteins. Dendrimers, hyperbranched
polymers, and linear polymers bearing low and high affinity ligands will be
synthesized and studied. In order to evaluate the protein/polymer aggregates
thoroughly enough that guiding principles regarding formation of protein
clusters can be enabled, a diverse set of experiments will be performed. Assays
will include enzyme linked immunosorbent assays, electron paramagnetic
resonance/chromatography assays, dynamic light scattering experiments,
transmission electron microscopy imaging, fluorescence lifetime waveform
spectroscopy, and size exclusion chromatography-multiangle light scattering
experiments. The goal of this research is to improve the fundamental
understanding of how synthetic multivalent systems can cluster proteins into
defined aggregates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, good methods for controlled
formation of discrete protein/polymer aggregates that can be used to study and
to mediate multivalent biological recognition processes are not available. This
research should enable the development of new methods for controlling the
display of proteins on synthetic multivalent macromolecules and polymers. This
proposal will also serve as a rich training ground for students from rural
Montana and for Native American students who attend reservation high schools and
tribal colleges during the school year and participate in summer programs at
Montana State University. In addition, the micrographs and other results from
this study will be used in presentations with local middle school students.
After initial presentations by Dr. Cloninger at the school, small groups of
middle school students will be able to participate in field trips to Montana
State University in order to see the instrumentation and to perform experiments
with polymers.