* 1214123
* Toward the Coherent Control of Large Amplitude Molecular Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Geoffrey Blake, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2016
* USD 428,030.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Geoffrey Blake of the California
Institute of Technology will conduct a research program that seeks to coherently
control the large amplitude molecular dynamics in isolated molecules and
hydrogen bonded clusters using sub-picosecond Terahertz (THz) pulses.
Specifically, intense (up to MV/cm) THz electric fields will be generated by
tilted pulse front generation in lithium niobate crystals and/or plasma
filamentation in gaseous media in order to pump the softest intramolecular and
intermolecular modes in target systems to high degrees of excitation. The
resulting state distributions and internal dynamics will be probed, with
complete eigenstate resolution, by chirped pulse-Fourier Transform MicroWave
spectroscopy. The first targets are small prebiotic molecules that also serve as
molecular models of hydrogen bonding interactions pivotal to the structure and
activities of biopolymers, along with hydrogen bonded clusters that illuminate
the fundamental interactions that govern the formation of aqueous aerosols in
the atmosphere. The pump-probe spectra and time-resolved dynamics will provide
the transformational tools that are needed for observations with the next
generation of microwave to THz telescopes such as the Atacama Large Millimeter
Array, in the exploration of the complex potential energy surfaces of liquids
and bioplymers, and in the development of coherent control strategies for the
large amplitude motion that operate in even the simplest building blocks of
hydrogen bonded assemblies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses new light
source and detection technology that allows the weak but very important
interactions between hydrogen bonded molecules to be observed with unprecedented
resolution. Understanding these interactions is important in many fields; this
work focuses on interactions in small prebiotic molecules that are monitored in
space and water clusters that are important to understanding the formation and
fate of aerosol particles in the atmosphere. This project will be conducted with
the assistance of graduate and undergraduate students, including women and
members of underrepresented minorities. In addition to these activities, the
group headed by Prof. Blake is strongly involved in the Caltech K-12
educational/outreach programs, and is developing new teaching modules in
spectroscopy for hands-on science curricula in local classrooms. The support
provided here will also make it possible to develop low-cost laboratory
instruments and experiments for inquiry-based undergraduate instruction that
highlights the strong ties between molecular dynamics and spectroscopy.