* 1214865
* SBIR Phase I:  Energy Saving Solenoid Valve
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Ellen Mell, Nexmatix LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2013
* USD 175,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project applies a novel approach
to the design of pneumatic solenoid valves to significantly reduce manufacturing
energy consumption. In the United States, over 70% of all manufacturing
facilities employ compressed air systems with low efficiency, wasting hundreds
of millions of dollars. This project proposes to develop a novel plug-and-play
solenoid valve design that recycles compressed air via cross-flow from one
cylinder chamber to the other, thereby reducing compressed air consumption of
the pneumatics by 20-25%. Successful commercialization requires the development
of a mechanical and electronic control system technology to prove that this
approach applies broadly across applications. This project will focus on
designing an internal electronic control system and mechanical housing to
realize a plug-and-play replacement. This is a critical requirement in order to
allow the replacement of existing valves with no upgrades or changes to hardware
or software. The project will deliver an energy-saving valve technology that is
reliable, cost-competitive and which can serve a significant portion of the
multi-billion dollar worldwide solenoid valve market.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project targets a worldwide
pneumatics market of $8.5 billion, driven by the continued growth in
manufacturing around the world. The United States represents 16% (or $1.4
billion) of this total, with over 70% of all manufacturing facilities employing
pneumatics to process, build, and/or package products. These pneumatic systems
consume approximately 1% of the electricity used in the United States. The
energy-saving valve is designed as a plug-and-play replacement for existing
pneumatic solenoid valves with the benefit of using 20% less compressed air.
This reduction can save manufacturers significant energy cost each year with the
potential for $400-500 million in annual savings. Domestic manufacturers account
for 11.5 million jobs, and economic and business leaders recognize the critical
need for change in this sector to stay competitive. According to the 2011 Next
Generation Manufacturing Study, sustainability was identified as an important
component to manufacturers' strategy to stay competitive. The proposed energy
saving valve technology can help U.S. manufacturers achieve their sustainability
goals to help keep them competitive.