* 1214892
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultrasound Data Communications for Wireless Sensors and Real Time Location Systems
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Kshitij Yadav, Udacomm
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 145,639.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project investigates the
feasibility of using through-air ultrasound data communications for wireless
sensors. Traditional RF-based wireless communications for small-form-factor
devices like sensors or mobiles use carrier frequencies of hundreds of MHz to
several GHz. The associated electronic receivers and transmitters must be
designed to handle these high speeds. This results in substantial power
dissipation so that regular battery replacements are required, which are both
difficult and costly. Ultrasonic communications use low frequency carriers, from
a few tens of kilohertz to a few MHz, which enables an order-of-magnitude
reduction in the power consumption of the communication electronics. In
preceding academic research, a custom-designed ultrasonic receiver integrated
circuit (IC) was field tested. The IC achieves a ten-fold reduction in power
consumption over the state-of-the-art RF-based receivers. To prepare this
technology for the commercial arena more technical work will be conducted in
understanding the effect of reverberations on system performance in real sensor
environments, in increasing the communication-distance range from the present
value of 10m, and in designing ultrasonic transducers customized for data
communications. The anticipated end-result is a low-cost, ultralow- power
ultrasonic-communication module that consumes significantly lower power than any
commercially available wireless communication system.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project derives from the fact
that low cost and ultra-low power wireless sensors enabled by using ultrasound
have a vast array of applications in industrial, structural and environmental
monitoring. Several of the potential applications have a significant societal
impact; examples include border surveillance, air-pollution monitoring, forest-
fire detection, greenhouse monitoring, machine-health monitoring, and wastewater
monitoring. Further, the use of interference-free ultrasound will expand the
applications of wireless sensor networks in RF regulated environments like
hospitals. This will be a leap forward in the safety and environmental
sustainability of wireless sensor networks.