* 1214063
* Low-Coordinate Building Blocks for Cyanide-Based Single-Molecule Magnets
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Stephen Holmes, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2016
* USD 360,000.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program supports Professor
Stephen Holmes of the University of Missouri-St. Louis to investigate
differences in magnetic behavior for modular building blocks and their
polynuclear derivatives, as a function of transition metal substitution, linking
and ancillary ligands, coordination environment, and spin ground state
degeneracy. Efforts to understand how single-ion magnetic anisotropy translates
into magnetic properties exhibited by a series of structurally related bi- and
trinuclear complexes will be explored. Several 3- and 4-coordinate molecular
building blocks containing paramagnetic centers with orbitally degenerate spin
ground states will be constructed; sterically demanding ligands will enforce
this geometry and allow for efficient spin-orbit coupling interactions.
Elucidating origins of how single-ion magnetic interactions assist in the
formation of polynuclear complexes that spin ground states with exceptionally
large zero-field splittings are the goals of this effort. Several bi- and
trimetallic single-molecule magnetic complexes (SMMs) containing linear M-X-MÂ´
bridges, where X = cyanide and 1,4-butadiynylide, will be explored using
purposefully designed precursor complexes. Structure-property relationships will
be drawn and used to refine our understanding of how orbitally degenerate and
anisotropic spin centers can be designed and used to construct SMMs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will impact efforts to use soluble
transition metal complexes as switchable components in a range of information
storage technologies. Proposed domestic/international collaborations and
exchanges will allow participating students to develop a global perspective of
science, establish potentially life-long collaborations, and afford access to
complementary skills and expertise currently unavailable at their home
institutions. Mentorship of numerous undergraduate, ACS SEED, and regional STARS
(Students and Teachers as Research Scientists) students and high school teachers
within the greater St. Louis region will continue to be integral to research
efforts.