* 1214843
* SBIR Phase I:  Bio-Based Latex by Emulsion Polymerization of Alkyl Itaconates
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Yvon Durant, Itaconix Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate the
development of performance bio-based latex from alkyl itaconates for application
in wood coatings. Identified by DOE in 2004 as a top 12 renewable chemical,
itaconic acid and its derivatives have potential use in polymers for a variety
of products from builders in detergents to binders in paints and coatings.
Itaconix has successfully produced stable alkylitaconate bio-based latexes using
its patent-pending green emulsion polymerization process. The current
performance of these latexes is not sufficient to overcome marketplace inertia
favoring the well-established petroleum-based latexes.This research will combine
a new model-based approach and Itaconix?s existing polymer expertise to (a)
identify the key synthesis parameters necessary to enhance cohesion and adhesion
and (b) minimize hydroplastization effects. The key to controlling these
parameters is to optimize the morphology of the structured latex particles. The
goal is to create core-shell type geometries where a hard core acts like a
hydrophobic reinforcement domain and the soft shell provides film-forming
properties.

The Broader Impact/commercial potential of this project will be market
acceptance and use for optimized alkylitaconate latexes that offer superior
price/performance over current latexes in certain wood coatings. With this
commercial breakthrough, we will open the potential for developing favorable
bio-refining economics and leveraging efficient latex production technologies
that will enable broader use of bio-latexes. While bio-based chemicals rapidly
capture the interest of customers and generate application testing, they rarely
command more than a slight price premium over petroleum-based chemicals. To
succeed commercially and reduce our dependence on petroleum, bio-based latexes
need to offer compelling price/performance advantages.Current paint and coatings
manufacturers face wide price variations from petroleum-based monomers and
latexes, often requiring costly product reformulations and adjustments. A long-
term expected advantage from bio-based materials is more stable sourcing and
formulations. Our research is expected to generate initial market acceptance and
use for optimized alkylitaconate latexes that offer superior price/performance
over current latexes in certain wood coatings. With this commercial
breakthrough, we will open the potential for developing favorable bio-refining
economics and leveraging efficient latex production technologies that will
enable broader use of bio-latexes.