* 1214808
* SBIR Phase I:  Meso-Scale Power Generation System
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Jason Hugenroth, InvenTherm LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate the
feasibility of a novel meso-scale combustion based power generation system
(MPGS). Meso-scale engines using liquid fuels have theoretical energy densities
tens of times greater than the best battery technologies. The theoretical
advantages of such systems have gone unrealized due to inherent difficulties
encountered when attempting to miniaturize macro-scale engines. The proposed
technology was conceived specifically to take advantage of scaling effects to
enhance engine performance. A joint analytical and experimental program will be
conducted to demonstrate the technical and commercial feasibility of the MPGS.
The anticipated outcome of the research effort is successful testing of the
critical-path system components for the MPGS.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to provide a viable
alternative to batteries for portable power in the 10 W to 100 W range. The
proposed MPGS has the potential to overcome many limitations of batteries and
fuel cells. Such a device has significant commercial potential and many societal
benefits. A laptop computer could operate for 30 hours on a single methanol fuel
canister. Unlike batteries, which require a long recharge time, a new fuel
canister could be inserted for continued off grid power. A soldier could travel
lighter, faster and longer without needing to replace batteries in flashlights,
communications equipment or personal cooling garments. Greater mobility and
quality of life would be possible for patients that use portable oxygen
concentrators or other portable medical equipment.