* 1214595
* SBIR Phase I:  Polyols Derived from Proteins Biomass for Rigid Polyurethane Foams
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Vahid Sendijarevic, Troy Polymers, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,940.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is proposing to produce
polyols from soymeal for use in the manufacturing of rigid polyurethanes foams.
The proposed process follows the ?Green Chemistry? guidelines and consists of
hydrolyzing the protein to amino acids and converting them to hydroxyl
terminated monomers. Polymerization of these polyols will yield poly(amide-
urethane)s, which can be used as foams, coatings, adhesives, sealants and
elastomers. However, the focus of this proposal will be on introducing this
technology to the rigid polyurethane foams market. The structure and the
presence of amide linkages in these polyols should provide better dimensional
stability, higher rigidity and better chemical resistance foams then current
polyurethane foams that contain esters or ethers linkages. Key elements of the
current program will be to prepare and characterize the polyol monomers and then
evaluate them in rigid polyurethanes foams. Model compounds derived from
commonly available amino acids will also be used to optimize the process and
characterize the products. The data will be used to articulate the scientific
basis and develop appropriate process and products. Assessing potential
commercial feasibility, preliminary economic evaluation, identifying potential
market segments and customers who are interested in this technology will also be
examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project provides an opportunity to produce a desirable bio-
based alternative to environmentally un-friendly and increasingly expensive
petroleum-based rigid polyurethane foams. Recently, much activity has been
directed to utilize the oil from soybean to produce biodiesel, however, most of
the leftover protein biomass is being used for poultry, swine and cattle feed or
in aquaculture feed. Only a small portion of this biomass is refined for human
consumption and even a smaller amount (only 0.5%) is currently being used for
industrial applications (primarily in adhesives). The relatively low cost and
stable supply of this valuable raw material makes the protein biomass an
economically attractive source for value-added products such as its use in the
production of polyurethanes. Furthermore, the proposed manufacturing process
offers distinct advantages over the production of current polyols. It is
anticipated that these polyols, and the foams derived from them, will benefit
the growing ?green? market. The proposed technology is expected to reduce the US
dependence on foreign oil imports and will provide alternative ?grown in
America? valuable products. The results from this proposed project will be
broadly disseminated to enhance the scientific and technological understanding
in this field.