* 1214302
* Research in High Energy Physics and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Matthew Kleban, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2016
* USD 240,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Matthew B. Kleban at New
York University. New data from cosmology have quantified many parameters of our
universe to unprecedented accuracy. Among the most significant is the
determination that much of the energy in the universe is "dark", of a form
consistent with a small, positive vacuum energy. Such a result is famously
difficult to explain, and accounting for it probably requires a theory of
quantum gravity. Professor Kleban will advance his ongoing program of research
in fundamental physics, with a focus on those aspects of string theory and
quantum gravity that predict effects which can be tested with cosmology.
Professor Kleban's recent work helped lay the foundation for understanding the
effects of high-scale physics on cosmology, particularly signatures of cosmic
bubble collisions, and in a recent development, an independent group recently
analyzed Cosmic Microwave Background data for the signals of bubble collisions
which were predicted by the Prof. Kleban. This search uncovered several
anomalous features consistent with collisions, but the results were incomplete
and inconclusive. Determining the origin of those anomalies is of paramount
importance, and Prof. Kleban will pursue this along with a number of other
related research directions.

This work is also envisioned to have significant broader impacts. The detection
of a cosmic bubble collision would be a transformative discovery, permanently
altering our understanding of the universe and humanity's place within it. It
would demonstrate that our observable universe is a tiny part of a vastly larger
multiverse populated by other bubbles containing regions of highly exotic
physics. It would also confirm a prediction of string theory, provide crucial
evidence for the nature of dark energy, and dramatically change our view of the
Big Bang. This possibility continues to have a substantial broader impact in the
form of magazine and newspaper articles, public lectures and interviews given by
Prof. Kleban, and by inspiring undergraduate and graduate physics students at
NYU. On another front, Prof. Kleban recently helped develop a survey that was
administered to hundreds of NYU undergraduates, with the aim of determining if
and why minority and women students drop out of the physics program at a higher
rate than others. As part of his continuing research, he will continue the
analysis of the results of this survey with the goal of using the conclusions to
help improve the graduation and success rates of women and minority physics
students. Finally, Prof. Kleban will train and aid in the professional
development of graduate students that participate in this project.