* 1214077
* SBIR Phase I:  Innovations in Nanowire Manufacturing: Large Scale Synthesis of Inorganic Semiconducting Nanowires and Application to Printed Electronics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Louise Sinks, US Nano LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2013
* USD 176,160.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop large-
scale manufacturing methods for inorganic semiconductor nanowires, specifically
CdSe nanowires. An automated pilot reactor will be designed and built that will
allow a reduction in materials cost and an improvement in the robustness of the
synthesis, thus allowing a scale-up of nanowire production to multi-gram scale.
The resulting nanowires will be incorporated into functional inks for
printed/flexible electronics. A prototype printed photosensor will be produced
as a demonstration. The demonstration device will validate that inorganic
semiconducting nanowires can be incorporated into flexible/printed electronics
using standard plastic substrates and commercial printing methods. The
production of robust nanoinks will allow for easy incorporation into current
commercial printed electronics manufacturing streams. While characterization of
the materials and devices will involve a variety of techniques (including
electron microscopy), the project will also focus on the validation of materials
via simple optical metrology techniques (such as ultraviolet-visible
spectroscopy) that could be incorporated in-line for large-scale manufacturing
of nanomaterials, nanoinks, and printed substrates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to provide
additional technologies for printed and flexible electronics. Flexible
electronics technology is expected to be increasingly applied in a variety of
applications including energy (photovoltaics, batteries, and lighting), consumer
devices (displays, sensors, actuators), healthcare (sensors), communication
(RFID), and defense (sensors, photovoltaics, displays). The area of flexible
electronics is a rapidly growing market, with experts predicting a size of $250
billion by 2025. Appropriate technologies must be developed to replicate current
solid state devices; these include printable semiconductors, insulators,
conductors, and metals. Inorganic semiconducting nanowires are extremely
appealing for printing; their morphology suggests that devices made with these
materials would be flexible and transparent. CdSe nanowires have strong
anisotropic absorption of light, suggesting their utility for thin-form photo-
and polarization sensors. Such sensors are expected to be deployed in "smart"
building sensor nets. The technology developed in this project will enable the
creation of a variety of additional devices on a variety of substrates,
including flexible films, such as plastics and metal foils, in addition to
conventional rigid substrates such as glass or semiconductor wafers.