* 1214555
* The Second Geoscience Alliance National Conference in spring 2012 at Salish Kootenai College in Pablo, Montana,
* GEO,GEO
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2013
* Diana Dalbotten, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 01/31/2013
* USD 37,040.00

The University of Minnesota-Twin Cities is collaborating with Salish Kootenai
College to convene a second conference of the Geoscience Alliance, which fosters
engagement of Native American students in the geosciences and related STEM
fields by bringing together geoscientists, Native leaders, educators and
students for the purpose of advancing research, identifying best practices,
improving evaluation, promoting educational opportunities, and fostering new
collaborations. The conference is being held at Salish Kootenai College in March
2012, with an anticipated attendance of ~125 participants. The Geoscience
Alliance effort builds on best practices for improving participation by Native
Americans in STEM fields, and particularly in the geosciences, including: 1)
cultural context; 2) community relevance; 3) a holistic approach that considers
the entire student; 4) involvement of the community, family, and elders; 5) a
communal learning environment; and, 6) problem-based or real-world-based
activities. The conference will address the following research strands: Topics
in Education and Evaluation Related to Native American Geoscience and STEM
Learning, and Topics in Geosciences Research Affecting Indigenous Communities.
Attendees at the conference will include: Native American K-12, undergraduate
and graduate students, as well as faculty from Tribal colleges and other
universities, teachers, elders, and other interested researchers. Scientists
from major Federal agency-supported research and education centers and
facilities, including CUAHSI, EarthScope, UCAR/NCAR, GLOBE, LacCore, will share
information about opportunities and programs for Native students and educators
working in Native communities. Continuation of the Geoscience Alliance after the
conference will be fostered by organizing sessions and receptions at
professional conferences (e.g., SACNAS), through communication by technological
and traditional means, and via new ongoing research and education
collaborations. Co-funding for this conference is being provided through a
separate contribution from NASA (via the Virginia Space Grant Consortium).