* 1214102
* Azulene-bridged Organometallics: New Platforms for Charge Delocalization and Transport at the Nanoscale
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Mikhail Barybin, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2016
* USD 360,000.00

This project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Mikhail Barybin of the University
of Kansas will study charge delocalization and transport within the 2,6-azulenic
framework. The approach is to synthesize novel azulenic and bis-azulenic
molecules linearly terminated with isocyano, mercapto, or cyano groups; to form
and characterize self-assembled monolayer (SAM) films and nanografted patterns
of these compounds on metal surfaces; to synthesize and study discrete metal
complexes of these ligands to understand the ligand interactions with metal
ions; and to probe the conductivity of the azulenic and bis-azulenic SAM films
The broader impacts involve training undergraduate and graduate students in an
interdisciplinary research environment, developing a new freshman honors course
on the "Nanotech Revolution," and working with Northeastern State University (a
predominantly Native American student institution) to bring students to the
University of Kansas for undergraduate research experiences.

Computing using molecules has the potential to generate ultrasmall devices that
use little power; however, many significant technical hurdles must be overcome
to realize the benefits of molecular level devices. This work will further our
understanding how molecules transport charges between two contacts and will
afford novel platforms for developing advanced materials relevant to a variety
of nanotechnological areas, including organic electronics. Such work could also
impact the design of solar cells, molecular switches, and conducting polymers.