* 1214862
* Travel Support for the Organizational Communication and Information Systems Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Youngjin Yoo, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2013
* USD 24,984.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) of approximately 25
promising graduate students from the United States and abroad, along with a
panel of about 5 distinguished research faculty mentors. The event will take
place in conjunction with the Academy of Management (AOM)'s 2012 Conference and
will be held August 3-4 in Boston, MA. This is the leading international forum
for the presentation and discussion of research about management and
organizations, and is attended by approximately 6,000 professionals from around
the world. More information about the conference is available at
http://meetings.aomonline.org/2012/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Organizational
Communication and Information Systems (OCIS) Doctoral Consortium is a research-
focused meeting that has taken place annually at the AOM conference since 2000,
and has helped to launch the careers of many outstanding researchers in
organizational communication and information systems. Goals of the workshop
include building a cohort group of new researchers who will then have a network
of colleagues spread out across the world, guiding the work of new researchers
by having experts in the research field give them advice, and making it possible
for promising new entrants to the field to attend their research conference.
Student participants will make formal presentations of their research during the
workshop, and will receive feedback from the faculty panel. The feedback is
geared to helping students understand and articulate how their work is
positioned relative to other OCIS research, whether their topics are adequately
focused for thesis research projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen
and applied, and whether their results are appropriately analyzed and presented.
Student participants will present their work to the doctoral consortium on
August 3-4, with follow up activities planned during the technical program of
the conference (August 5-7). The OCIS conference management committee will
evaluate the doctoral consortium, and the results will be made available to the
organizers of future consortia. The OCIS doctoral consortia have been highly
successful in providing a forum for the initial socialization into the field of
young doctoral scholars; many of today's leading researchers participated as
students in earlier consortia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The annual
OCIS doctoral consortia traditionally bring together the best of the next
generation of researchers in organizational communication and information
systems, allowing them to create a social network both among themselves and with
senior researchers at a critical stage in their professional development.
Applications are encouraged from all doctoral students whose research is OCIS-
related, regardless of the fields in which they are earning their degrees. While
NSF funds will be used chiefly to support participation by students enrolled in
graduate programs in the United States, some international participants may be
supported as well in recognition of the fact that the OCIS field embraces
educational and cultural traditions that vary in different parts of the world.
The organizers will try explicitly to identify and include the broadest possible
group of highly qualified participants, and in particular will consider gender
in the participant selection process. As a consequence of these steps, the
student and faculty participants will constitute a diverse group across a
variety of dimensions, which will help broaden the students' horizons to the
future benefit of the field.