* 1214215
* Determining temporal change of seismic properties inside the Earth using repeated earthquakes
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Lianxing Wen, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 09/30/2015
* USD 278,910.00

We propose to establish theoretical frameworks that conceptualize propagation of
difference waves, defined as the wave field difference between the repeated
sources, and use difference wave fields to effectively image temporal change of
properties in the media. We also propose to study possible temporal changes of
seismic properties globally using dense arrays and earthquake doublets, and to
explore the relationship of temporal changes of seismic properties with many
interesting geological phenomena, such as earthquake process, fault zone
behavior, glacier melting, volcano eruption and geothermal activities. The
conceptualization we propose would make experiment design and resolution
analysis straightforward and overcome many challenging issues in the current
methods for determining temporal property changes in the medium. The
conceptualization also makes it possible to pinpoint and quantify temporal
changes inside the medium. During the course of research, we will also formulate
empirical procedures to handle the situation of imperfect source repeatability
in the real data processing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using seismic or ultrasonic
waves to probe temporal change in the medium is an important topic in ultrasound
experiments, civil engineering, medical imaging, and geological sciences. In
geological sciences, probing temporal medium change has not only started to
provide fundamental insights into physics of many geophysical phenomena, such as
earthquake nucleation, fault zone damage and healing process, volcano
activities, stress build-up in the crust and the thermo-chemical processes in
the top of the Earth?s inner core, they have also become a practical and
effective tool for monitoring evolution of oil fields and underground carbon
sequestration.