* 1214163
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Chemical Nature and Origins of Atmospheric Brown Carbon Aerosol
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Douglas Lowenthal, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2017
* USD 390,000.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Chemistry Division at the
National Science Foundation supports the research Professors Judith C. Chow,
Lung-Wen Anton Chen and Douglas H Lowenthal who submitted an International
Collaboration in Chemistry (ICC) proposal. They seek to better understand the
chemical nature of brown carbon (BrC) and address the hypotheses regarding BrC
sources through an international collaboration between U.S. and German
researchers. Brown carbon is a special class of light-absorbing organic matter
in atmospheric aerosols that has direct and indirect effects on the Earth's
radiation balance. BrC is believed to derive from the oxidation and/or
oligomerization of organic compounds in biomass burning plumes and
photochemically-formed secondary organic aerosol. This project improves
understanding of the BrC's chemical nature and its sources by perfecting and
applying a new measurement method. This method combines thermal/optical
characterization of source and ambient aerosol samples with mass spectroscopic
detection of the evolved gases using soft and hard ionization methods. A
thermal/optical carbon analyzer developed at the Desert Research Institute (DRI)
is enhanced for multi-elemental and spectral detection with photo-ionization
time-of-flight mass spectrometers (TOF-MS) developed at the University of
Rostock (UR) in Germany. BrC and black carbon (BC) can then be quantified from
spectral light absorption measurements and studied with molecular
patterns/source signatures in gases evolved at different temperatures. The
relationship of BrC to organic groups, particularly carboxyls observed in higher
temperature fractions (likely originating from high-MW polycarboxylic acids),
will be investigated. A library consisting of two-dimensional MS-thermograms for
major aerosol types, including laboratory-generated model aerosols, real-world
fresh and aged source emissions, and source mixtures from urban and non-urban
environments will be established. This library will facilitate source
attribution when coupled with advanced chemometric analyses. The derived
profiles can be applied to global emission inventories that currently contain
only a BC component for modeling the global radiation
balance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this study include: 1)
increasing academic exchanges between U.S. and German universities; 2) training
doctoral candidates in both countries to enhance the environmental workforce; 3)
research experiences for environmental science instructors from Nevada high
schools and community colleges; and 4) improving the ability to better model
effects of BC and BrC as short-term climate forcers by improving their regional
and global emission estimates.