* 1214359
* Progress in Integrating Technology in the Teaching and Learning of Mathematics at Historical Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU)
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Daning Chen, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 06/30/2016
* USD 200,000.00

This proposal will support Jackson State University to offer training workshops
and follow-on activities to develop mathematics faculty expertise in the use of
Mathematica as a teaching, learning and research tool in the mathematical
sciences and to promote year-long technology aided undergraduate research in the
mathematical sciences. Each year, the program will attract 30 mathematics
faculty from at least six HBCUs in Mississippi and neighboring states and is
intended to achieve the following specific objectives: (1) train 30 HBCU faculty
each year for two years to gain expertise in integrating the Mathematica
software in the teaching and learning of calculus and upper division
mathematical sciences courses, (2) allow each participating faculty member to
engage at least one mathematical sciences major from their institution in a
year-long research experience and place them in summer research experience at
other institutions, and (3) train each participating faculty on how to develop
Mathematica course guidelines and manuals integrating programming with
Mathematica and course delivery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program
activities are structured to serve as a forum for learning, discussion and
exchange of information on the use of technology in teaching, learning, and
research in the mathematical sciences. Sessions will be held on the most
effective ways of teaching undergraduate courses such as discrete mathematics,
linear algebra, differential equations, operations research and matrix theory,
and numerical analysis which are inherently numerical with the computer
programming platforms such as Mathematica. The participating HBCU mathematics
faculty will engage in national and international intellectual conversations to
address questions of satisfaction with technology and student learning gains and
to disseminate the best practices of technology-assisted teaching and learning
of mathematics. The findings of the projects will be shared with academic
institutions and intellectual and professional communities through conferences,
journal publications, and workshops and on the Jackson State University web
sites and departmental web pages.