* 1214207
* Ship Operations- R/V Knorr Operations
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Albert Suchy, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rose Dufour
* 03/31/2017
* USD 17,606,732.00

Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI) is awarded funding to support NSF
peer-reviewed scientific research aboard R/V Knorr in CY 2012. In CY 2012 R/V
Knorr will remain in the Atlantic Ocean fulfilling research requirements for
NSF, ONR,and NASA. Research programs will include an ONR two-ship operation off
Greenland. Mooring work will be conducted from R/V Knorr as well as studies in
the biochemistry, including water sampling and sediment trap recoveries,
geochemistry, studies on the Mid Atlantic Ridge, and acoustical research. Line W
and joint NASA/NSF projects will be performed off R/V Knorr in the Atlantic
Ocean. ROV Jason operations will be carried out on R/V Knorr at the Mid Atlantic
Ridge, concluding with Knorr transiting to a shipyard for a regulatory dry-
docking. This is year-one of a five-year cooperative agreement, and negotiations
will be made yearly since the level of funding is dependent on the number of
days at service in support of NSF funded research programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical and Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;These peer-reviewed projects have been rigorously evaluated for
scientific and intellectual merit as an integral part of the NSF grant review
and award process. The competitive nature of the award granting process ensures
a very high level of intellectual merit. Knowledge gained and the discoveries
made by the research programs supported by R/V Knorr will enhance understanding
of the oceans and address a broad range of important scientific questions. The
goal of this proposal is to provide funding support to safely and productively
operate and maintain R/V Knorr in 2012 and to ensure it is maintained to support
its planned life-cycle. This support is an essential prerequisite for safe and
successful scientific missions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impact
Statement&lt;br/&gt;WHOI research vessels provide at-sea laboratories necessary
to effectively and safely take science to sea. This community includes senior
oceanographic scientists, post-doctoral and doctoral students, graduate and
undergrad students as well as engineers, technicians, and teachers. These
intellectual endeavors have broadened our understanding and have spurred on new
questions and scientific theory. Research supported by R/V Knorr next year will
be important in understanding the Earth's climate and how it changes over time.
In 2012 R/V Knorr will perform biogeochemical research by collecting water
samples and conducting sediment traps in the Atlantic Ocean. Geochemical
experiments will take place on the Mid Atlantic Ridge. Line W project and other
mooring deployments and retrievals will also take place in the Atlantic from R/V
Knorr in 2012. Joint NASA/NSF experiments will take place from R/V Knorr east of
the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. Jason operations and acoustical experiments, using
autonomous hydrophones, will also take place from R/V Knorr in 2012. R/V Knorr
will end 2012 in a regularly scheduled dry-dock period either in an east coast
shipyard or aboard, depending on 2013 scheduling needs. Educational and outreach
programs such as Dive &amp; Discover http://science.whoi.edu/DiveDiscover, NSF's
COSEE Center, Ridge 2000, and Women Exploring the Ocean will be featured on
these cruises. All of these intellectual endeavors will continue to broaden our
understanding of the oceans, stimulate new questions, and confirm scientific
theory for years to come, benefiting society at large.