* 1214705
* SBIR Phase I:  High-resolution High-speed Dynamic Nanoindenter to Measure Viscoelastic Properties of Soft Materials
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Yuri Liburkin, NanoScience Solutions, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,959.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is aimed at testing the
feasibility of a new technology for studying the mechanical properties of soft
materials, such as biomaterials, cells, tissues, polymers, and nanocomposites.
The proposed method will provide substantially higher spatial resolution and
increase the speed of mapping viscolelastic properties of soft materials, by a
factor of more than 100 versus existing technology. In addition, the proposed
technique will give users the ability to test the linearity of strain-stress
relation at the nanoscale while performing the measurements (such linearity
information is paramount for proper calculation of the rigidity modulus). We
will analyze viscoelastic (frequency-dependent) properties of materials with a
nanoscale probe through atomic force microscopy (AFM), by measuring multiple
frequencies at the same time (rather than sequentially, as is currently done in
existing nanoindenters). This will accelerate the measurements for any material,
but will also represent a true breakthrough for materials research. Besides
increased measurement speed, a substantially higher spatial resolution will be
attached because there will be no need to wait for the slow relaxation of soft
materials (a phenomenon called "creep").&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project will be to enable mapping of
mechanical viscoelastic properties of soft materials with dramatically improved
spatial resolution and speed (by more than a factor of 100) as compared to
existing nanoindenters. This will add a new dimension to the study of the
nanomechanics of polymers, nanocomposites, biomaterials, and tissues at the
nanoscale. This solution will be commercially valuable for the users of
nanoindenters (representing a $50 million market in 2010) and AFMs (representing
a market of more than half a billion dollars). More broadly, this tool will be
invaluable for researchers working in the areas of bio-nanotechnology (~$100-150
billion), biomaterials ($25 billion), and polymers ($200+ billion). The work
done in this effort will result in the development of an attachment (both
hardware and software) for existing AFMs, and eventually, as a stand-alone
system to measure the unique spectra of viscoelastic properties of soft
materials.