* 1214591
* SBIR Phase I:  Next Generation Wireless Sensor System for Environmental Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,02/28/2013
* John Manobianco, MESOSCALE ENVIRONMENTAL SIMULATIONS AND OPERATIONS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 02/28/2013
* USD 149,989.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Program (SBIR) Phase I project aims to
revolutionize, in situ, wireless atmospheric sensing by developing a system of
airborne probes that gather data as they drift passively through the air with no
active propulsion or flight. The novel probe design leverages miniaturization as
well as integration electronic components to minimize complexity, cost, size,
mass, terminal velocity, and power consumption. Two other elements that comprise
the system include deployment mechanisms and interrogation platforms to
communicate with probes and retrieve sensor data. Data from by the system can
provide substantial benefit to a range of applications that are sensitive to
atmospheric conditions. The initial focus will leverage the space and time
resolution data to improve short-range weather forecasting especially for high
impact events. The project objectives are to determine the technical feasibility
and commercial potential of the system. These objectives will be met using a
design-simulation cycle to study tradeoffs of system components and develop
realistic cost estimates given the feasibility analyses.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project extends to many weather-
sensitive sectors of the global economy including transportation, agriculture,
air quality, and recreation that are estimated to be about $485 billion of the
U.S gross domestic product. Such data could also provide calibration and
validation for ground and space-based remote sensing of carbon dioxide and other
green house gases linked with global climate change. The system could be
configured to measure acoustic, magnetic, chemical, biological, nuclear, or
other parameters of interest for surveillance, reconnaissance, and related
applications. Measurements from the proposed system would be ideal for a
multitude of research and operational missions where it is only economical and
practical to perform high space and time density sampling over very limited
domains. This capability can greatly enhance the scientific understanding of
basic atmospheric processes, such as hurricane intensification and tornado
formation, and ultimately lead to more accurate short-term forecasting of these
and other hazardous weather events. The proposed wireless sensing system has
high risk hardware and software innovations that enable significant market
opportunities.