* 1214582
* Understanding the antibody responses following Human Immunodeficiency Virus infection
* MPS,DMS
* 09/10/2011,08/31/2014
* M. Stanca Ciupe, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2014
* USD 111,598.00

During the course of an individual's infection with Human Immunodeficiency Virus
(HIV), the virus population consists of a distribution of different variants,
produced by mutation and selection. Consequently, the immune system attempts to
build a response that is broad enough to handle the diversity of virus strains
present. Biological experiments have shown that neutralizing antibodies fail to
offer long-term protection because they are primarily strain-specific and lag
behind viral evolution. The proposed research presents a thorough investigation
of the antibody mediated immune responses against HIV with an emphasis on their
neutralizing and non-neutralizing activity. Novel mathematical models of
antibody responses following infection with HIV are developed, analyzed using
asymptotic analysis, bifurcation analysis and numerical analysis, and validated
against biological data in order to quantify the relative importance of
biological processes in influencing disease evolution. The investigator aims to
discover which factors (host or virus specific) influence the outcome of the
infection. The specific goals are in understanding (1) the roles of competition
and cross-reactivity between families of neutralizing antibodies in the presence
and absence of virus evolution; (2) the necessity of antibodies to neutralize
every viral spike; and (3) the role of non-neutralizing antibodies. All these
questions will have implications for vaccine development as well as for disease
prognosis.&lt;br/&gt;The ability of HIV to persist in an infected individual and
eventually cause AIDS depends on its avoidance of the immune system. Of the two
immune mechanisms present, the cellular response is better understood, while the
antibody response is still under investigation. Understanding of how antibodies
respond to the virus is crucial for the success of any future vaccine candidate,
especially since current therapeutic vaccines focus on inducing both arms of the
immune response. The goal of this proposal is to investigate how particular
biological interactions can lead to an efficient antibody response during both
immunization and natural infection with HIV. Given the difficulty and cost of
experimentally examining all of the biological interactions involved, we
consider alternative methods for testing new hypotheses. They consist of the
development, analysis and validation against biological data of mathematical
models, with the goal of providing insight into the dynamics of antibody
responses. This knowledge may eventually guide treatment and prevention, and
assist in establishing immunological goals for an effective AIDS vaccine. The
research aims to promote the advancement of mathematical and biological
knowledge, provide an opportunity for interdisciplinary collaboration with
researchers in the mathematical and medical communities, and lead to the
training of graduate and undergraduate students. The PI plans to incorporate
ideas and results from the proposed research into a first year graduate
Mathematical Biology course, as well as a summer course directed at
undergraduate mathematics majors across Louisiana, and to engage with graduate
and undergraduate students to incorporate this research as part of their
dissertation and summer research programs.