* 1214807
* Theoretical Investigations of Mantle and Core Materials
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2017
* Ronald Cohen, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2017
* USD 326,000.00

We will use new electronic structure methods to better understand the effects of
iron in minerals in Earth's mantle and core. We will constrain physical
properties important for our understanding of the Earth, including phase
transitions that are responsible for changes in density, sound speeds, and
electrical and thermal conductivity. Predicting properties of transition metals
and transition metal oxides is a remaining key problem in accurate prediction of
properties of Earth materials. Only now have the techniques been developed that
include the basic ingredients of a successful theory. This is a deep problem,
and experiments and theory to understand these materials have been active areas
of research for over 30 years. The goal of this work is to (1) make predictions
useful for modeling of the solid Earth (2) better understand mineral behavior
and help in interpreting experimental data, (3) develop and test methods for
highly correlated materials such as transition metal oxides and transition metal
bearing perovskites, and (4) provide guidance for the design of experiments. The
term 'first-principles' means that no experimental data are directly used;
properties are computed from fundamental physics using as basic input the
positions of the atomic nuclei and their charges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials
containing iron and other transition metals are problematic for density
functional theory, the standard for first-principles studies of materials. For
example, wüstite (FeO), end-member of the important lower mantle phase
magnesiowüstite ((Mg,Fe)O), is predicted to be a metal by conventional band
theory, but is an insulator. The LDA+U model, with which much progress has been
made, gives a gap for antiferromagnetically (AFM) ordered rhombohedral wüstite
and magnesiowüstite, but cannot give a gap for the room temperature or high
temperature paramagnetic cubic structure, nor does it correctly predict
insulator to metal transitions. There are also indications of problems for iron
metal itself. Earth's inner core is widely believed to consist of hexagonal
close-packed (hcp) iron with a few percent light elements. Theory predicts an
AFM ground state of iron below 50 GPa, but to date there is no experimental
confirmation of magnetic order in hcp-Fe. There is a clear discrepancy in theory
and experiment for Fe-Ni, where theory predicts observable hyperfine fields, but
synchrotron Mössbauer experiments observe no sign of magnetism. Our most recent
work shows that the elasticity of hcp iron at inner core conditions does not,
after all, explain the observed seismic anisotropy. The inner core thus cannot
be pure hcp iron alloy. Ni and other minor elements stabilize the fcc structure,
so that the inner core may consist of two major phases, thus explaining the
seismically observed heterogeneity. We will address the problem of Fe in
minerals and iron metal using dynamical mean field theory (DMFT) integrated with
density functional theory (DFT). Unlike standard band theory and LDA+U, DMFT
includes dynamical quantum and thermal fluctuations, which are believed to be
crucial in correctly describing transition metal oxides.