* 1214328
* Oceanographic Technical Services, R/V Marcus G. Langseth, 2012 ? 2016
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* David Goldberg, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 08/31/2018
* USD 20,548,369.00

Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory (LDEO) of Columbia University proposes to
support technical services on R/V Marcus Langseth as part of the U.S. Academic
Fleet which is scheduled by the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory
System (UNOLS). R/V Langseth, a 235? seismic survey vessel purchased in 2005
from Western GECO to be operated as a geophysical research vessel (with some
additional general purpose oceanographic capabilities) is owned by the National
Science Foundation and replaced R/V Maurice Ewing, a 236? research vessel
operated by LDEO from 1990 to 2005.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LDEO is requesting
funds to support both basic and specialized services for multichannel seismic
data acquisition. They propose to provide at least three technicians on each
seagoing research project to provide basic services and to maintain equipment
calibrate sensors and provide support for qualified users. Specialized services
include both single cable and multiple cable seismic operations. LDEO proposes
to sail eight technicians for single cable mode and 12 technicians for multi-
cable mode. The budget in this proposal is for the first year of a 5-year
continuing grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal
impact of the present proposal is under criterion two, providing infrastructure
support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in
support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects (which individually
undergo separate review by the relevant research program of NSF). The support of
maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded
researchers from any US university or lab access to working, calibrated
instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research, and
expanding the base of potential researchers.