* 1214767
* Fallback Food Seasonality and the Plasticity of Craniomandibular Development
* SBE,BCS
* 06/30/2011,09/30/2013
* Matthew Ravosa, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 09/30/2013
* USD 220,122.00

Cranial variation in primates is influenced by masticatory stresses, with taxa
relying on stiff and/or tough foods often possessing more robust skulls, jaws
and jaw muscles. Most primates exhibit seasonal diets, focusing on difficult-to-
process "fallback" foods only part of the year rather than continuously. Indeed,
the ecomorphological significance of fallback foods is emerging as one of the
key outstanding issues in primate biology and evolution. Unfortunately, the
extent to which the seasonal vs. annual processing of such resistant foods might
affect variation in cranial growth and form is unknown. Exploring the influence
of seasonality in food material properties on skull development is vital for
paleobiological reconstructions as well as for understanding the ecological
bases of adaptive plasticity and phenotypic variation in the primate skull and
feeding apparatus. Thus, this research tests the hypothesis that the long-term
frequency of elevated loading during post-weaning ontogeny results in higher
growth trajectories and larger adult masticatory proportions. Important
similarities exist in the morphology, behavior, function, ontogeny and
plasticity of the feeding complex between rabbits and primates that will
facilitate such comparisons. Rabbit siblings are raised on diets of different
properties, with one group having a control/normal diet, one eating an "annual"
fracture-resistant diet, and one subjected to "seasonal" increases in dietary
toughness and stiffness to model fluctuations in the reliance on fallback foods.
Three postnatal stages are being examined, with cranial variation evaluated via
3D imaging of internal and external anatomy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In bridging
the gap between lab- and field-based studies of plasticity and evolution, this
research offers a novel and timely assessment of the role of dietary seasonality
on cranial ontogeny. A broader impact will be to provide interdisciplinary
training for postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate trainees, especially
under-represented groups and the local K-12 community. The benefit to society
includes collecting data on load-induced responses necessary for understanding
how to mimic the growth activity of musculo-skeletal tissues, and for
identifying masticatory parameters to be examined in field specimens.