* 1214895
* SBIR Phase I:  High-Power and High-Energy-Density Enzymatic Fuel Cell through an In Vitro Synthetic Enzymatic Pathway
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Percival Zhang, Gate Fuels Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop high-power
and high-energy-density enzymatic fuel cells (EFCs) that can completely oxidize
low-cost maltodextrin (i.e., a partially hydrolyzed starch fragment). EFCs have
received increasing interest as a next-generation, environmentally friendly
(micro-)power source. Compared to microbial fuel cells, EFCs have much higher
power densities suitable for more applications. However, current EFCs are
limited by the partial oxidization of hexose molecules by one or two redox
enzymes (i.e., 2-4 mol of electrons produced per mol of glucose) and a short
enzyme lifetime. The goal of this project is to demonstrate the technical
feasibility of the complete oxidation of maltodextrin in EFCs through a patent-
pending synthetic enzymatic pathway. The technological innovation of this
project is the construction of an ATP-free and CoA-free pathway by an assembly
of thermostable enzymes to generate 24 electrons per glucose unit and increase
power density. As a result, EFCs are expected to feature high energy density due
to the complete oxidization of the fuel, high-power density due to substrate
channeling among cascade enzymes and the mitigation of product inhibition of the
enzymes, and a long lifetime due to the use of thermostable enzymes.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is developing bio-
inspired sugar biobatteries featuring four appealing advantages: (i)
biodegradability, (ii) safety, (iii) high energy storage density (e.g., 400 Wh
electricity/kg for a 20% (w/v) maltodextrin solution, nearly three times that of
lithium ion batteries), and (iv) fast refilling by adding a sugar solution. EFCs
would have broad potential applications, such as rechargeable battery chargers
(e.g., cellular phone chargers for outdoor uses or portable military devices),
educational toy kits, and disposable (primary) batteries. In the future,
miniaturized sugar-powered EFCs could potentially replace some secondary
(rechargeable) batteries. Sugar-powered EFCs would be nearly 100% biodegradable,
with the exception of the electrodes and wires, and are based on non-toxic and
earth-abundant elements. The maltodextrin solution is neither toxic nor
flammable. The innovation of EFCs equipped with this in vitro synthetic pathway
would greatly promote the concept of in vitro synthetic biology and demonstrate
another advantage a faster reaction rate than that of microbes due primarily to
the absence of a cellular membrane. In addition, the generation of electricity
from renewable and low-cost sugars, namely maltodextrin or future cellulosic
materials, would decrease greenhouse gas emissions, increase national energy
security, and promote rural economies.