* 1214900
* Mechanical Erosion of Frictionally Locked Fault Patches Due to Creep:  ObservationalEvidence and Modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Maximilian Werner, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 09/30/2014
* USD 200,593.00

The aim of this study is to increase our understanding of how earthquakes
nucleate on frictionally locked fault patches that are loaded by the growing
stress concentrations at their boundaries due to aseismic creep. We will begin
with an analysis of observed seismicity patterns at locations where creep-
mediated mechanical erosion is likely to be occurring: on (some) streaks of
microearthquakes on partially creeping faults, and at the base of the
seismogenic zone of major strike-slip faults. Streaks are near-horizontal
ribbons of tightly clustered small earthquakes, first observed in large numbers
on northern Californias creeping faults, that neighbor apparently aseismic holes
that might be frictionally locked or aseismically creeping. We will analyze the
seismicity patterns on streaks to search for changes that might betray the
gradual mechanical erosion of neighboring locked patches. Such changes might
include accelerating seismicity, increased moment release rates or increases in
the magnitudes or frequencies of repeating earthquakes on streaks. By
correlating seismicity patterns on the streaks with whether or not neighboring
holes have hosted moderate earthquakes (i.e., are probably locked), locked holes
might be (statistically) identifiable. Mechanical erosion of locked patches has
previously been invoked to explain accelerating seismicity and increases in
maximum earthquake magnitude on a strike-slip streak in Kilauea?s East rift, and
might also play a role in the loading of major locked strike-slip faults by
creep from below the seismogenic zone. The search will therefore be extended to
promising regions at the base of crustal-scale strike-slip faults in southern
California. These observations will be compared to numerical models designed to
increase our understanding of earthquake nucleation on the boundaries of stuck
(velocity-weakening) asperities that are being mechanically eroded by external
creep (velocity strengthening surroundings), on faults endowed with rate-and-
state friction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How earthquakes nucleate remains a major
unsolved problem in seismology. Given the uncertainty in the current equations
that are presumed to describe friction on faults, it is essential that numerical
models of earthquake nucleation be continually confronted by observations. A
standard conceptual model is that many earthquakes are caused by slow, aseismic
sliding of the surrounding fault area, which progressively loads fault regions
that are frictionally stuck until eventually a large earthquake occurs. For
example, a large, locked, vertical strike-slip fault is expected to experience
progressively increasing stresses because of aseismic sliding on the fault?s
deep extension, which because of its higher temperature slides slowly in direct
response to plate motion. Simple mechanical models predict that, because of the
growing stresses at the transition between the stuck and aseismically sliding
regions, micro-seismicity should mirror the progressive loading by becoming
stronger over time (e.g., rates increase, magnitudes grow), until a large
earthquake releases the built-up energy. The goal is to search for observations
that might support this model and its predictions, while at the same time
confronting numerical simulations of earthquake cycles based on current laws of
friction with the observations. The developed methods to characterize seismicity
patterns that reveal such mechanical erosion of locked fault patches might help
in identifying those strike-slip faults that are nearing the end of their
earthquake cycle and that are therefore more likely to rupture in large
earthquakes than others. This hypothesis could eventually contribute
meaningfully to improved forecasts of damaging earthquakes.