* 1214989
* SBIR Phase I:  Partial Wave Spectroscopic (PWS) Microscopy: an Early Screening for Lung Cancer
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Hariharan Subramanian, Nanocytomics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,970.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop and
commercialize a technology that can screen patients who are at risk for lung
cancer by means of a simple buccal swab of the cheek epithelium. Lung cancer is
the leading cause of cancer deaths in the U.S. The reason for the lethality of
lung cancer relates to its tendency to be diagnosed at a late stage, given that
the potentially curable stages of disease are often clinically silent. Survival
rates for lung cancer depend dramatically on the stage at which it is diagnosed.
However, existing screening approaches have been inadequate from either a
sensitivity or efficacy/cost-effectiveness perspective. Thus, finding a
screening method to identify patients at risk would be critical. In Phase I, a
high-throughput partial wave spectroscopic (HT-PWS) microscope that can quantify
the statistical properties of cellular nanoscale organization and identify early
cancerous changes in buccal epithelial cells, which are associated with lung
cancer, will be developed. This test will be simple, inexpensive, minimally
invasive, and highly accurate and will be based on the well-validated biological
phenomena of field carcinogenesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercialization potential of this project is that the partial wave
spectroscopic (PWS) microscope-based testing would significantly improve the
accuracy of lung cancer screening and allow diagnosis of the disease at an
early, curable stage. The vision is for this technology to become a primary
font-line screening method for lung cancer which is a $5B market, with an
estimated 46M smokers in the United States. The PWS microscopy-based screening
technique would be performed on smokers by a primary care physician or dentist
as part of an annual exam (like an annual Pap smear test). If the result is
negative (not at risk), then the patient would be retested at their next annual
physical. However, if the result is positive then the patient will be sent for
other more expensive/invasive tests such as Computed tomography (CT) and
bronchoscopy. Because significantly more at-risk patients would likely be
screened for lung cancer than today, this would have a major impact on
healthcare in the United States by both reducing the cost of healthcare and by
saving valuable human life.