* 1214461
* SBIR Phase I:  Collaborative Indoor Mapping Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Kamiar Kordari, TRX SYSTEMS INC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is developing a smart
phone application that creates indoor maps through crowd-sourcing and data
fusion technologies. Commercial and enterprise applications require indoor maps
to support accurate location calculations and location display. In this project
a global indoor map database is created though the contribution of a community
of volunteers or any team that is interested in collaboratively creating indoor
maps of a building, campus or city. The individuals will have a mobile app on
their smart phone. As they walk through indoor spaces the application
automatically creates a map using motion sensors in the phone by detecting
building features such as hallways, stairways, and elevators based on the users
motions. The technical challenge is to merge and fuse sensor data coming from
many users carrying commercial cellular devices to incrementally update a global
map of indoor spaces. The commercial challenge is to deliver an enabling
technology for a broad spectrum of location-based applications. The proposed
solution will provide the following: &lt;br/&gt;- Global data base of indoor
spaces &lt;br/&gt;- Mapping API for mobile app developers to access to indoor
maps &lt;br/&gt;- Map intelligence about patterns of pedestrian movement for
third party companies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is the ability to create the indoor
maps of navigable passageways that are required for a broad array of enterprise
and consumer applications without requiring professional survey teams or
enterprise involvement to deliver the mapping data. The TRX solution will
significantly reduce the cost and time of creating and updating maps and will
increase the availability of indoor mapping data. TRX will use these maps to
deliver mapping data for indoor location systems to support location
calculations and display users or other information inside buildings.
Application developers will include providers of software to consumers, urban
planners, law enforcement, first responders, and retailers. Companies interested
in our mapping application will include both location-based services companies
and dedicated mapping application providers: (1) Infrastructure-based Navigation
providers: Navteq (Nokia subsidiary) has enabled a mobile indoor navigation
system for airports by installing antennas throughout the building. Qualcomm is
developing a similar Wi-Fi based solution. These solutions count on maps
provided by the enterprise. (2) Indoor Map creators: Point Inside and Micello
are manually creating indoor maps of important buildings by converting floor
plan images into interactive maps. Again this requires enterprise involvement
for establishment and maintenance.