* 1215016
* SBIR Phase I:  Integrated DC-DC Converters Using Thin-film Magnetic Power Inductors
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Noah Sturcken, FERRIC, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop
integrated DC-DC power converters using magnetic thin-film power inductors.
Currently, microprocessors and systems-on-chip (SoCs) are powered with board
level voltage regulators assembled from discrete components. As supply voltages
have scaled for digital integrated circuits (ICs), this power delivery paradigm
has become increasingly inefficient, as power is delivered through the
resistance of the power delivery network (PDN) at low voltages and high
currents. In a typical case where 100W is delivered at 1V, 10% of the total
power delivered may be wasted in the resistance of the PDN. The objective of
this SBIR project is to commercialize power converters utilizing inductors with
precisely engineered laminations of high permeability magnetic material. This
will enable a significant improvement in power converter current density and
subsequently enable power supplies for microprocessors and systems on chip
(SoCs) to be downconverted in the same package, or even on the same die. This
new class of integrated voltage regulators (IVRs), will provide as much as 20%
reduction in total power consumption for digital ICs by reducing resistive
losses and enabling improved power management techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is
a reduction in power consumption for all digital computing platforms, ranging
from smart-phones to datacenters. The total energy savings potential for this
new class of technology is estimated at 15 billion kWh within the United States
alone, this is equivalent to roughly 10 million metric tons of CO2 emissions.
This technology will also significantly reduce the footprint for digital ICs
enabling a significant reduction in form-factor for all classes of computing
platforms. Voltage regulators utilizing integrated magnetic thin-film inductors
will have cost and performance advantages over the other voltage regulator
products that are commercially available. Therefore this technology is expected
to have a sizeable impact on the $10 billion worldwide voltage regulator market.
Furthermore, the integration of magnetic materials with CMOS will facilitate
advances in other magnetic based systems, such as magnetic filters, sensors and
imagers. Likewise, the experience gained from commercializing a magnetic
material process module with CMOS technology will lower the technological
barriers for other forms of heterogeneous integration.