* 1215859
* SEES Fellows: Sustainability begins at home - Understanding linkages between stewardship, urban yards and biodiversity
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2018
* Susannah Lerman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2018
* USD 498,008.00

This research will explore the motivations for and outcomes associated with the
stewardship of sustainable yard practices and design, with "sustainable yards"
being those that more closely mimic natural processes and vegetation composition
and configuration. The research will be guided by a conceptual framework that
focuses on the poorly understood linkages between the motivation for urban
stewardship of sustainable yards, and the ecological outcomes from yard
management. The project will investigate perspectives on the aesthetic and
ecological functions of residential yards through targeted interviews and focus
groups with scientists, practitioners and homeowners. A landscape intervention
study will also be conducted to test how various lawn mowing regimes in private
yards influence pollinator diversity.

As our world becomes increasingly urbanized, identifying ways to reconcile urban
development with ecological integrity remains a challenge. Despite the benefits
of sustainable yards for improving urban biodiversity and hence, reconnecting
urban dwellers with nature, sustainable yards are not implemented at a scale
that impacts local or regional sustainability. This research, and associated
outreach and education activities, will contribute to our understanding of how
to maximize the benefits provided by residential yards for people, biodiversity,
and ecosystem processes. Residential yards provide an opportunity for urban
dwellers to put into practice the reality that "sustainability begins at home"
and to make individual household-level yard management decisions that can scale
up and improve city-level sustainability for people and wildlife.

This project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. With SEES Fellows support, this project will enable a
promising early career researcher to establish themselves in an independent
research career related to sustainability.