* 1215201
* SBIR Phase I:  TerraFly-based System for Querying and Control of Mobile Devices
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Debra Davis, NOA Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project begins the
development of M-TerraFly, a System and Application Programming Interface, data
services and device control, coupling geo-spatial visualization and database
technologies with mobile sensor networks and related systems. This System?s
initial demonstrable application couples TerraFly with IBM?s CARMEL system of
video streaming from airborne and mobile cameras. This application enables the
development and promotion of the product in strategic partnership with IBM.
CARMEL-TerraFly coupling allows visual geospatial-temporal querying of airborne
sensors. The broader product, M-TerraFly, enables coupling of TerraFly with and
provision of geospatial interfaces to other technologies. The Product leverages,
builds-upon, and benefits from exposure of the team?s TerraFly geospatial
technology funded by NSF at Florida International University and transferred to
the SBIR firm. This work benefits from the team?s access to talent, servers, and
databases at FIU, IBM, and LexisNexis?via partnership facilitated by the NSF
Industry-University Cooperative Research Center at Florida International and
Atlantic Universities (FIU-FAU I/UCRC). The product transforms the usability of
mobile information overload.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes applications in
disaster management, environmental monitoring, and transportation. The initial
application with IBM, CARMEL-TerraFly, enables situation command. The broader
system assists disaster control and mitigation and situation control where a
large number of stationary, airborne, and vehicle-borne sensors, such as video
cameras, are collecting an overwhelming amount of information. The System
overcomes the prior state-of-the-art?s inability to query and visualize a
multitude of moving objects. The embeddable version of the System enables
diverse third-party products. Three large prospective clients have documented
their need for this System. The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) 2011
Geospatial Analytics Report describes DHS applicability of TerraFly-based
technology. The project?s team is comprised of scientists, technologists, and
business strategists; the team is advised by leadership of IBM, LexisNexis, and
other partners. The firm has capital from technology revenues and investors;
further funding is expected from governmental and industrial users. The system?s
educational module facilitates studies of computing and environment nationwide
and within coursework at FIU. The educational module will be disseminated via
TerraFly, with its 5M Google-indexed pages and leveraging prior exposure in
scientific and popular media, including Fox TV News, NPR, New York Times, USA
Today, Science, and Nature.