* 1215753
* SEES Fellows: Sustainable organic solar power from printed building-integrated panels
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Cody Schlenker, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 07/31/2016
* USD 500,580.00

This interdisciplinary project will explore the technological, environmental,
and socioeconomic barriers to adopting sustainably printed organic photovoltaic
(OPV) modules for building-integrated solar power production by considering the
overall life cycle of the product. Research efforts will focus on: 1) validating
a new strategy for recouping photocurrent losses in high photovoltage devices,
2) providing a cradle-to-grave assessment of printed OPV modules as building-
integrated roofing shingles, 3) developing a general route to achieving state-
of-the-art efficiencies from halogen-free solvents, and 4) developing a
comprehensive picture of the charge generation/recombination mechanism for a
novel homologous series of fullerene-free organic acceptors.

While solar power technically has the greatest potential of any sustainable
resource, it is currently used to supply only about one-tenth of one percent of
worldwide energy demand. The ability to implement any potentially disruptive
technology for solar power generation is constrained from below by the
performance, manufacturability, and competing uses/economics of available
materials, and constrained from above by decision making frameworks
(public/fiscal policy, individual finance) related to, among other things, the
product?s cradle-to-grave life cycle. This project will explore the
sustainability of solar power devices capable of being fabricated from novel
organic dyes and polymers (organic photovoltaics or OPVs) that require low
energy inputs and low capital investment. Because OPVs can be relatively
lightweight and can be arbitrarily molded to flexible or curved substrates, they
have potential for being integrated into building components such as roofing
shingles, thus bringing down costs. This research will assess the technological,
environmental, and socioeconomic feasibility of such applications.

This project will also engage and mentor high school students in hands-on
learning activities that demonstrate the basic solar energy concepts of
absorbing light and converting it to electricity, will share research results
with a broad public audience, and will establish university-industry
partnerships in the area of solar energy development.

This project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. With SEES Fellows support, this project will enable a
promising early career researcher to establish themselves in an independent
research career related to sustainability.