* 1215288
* SBIR Phase I:  Scratch and Abrasion Resistant Superhydrophobic Polymer Coatings
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Elizabeth Kujan, ARL Designs
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project strives to control the
chemical properties and the morphological structure of a polymer nano-composite
surface, at scales ranging from nanometers to the macroscopic, to achieve
superhydrophobic and icephobic properties while exhibiting scratch and abrasion
resistance. The goal is to apply this knowledge to manufacture superhydrophobic
and icephobic surfaces over large areas and at low cost for commercial and
defense applications. Materials design of nano-micro-macro scale surface
features will be guided by experimental and model-based analysis to optimize the
wetting and mechanical durability of the surfaces. This project's contributions
to polymer science would include a fundamental understanding of the relationship
between polymer structure, molecular weight and viscosity on the formation of
nanocomposite materials with a specific structure, as well as optimization of a
processing route to achieve a desired surface morphology. Contributions to
surface science would include an understanding of the impact of surface
morphology over several different length scales on the wetting behavior of
liquid water as well as super-cooled water droplets.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project would be improvements in
the safety of food handling equipment, as well as the performance and
reliability of outdoor infrastructure that is subject to icing conditions, such
as stadium roofs, wind turbines, aircraft, and naval structures. Equipment used
to wash food can harbor bacterial in areas that retain water. By applying a
scratch- and abrasion-resistant superhydrophobic surface, safety would be
significantly improved, as the potential for water to be harbored in reservoirs
would be greatly reduced. Surfaces that repel super-cooled water could be used
outdoors to prevent the formation and accretion of ice layers. In this way the
safety of numerous structures could be improved, as the added weight of ice
accumulation would be avoided. For example, these surfaces could be used to
prevent the accumulation of ice on aircraft surfaces. Avoiding the build-up of
relatively small amounts of ice can provide a significant margin of safety,
because the impact of icing on airflow patterns, rather than the added weight,
is the cause of icing-related aircraft accidents. The mechanical durability of
the surface would insure that the superhydrophobic properties are retained for
many years even when exposed to rough handling conditions.