* 1215242
* SBIR Phase I:  Recombinant Multiepitope Mosaic Protein Design for Urine-based Diagnosis of Leptospirosis
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Edwin Agbo, Fyodor Biotechnologies, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2012
* USD 165,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop
recombinant monoclonal antibodies using "mosaic" antigens derived from
Leptospira spp proteins identified in the urine of clinical patients. The mosaic
antigens are designed to artificially combine important antigenic epitopes in
order to maximize the coverage of potential epitopes in one structure and to
provide broader coverage than those afforded by multiple synthetic peptides. Our
approach involves the use of computational biology and bioinformatics to create,
score, and select "mosaic" antigens from Leptospira spp. Antigenic properties of
the mosaic antigens are evaluated by indirect ELISA using a panel of well-
characterized human sera from clinical patients and apparently healthy
individuals. We will then use recombinant DNA and protein engineering techniques
to derive cognate chimeric proteins, followed by the generation of recombinant
epitope-specific monoclonal antibodies that target potential epitopes (rather
than a few dominant epitopes) generated from the "mosaic" protein. The
diagnostic potential of the recombinant antibody is evaluated by immunoblotting
and ELISA using leptospirosis specimens from early and convalescent phases of
the illness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project, if successful, will be the development of a rapid, non-invasive,
one-step, multiplex test that will have general applicability in the timely
diagnosis of a complement of febrile illnesses, including leptospirosis. This is
aimed at tropical and subtropical countries where the disease incidences are
higher and where current tools are mostly inadequate. Early leptospira diagnosis
is essential because antibiotic treatment is most effective when initiated early
in the course of the disease. Current diagnostic tools are unsuitable for use in
resource-limited settings especially in the tropical regions where other similar
acute febrile illnesses are common. It expands the multiplex diagnostic test
panel we are presently developing by iterative expansion.