* 1215809
* Collaborative Research: Process Dynamics in the Intermittent Snow Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Martyn Clark, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 09/30/2016
* USD 64,052.00

Intermittent snow, which appears and disappears multiple times over the course
of a winter, provides critical feedbacks to the fields of atmospheric science
(by altering surface albedo and temperature), hydrology (through melt
contributions to rain-on-snow floods), soil science (through insulating the land
surface), and ecology (through insulation and water supply). Despite its
scientific and societal importance, intermittent snow is a modeling challenge.
Focusing on intermittent snow in both the Washington Cascades and the plains of
Colorado, this research project will use a mix of observations and physically-
based modeling to improve understanding of how different snow processes combine
to influence snowpack evolution. Controlled numerical experiments will examine
(1) multiple methods to estimate fluxes at the snow-atmosphere interface,
including approaches used to estimate the surface albedo, the turbulent fluxes
of sensible and latent heat, and the partitioning of precipitation between rain
and snow; (2) multiple methods to simulate internal processes within the
snowpack, including heat conduction, penetration of shortwave radiation,
vertical drainage of liquid water, and compaction of the snowpack associated
with metamorphism of the snow crystals; and (3) multiple methods to simulate
fluxes at the lower boundary associated with heat transfer in the soil. Model
simulations, isolating one process at a time, will be compared with detailed
measurements, both at point locations and distributed across the landscape. This
research aims to provide a better understanding of dominant processes in the
intermittent snow zone, a better understanding of major modeling uncertainties,
and a path forward towards an improved, coupled atmosphere-hydro model. Because
intermittent snow is almost always ripe to melt, it responds immediately to
energy inputs, resulting in a change in snow water equivalent (SWE) rather than
just a change in internal snowpack temperature. This readiness-to-melt makes
intermittent snow an extra sensitive indicator of snow model performance.
Therefore, any model improvements vetted in this area will translate into better
snow modeling everywhere, including the seasonal snow zone (where snow lasts all
winter).

Although intermittent snow is only present part of the winter, it has important
impacts on the atmosphere, the land surface, and society. Snow increases the
reflectivity of the Earth's surface and lowers the temperature, and it also
insulates the soil, protecting the ground surface from potentially damaging
frost. During rain-on-snow storms, this lower-elevation snow melts and
contributes to flooding (a hazard), but at other times, melting snow from this
zone contributes to summer water supplies (a resource). Intermittent snow in
cities and along major highways hinders transportation and city operations. The
intermittent snow zone has been clearly identified as the most sensitive region
to climate change, and many areas that currently have seasonal snow are
predicted to shift to an intermittent snow regime. For all of these reasons, it
is important to model intermittent snow correctly. This project will improve the
next generation of snow models used for hydrologic and climate prediction.