* 1215650
* Collaborative Research: Knowledge Representation and Design for Managing Product Obsolescence
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2011,06/30/2014
* Rahul Rai, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Christiaan Paredis
* 06/30/2014
* USD 44,329.00

Last Modified Date: 06/13/09 Last Modified By: Christina L. Bloebaum Abstract
The research objective of this award is to investigate two novel research
approaches to understanding and managing technology obsolescence challenges: (1)
a knowledge representation scheme and management system that can facilitate
information sharing and collaboration for obsolescence management and mitigation
efforts between existing tools and across different organizations; and (2)
fundamental principles, teachable methods, and guidelines for designing product
architectures that can evolve with changing requirements, enabling proactive
obsolescence management across the entire product life cycle. Fast moving
technologies have caused commercial high-tech components to have shortened
procurement life cycles, rendering them obsolete quickly. The impact and
pervasiveness of obsolescence problems are growing. Existing work focuses on
reactively managing obsolescence, i.e., minimizing the cost of resolving the
problem after it has occurred, however, reactive management is very expensive
and inefficient. Proactive and strategic obsolescence management have many
potential advantages, but are poorly understood in theory, and poorly addressed
in practice. Deliverables include a standard obsolescence ontology within a
software system that domain experts can use to share and annotate information in
their fields, demonstration and validation of fundamental principles on a wide
range of product design problems, documentation of research results, engineering
student education, and engineering research experiences for underprivileged
undergraduate students.

If successful, the results of this research will overcome limitations in
existing design methods that do not adequately consider obsolescence issues.
This research will provide a platform for the exploration and understanding of
interactions among the elements of product design and sensitivities to
obsolescence. Designers will have the tools they need to manage the issue of
obsolescence and design products to enable proactive obsolescence management.
The results of this research will be disseminated to provide an opportunity to
create cost-effective, and environmental friendly products at faster pace.
Graduate and undergraduate engineering students will benefit through classroom
instruction and involvement in the research. The education and outreach
activities of this effort will help promote interest for engineering from
underrepresented groups.