* 1215756
* Collaborative Research: Near-Surface Repulsion and Mixing-Limitations: Upscaling of Colloid Transport in Non-Uniform Media under Unfavorable Conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Timothy Ginn, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 07/31/2015
* USD 159,917.00

The profound influence of repulsive colloid-surface interactions on colloid
transport under environmental conditions (so-called unfavorable conditions) has
rendered quantitative prediction of colloid transport in porous media under
these conditions unattainable to date. A major question is whether surfaces can
generally be interpreted/categorized in terms of a bulk repulsive surface that
includes attractive ?heterodomains? of given size and spatial frequency (surface
coverage). Specifically, it is unknown whether characterizing surfaces in this
way allows prediction of colloid transport in porous media under unfavorable
conditions. This discrete heterogeneity model predicts (and experiments
indicate) that a fraction of colloids in the fluid surrounding a porous media
grain will spend long residence times in the near-surface fluid due to weak
attractive interactions, which raises another fundamental question: how do the
long residence times of colloids in the near-surface fluid under unfavorable
conditions influence transport behavior at the Darcy scale? What scale-up
strategies are needed to recognize the influence of long near-surface residence
times? We posit that these long near-surface residence times yield incomplete
mixing of colloids across the fluid domain, necessitating memory
function/multirate or correlated random walk approaches to upscaling. Our
recently-developed mechanistic model with heterodomains captures colloid
transport and retention behavior at the pore scale under unfavorable conditions.
This model will serve as the platform from which to scale up predictions to the
Darcy scale under unfavorable conditions. The model results will be compared to
experimental results for colloid transport in an impinging jet and in porous
media for a range of colloid sizes, solution ionic strengths, and fluid
velocities. We anticipate producing a mechanistic model that will predict the
extent and mode of colloid retention under unfavorable conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will represent unfavorable surfaces in
numerical models of colloid transport in order to provide mechanistic prediction
of colloid retention during transport in porous media. The results of this
mechanistic model will be used to explore the influence of colloid-surface
interaction on strategies to upscale transport prediction from the pore to the
Darcy scale. This project will greatly enhance our ability to predict colloid
transport under environmental conditions, in contexts such as pathogen transport
in the environment, and targeted delivery of bacteria with novel metabolic
properties.