* 1215302
* ICES: Small: Artificial Human Agents for Virtual Economies
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* David Levine, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 07/31/2015
* USD 199,823.00

The goal of the project is to be able to replace human agents
with&lt;br/&gt;artificial agents in studying two-player games. This project,
if&lt;br/&gt;successful, will greatly enhance the ability of economists to
test&lt;br/&gt;economic theories by partially replacing laboratory experiments
with&lt;br/&gt;simulations. Over the last decades laboratory studies have
proven&lt;br/&gt;invaluable both for the validation (and invalidation) of
economic&lt;br/&gt;theories, and for the practical purpose of testing mechanisms
(such as&lt;br/&gt;auctions) in the laboratory prior to practical
implementation. The&lt;br/&gt;ability to use simulations with artificial agents
in place of&lt;br/&gt;laboratory experiments with live human beings will both
reduce the&lt;br/&gt;cost of validation and testing, and make it possible to
explore&lt;br/&gt;quickly a much wider range of theories and policy
alternatives. It&lt;br/&gt;will also enhance our understanding of human behavior
and enrich our&lt;br/&gt;knowledge of the connection between human and
artificial intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Agent-based modeling is an
emerging and attractive approach to&lt;br/&gt;validating economic theories.
Existing research has focused on simple&lt;br/&gt;and naive agents. This project
proposes as the next step to develop&lt;br/&gt;artificial human (economic)
agents capable of mimicking the behavior&lt;br/&gt;of human laboratory subjects
in the context of two player simultaneous&lt;br/&gt;move games. Substantial and
detailed data is available on human play&lt;br/&gt;under these conditions.
Existing algorithms fall only slightly short&lt;br/&gt;of the ability to mimic
human play but do not yet implement fully&lt;br/&gt;autonomous agents. Based on
hidden Markov models, the PIs propose to&lt;br/&gt;develop and investigate a
framework of belief learning that is broad&lt;br/&gt;enough to encompass many
existing learning algorithms including&lt;br/&gt;reinforcement learning,
fictitious play, and smooth fictitious play.&lt;br/&gt;Moreover, based on this
framework, the PIs propose to derive more&lt;br/&gt;sophisticated learning
methods to fully develop artificial agents. This&lt;br/&gt;research will pursue
two important directions. First, the PIs will&lt;br/&gt;introduce the initial
calibration of priors based on available&lt;br/&gt;information and a cognitive
hierarchy model. Second, the PIs will allow for&lt;br/&gt;the reconsideration of
the existing model when "surprises" occur. The&lt;br/&gt;project will lead to
the next stage of research in both economics and&lt;br/&gt;computer science in
broadening the class of artificial agents to&lt;br/&gt;attack broader and more
economically important tasks. It will also&lt;br/&gt;enrich the research on
graphical model learning for artificial&lt;br/&gt;intelligence.