* 1215327
* SBIR Phase I:  Neurodynamic Models for Identifying and Optimizing Entrepreneurial Teams
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Ronald Stevens, The Learning Chameleon, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 165,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop
multi-dimensional neurodynamic models of the cognitive organizations of teams
that span zero history to proven entrepreneurial teams (ET), with the purpose of
developing a neurophysiologic instrument to rate a team's entrepreneurial
aptitude. This continuum will be developed using an established business
training task that will be performed by zero history teams, student teams
participating in the Edson Entrepreneurial Initiative within the Venture
Catalyst at ASU and established entrepreneurial teams recruited either from the
Venture Catalyst or from recent NSF SBIR awardees. Neurodynamic models will be
generated using EEG technologies and protocols previously developed for high
fidelity military training activities. These models dynamically follow the
engagement and workload of each member of the team as well as the entire team
and will be customized for studying entrepreneurial teams. By exploring the
neurological functioning of ET more informed theory may be produced to better
understand and predict which teams are likely to become sustained ET.
Furthermore, by developing quantitative measures / models that reflect team
experience / efficiency we may begin to develop training approaches to
accelerate and test the development of the ET skillset.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project
lies in its generality. The metrics and modeling approaches will be easily
customized for other business and non-business (i.e. education, training and /
or military) related team activities enhancing the commercial potential of the
product. The proprietary neurodynamic assessment system will be marketed to
corporate training / coaching programs, financial backers who wish to decrease
uncertainty in ventures, and entrepreneurial organizations who wish to optimize
their performance.