* 1215131
* SBIR Phase I:  Automatic Scalable Architectural Validation for Microprocessors
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Zaher Andraus, Reveal Design Automation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,908.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I Project addresses the challenge
of automating and scaling formal equivalence verification between architectural
ESL/TLM SystemC models and RTL Verilog models for microprocessors and ASIC
microcontrollers. The complexity of industrial processors, together with the
differences in semantics of SystemC and Verilog, create a significant modeling
gap that makes it infeasible to verify RTL Verilog implementations against their
SystemC specification models. This gap impedes the progression currently taking
place in EDA, wherein designers are moving upwards in the abstraction level for
modeling and verifying hardware designs. Our formal equivalence verification
technology will allow automatically obtaining RTL from ESL models using high-
level synthesis tools, and formally verifying the correctness of the resulting
models against the specification models. It will also allow manually written RTL
models to be verified against ESL models originally created for architectural
simulation. Expected challenges include overcoming the spatial and temporal
modeling gaps, and verifying equivalence for an unlimited depth using finite
equivalence formulations. By end of project, we anticipate to prototype a
software program that will discover unintended behavior in microprocessor
designs by ARM with respect to the reference architecture, or prove the lack of
any bugs, with modest computational resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Functional
verification of microprocessor designs remains a key challenge for the industry
due to exponentially growing verification costs - typically &gt;50% of a design
budget. Formal verification has potential to reduce these costs, however
existing formal technology can only handle small RTL blocks and is only used by
a handful of formal domain experts. With the industry shifting towards larger
design blocks and higher-level ESL languages such as SystemC, a turn-key tool
such as ours is necessary to bridge the ESL/RTL verification gap and addresses
the needs of design and verification engineers who do not necessarily have
formal domain expertise. Our target market includes both the integrated design
manufacturing and fabless ASIC/SoC suppliers. A typical customer would be an
ASIC design company looking to lower verification costs, decrease time-to-
market, and reduce the risks of discovering errors during post-silicon
verification or post-production. Formal semiconductor verification tools such as
ours play an especially vital role in mission-critical semiconductor design
markets such as ASICs for medical equipment, high-availability sensors, and
automotive semiconductors. Our long-term goal is to make formal verification
technologies scalable and directly usable by designers at higher abstraction
levels, enabling exponential growth in design complexity without exponential
growth in verification cost.