* 1215217
* SBIR Phase I:  PET Radiotracer Synthesis
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Kiel Neumann, Ground Fluor Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2012
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will support a new
synthetic chemical approach for the creation of positron emission tomography
(PET) imaging products to manage neurodegenerative disorders, cancer, and
cardiovascular disease. Creating these imaging products relies on the rapid and
efficient labeling of tracer molecules with a radioisotope ([18F]fluoride). The
difficulties inherent in radiofluorination chemistry have severely limited the
scope of radiotracers available for clinical use. This NSF SBIR Phase 1 project
addresses this critical problem using the company?s proprietary single-step
fluorination technology. This technology advances the current state-of-the-art
with simple, fast, and highly efficient radiofluorination, permitting an entire
new class of drugs to be labeled with no-carrier-added [18F]fluoride for the
first time. The project will focus on the synthesis of clinically relevant
radiotracers for pediatric cancer and Parkinson?s disease. Technical studies to
be performed using this support include optimization of this new
radiofluorination manufacturing methodology across multiple radiosynthesis
platforms.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to provide technology
to expand the scope of PET as a platform for determining the identification and
staging of diseases, and assessing the efficacy of treatment regimens. PET is an
underutilized diagnostic imaging technique that is stymied by the lack of highly
efficient, broadly applicable radiofluorination methods. The radiotracer
manufacturing technology developed here is extremely general and applicable to
the preparation of new imaging agents for PET. The availability of this general
labeling technique can also speed development of new drugs by providing in vivo
biomarkers of new therapeutic agents which can be used to determine optimal
dosing of new drugs and variability of biodistribution in target populations.
The commercial potential of PET imaging is significant; the worldwide market for
PET is expected to grow to $15 billion by 2015. There is also room for
significant expansion of this market as new imaging agents become available.