* 1215100
* SBIR Phase I:  The Chairside Delivery of Focused Microwave Energy for Caries Therapy
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Ivan Stangel, BioMat Sciences, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) project addresses the need for
new and minimally invasive approaches to the management of dental caries, a
microbial infection of teeth. Caries is one of the most widespread of chronic
diseases that infects nearly every American during their lifetime. The
preponderance of treatment for caries involves its surgical removal by dentists
using rotary instrumentation ("drilling'). However, one way to definitively
circumvent the continued use of surgical treatment involves the concept of
disinfecting caries in teeth using focused microwave energy. By killing the
bacteria, the disease can be arrested and an environment for spontaneous
remineralization enhanced. This proposal aims to test the hypothesis that
focused microwave energy delivered directly to a tooth is lethal to bacteria
that are native to dental caries. Thus, the purpose of this study is to (1)
develop a stable and efficient device for the chairside delivery of focused
microwave energy; (2) to demonstrate that the delivered microwave energy is
effective in killing bacteria in caries; and 3) to further demonstrate that
exposure of teeth to microwave energy does not significantly increase tooth
temperature or alter tooth structure. The proposed research will result in the
development of a novel shoebox-sized device capable of delivering focused
microwave energy directly to a tooth.

The broader/commercial impact of this project, if success, will be the
development of a device that will enable the low-cost, rapid and non-invasive
treatment of caries to be used both by dental and non-dental professionals. The
economic impact of this approach to care would be immense as treatment
efficiency is improved and access to care is increased. For the latter, despite
advances in prevention, caries continues to disproportionately affect low income
children, the working poor and the elderly. Thus, since the use of the proposed
technology would require minimal technical skill, treatment could potentially be
provided by trained nurses in schools or nursing homes to vulnerable
populations. On a commercial scale, the device will have extensive utility for
dentists by providing a rapid and definitive means of non-invasively treating
caries, thereby reducing the complexity and time of treatment while preserving
tooth structure. It is anticipate that the market for the device would be
extensive both in the United States and around the world.