* 1215796
* Direct Measurements of Shear and Longitudinal Wave Velocities of Iron and Iron Alloys at High Pressure and High Temperature by Laser Ultrasonics Technique
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2017
* Shiv Sharma, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2017
* USD 273,209.00

Understanding of the elastic behavior of minerals under high pressure is a
crucial factor for developing a model of the Earth's structure because most
information about the Earth's interior comes from seismological data. Therefore,
direct measurements of velocities and other elastic properties of minerals at
elevated pressures and temperatures are keys to understand the seismic
information, allowing us to translate it into chemical composition, mineralogy,
and temperature of the minerals inside the Earth. Iron is thought to be the main
constituent of the Earth's core and considerable efforts have been made to
understand its properties at high pressure and high temperature. However, there
are discrepancies between experimental data and theory on the elastic behavior
of iron under high pressure and high temperature (HPHT) conditions. To
understand the reason for this, the shear and longitudinal wave velocities of
iron and iron alloys at high pressure and high temperature should be measured
directly. The main goal of this project is to carry out direct measurements of
both longitudinal and shear velocities of iron and iron-nickel alloys under high
pressures to 100 GPa at room temperature and high temperature up to 3000 K using
the laser ultrasonic (LU) coupled with a diamond-anvil cell (LU-DAC), which has
been newly developed and successfully tested at the University of Hawaii.
Success of the proposed research is of fundamental importance for geophysical
science and materials science. For geophysical science, direct measurements of
shear and longitudinal velocities of iron and iron-nickel alloys in-situ at
elevated conditions similar to the Earth's interior are essential for
interpreting the observed seismic anomaly and understanding physical properties
of minerals in that region.

The main idea of the LU-DAC system is to use ultra-short nanosecond pulse and
continuous wave lasers for remote excitation and detection of acoustical waves
in materials under high pressure and high temperature in DAC. The main advantage
of the LU-DAC point-source-point-receiver technique for non-transparent
amorphous solids and melts is that it does not require any additional data (such
as thickness of the specimen under high pressure) to determine the elastic
properties of the iron at high pressures. The development of the LU-DAC
technique will provide a simple, inexpensive, non-destructive technique for
studying the elastic behavior of non-transparent functional materials at extreme
conditions; for instance magnetic, superhard, or tribological materials
synthesized at high pressure and high temperature.

The results obtained from the proposed research will provide the basis for
extending such measurements to study the elasticity of melts and partial melts
of iron-rich minerals at high pressure high temperature conditions when the LU-
DAC system is combined with laser heating. The knowledge of the elastic
properties of iron-rich minerals will allow a more realistic modeling of the
Earth's core-mantle interface and shed light on the nature and composition of
the D" layer and the Earth's core, and possibly on the formation of the Hawaiian
Islands through the hot spot.