* 1215109
* SBIR Phase I:  Direct 3D Manipulation for Computer Aided Design
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Robert Wang, 3Gear Systems
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2013
* USD 179,682.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to
demonstrate the feasibility of a 3D gestural user input system for computer
aided design (CAD) that enables engineering design firms to more rapidly explore
and produce new designs. This technology uses commodity depth-sensing cameras
and applies computer vision algorithms to deliver markerless finger-precise
hand-tracking, allowing users to simply reach out with their hands to directly
manipulate virtual 3D objects. In order to confirm feasibility, the objectives
of the project include data gathering, investigation of computer vision
algorithms, investigation of 3D input usability issues, and a thorough technical
and usability evaluation. More specifically, a data set of 3D scans of hand
shapes and hand poses will be collected. Next, a detailed investigation will be
performed of multi-view registration and database-driven hand pose estimation
algorithms for rapid calibration and tracking of a user's hands. The success of
the proposed technology will crucially depend on its delivery of a superior user
experience, and the usability issues regarding 3D input will be carefully
analyzed. Finally, a detailed technical and usability evaluation will be
performed, and the commercial viability will be based on the
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is in the area of engineering design. In today's market place, the
competitive capacity of an engineering firm is determined by its ability to
rapidly design new products and evaluate new engineering solutions. Most
engineering design firms use computer aided design software to accelerate this
process. However, the productivity of CAD engineers is still bottlenecked by the
user interface and the user input devices available to them. This is because
many CAD tasks involve 3D manipulation, which is difficult and tedious to
perform with a 2D mouse. A typical CAD user spends four to eight hours a day in
CAD software. Over a million CAD users fit this profile. The proposed technology
makes these users more productive by enabling them to directly manipulate
virtual CAD objects with their bare hands in 3D, at their desks---a technical
feat that has never before been achieved. The result is faster product and
engineering design in a variety of industries including manufacturing,
construction and architecture which spent $6B on CAD software in 2011. This
research will advance scientific and technological understanding by creating a
fundamentally new way to interact with computers for productivity applications.