* 1215462
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel macrocyclic chelating groups for use in targeted radioisotope diagnostic and companion diagnostic/therapeutic applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Darren Magda, Lumiphore, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,499.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project describes the
synthesis and evaluation of novel macrocyclic chelating groups intended for use
in targeted radioisotope applications. Targeted radioisotopes are deployed as
imaging agents in the context of single-photon emission computed tomography and
positron emission tomography. Such diagnostic agents also are used as a
companion in targeted radioisotope therapy wherein a radionuclide that emits
therapeutically useful ionizing radiation is similarly localized within specific
biological sites by attachment to an accessory molecule that imparts appropriate
biodistribution and pharmacokinetic properties. Metallic radioisotopes offer
versatile imaging and therapeutic properties, but loss of metallic radioisotopes
from their site-directing molecules can lead to deleterious side-effects or
reduced contrast and efficacy. There is, therefore, a recognized, compelling
need for improved chelating groups for use in radiopharmaceuticals. Such
chelating groups must rapidly bind radioisotopes, so that they are compatible
with the practicalities of clinical laboratory preparation. They also must
stably bind the cation so that none is released in vivo, at least prior to its
decay. The optimized chelating groups we propose will stably coordinate metal
cations currently used for radioisotope-based diagnosis and therapy, display
facile complexation kinetics, and provide a convenient synthetic handle for
attachment to targeting moieties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project will be the development of novel
"caged" macrocyclic chelating groups that display faster and more stable binding
as compared to acyclic and mono-macrocyclic chelators currently used. These will
coordinate not only In+3, but also more exotic cations such as Zr+4 whose
isotopes have hitherto remained undeveloped but possess intriguing radiochemical
characteristics, e.g., zirconium-89, positron emission half-life 78 hr. By means
of this approach, the aim is both to improve the utility of existing
radiopharmaceuticals, and to expand the scope of this technology to
radionuclides that are, at present, underdeveloped in the clinic.