* 1215033
* SBIR Phase I:  Advanced Nanomaterials Based on Quantum Dots with Built-in Charge for Sensing and Photovoltaics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Nizami Vagidov, Optoelectronic Nanodevices LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will focus on
development of novel optoelectronic nanomaterials with long photocarrier
lifetimes, low recombination losses, and enhanced coupling to infrared (IR)
radiation. The innovation which will enable this is the employment of quantum
dots (QDs) with built-in charge to create specified three-dimensional potential
profiles, where the areas of IR absorption (QDs, QD rows, and QD clusters) are
separated from the conducting channels by potential barriers. The charging of
dots is realized by selective doping of the interdot space. The resulting long
photoelectron lifetime will increase the photoconductive gain and responsivity
of sensors based on this innovation. This structure will also decrease the
generation-recombination noise and improve the sensitivity of photodetectors.
Low recombination losses and enhanced coupling to IR radiation will improve the
photovoltaic efficiency of quantum dot solar cells. The Phase I research
includes nanoscale design, development of growth and processing technologies,
and comprehensive analyses of the test structures and prototype devices. By
providing the needed fundamental and technological basis, this program will
develop advanced nanomaterials with a number of optoelectronic applications.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be development of
novel optoelectronic nanomaterials, which will lead to potential breakthroughs
in IR sensing and photovoltaics. With appropriate modifications, the technology
is applicable to practically all QD materials and structures fabricated by any
method. Optoelectronic nanomaterials that combine strong coupling to radiation
with long and manageable photocarrier lifetime are crucial for the development
of next generation IR sensors. Sensitive detectors operating at room temperature
will significantly increase the commercial market of IR technologies, which have
applications including industrial and environmental monitoring, chemical
sensing, medical diagnostics, and detection of explosives. The high scalability
of these structures provides a wide opportunity for imaging applications. When
integrated into in p-i-n junctions for solar energy harvesting, these structures
will provide an additional ~20% improvement in the conversion efficiency
(allowing 45-50% total efficiency without concentrators). In the Phase I
project, we will demonstrate that harvesting and conversion of IR radiation in
this way adds at least an additional 7% to the total conversion efficiency. The
potential high efficiency and relatively low cost (as compared with efficient
multi-junction cells) make this technology commercially viable for various
photovoltaic applications.