* 1215245
* SBIR Phase I:  *Mobile:  Enabling Rapid Mobilization of Enterprise Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Sandeep Kakumanu, starMobile, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,979.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes the
*mobile platform that offers a radically new alternative to enterprises for
application mobilization. The platform enables mobilization without requiring
any software development, mobilizes applications instantaneously, offers a
uni&#64257;ed mobilization platform for all of an enterprise?s applications, and
enables feature parity controllable by the enterprise. Offered as a cloud-based
service, enterprises can non-intrusively adopt &#8727;mobile to rapidly mobilize
applications. At the heart of the &#8727;mobile platform is an innovative mobile
remote computing protocol (MRCP). &#8727;mobile achieves instantaneous
mobilization by allowing the desktop version of the application to be run on a
cloud backend, and then using MRCP for intelligently and dynamically interfacing
the desktop version with a custom viewer on the mobile device. MRCP performs
dynamic transformations both in the downstream - where the transformation is
applied to the view presented to the user, and in the upstream - where the
transformation is applied to the user actions that need to be delivered back to
the application. The transformations are performed in an application agnostic
fashion.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will benefit the 85% of
enterprise knowledge workers who are expected to have smartphones within the
next few years (source: J. Gold Assoc., 2011). A recent survey of CIOs revealed
that there are multiple drivers for application mobilization - the key ones
being increased productivity of employees, higher revenue, and reduced paper
work. Not surprisingly, over 90% of IT managers in a recent survey indicated
plans for application mobilization (source: Sybase Survey, 2011). Typical
customers for &#8727;mobile include any fortune 1000 large enterprise, medium-
sized businesses, and small-medium (SMB) businesses that use applications for
business processes. While there is a strong and deep need for application
mobilization, there exists no universal, cost-effective solution that can
perform mobilization rapidly. The current market is highly fragmented with no
universal, cost effective, and rapid mobilization solutions available. Thus,
there is a need for a solution that can achieve rapid mobilization with minimal
effort on the part of the enterprise and at the same time provide the rich set
of functionality that the enterprise requires.