* 1215556
* SBIR Phase I:  Biocompatible tracers optimized for Magnetic Particle Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Richard Matthew Ferguson, LodeSpin Labs
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2013
* USD 149,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses a
fundamental problem with Magnetic Particle Imaging, a promising, yet new imaging
modality. MPI uses magnetic nanoparticles (tracers) to generate a signal that
can be used for fast, safe, non-invasive 3D imaging in living patients. The
problem relates to the magnetic tracers: there are no existing commercial
tracers that are suitable for MPI, due partly to a fundamental lack of control
over the physical and magnetic properties of tracers when using existing methods
of production. We have addressed this problem by identifying the desired tracer
properties for any MPI imaging system and developing a method to produce
particles with controlled/tailored properties. The proposed research is designed
to further improve the performance of our product, both to fine-tune its
physical characteristics and improve its stability in a biological environment.
We will improve the stability and performance of our tracer agent by developing
a new process for encapsulating the magnetic particles with a biocompatible
shell. We will also further improve the performance by developing a novel
filtering system to isolate desirable tracers based specifically on their
suitability for MPI, as determined by their magnetic relaxation.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this proposed project is an enabling
technology for MPI. The goal is to develop a high performance solution that can
make clinical MPI commercially viable. MPI using safe iron oxide tracers could
reduce patient morbidity during the course of treatment for cardiovascular
disease, where current imaging methods like x-ray angiography rely heavily on
the use of iodinated contrast media even though they may cause nephrogenic
systemic fibrosis in patients, especially those with chronic kidney disease. MPI
with targeted tracer probes, also offers significant promise for cancer
diagnosis and therapy, with outstanding signal to noise ratio and almost perfect
contrast (tissue is diamagnetic and generates no signal in MPI). Finally, the
projected commercial impact of MPI is significant: billions of dollars are spent
on medical imaging tracers each year, with iodine the most commonly used tracer.
Ultimately, MPI, which would circumvent a known hazard in iodine contrast
agents, has the potential to generate billions in tracer sales.