* 1215772
* Culture of Safety
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Barbara Wanchisen, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2014
* USD 215,000.00

With this award, the NSF Division of Chemistry supports the National Academy of
Sciences in their efforts to develop a workshop on the Culture of Safety. This
workshop will bring physical scientists and administrators together with experts
from the social and behavioral sciences communities to determine how to effect a
meaningful change in the culture and attitude toward safety in non-industrial
chemical research laboratories. The objective of the workshop is to provide
practical guidance on how all participants in the chain of responsibility for
laboratory safety can build an environment where safe practice is the expected
norm and is routinely given primacy over other research activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will meet the need for a more in-depth,
interdisciplinary exploration of laboratory safety in non-industrial chemistry
laboratories. It will compare practice in these settings with practice from
other sectors known for managing high risk, and with knowledge of the behavioral
science literature. A report on the best practices to create and maintain
satisfactory safety culture will be produced. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Culture
of Safety Workshop will enhance infrastructure for research through its impacts
on improved safety in non-industrial laboratories. It particular, it will
provide information and guidance that will be useful to university
administrators, department chairs, and faculty as they seek to build an
environment and mindset of safe practice by improving research experiences at
both the graduate and undergraduate level. Society at large is expected to
benefit by reducing the risks to individuals and communities from unsafe lab
practices and by enabling a cadre of researchers who are better prepared to
assume positions in private sector research.