* 1215824
* Theoretical and Observational Studies of Surface Wave Attenuation From Ambient Noise
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Xiaodong Song, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 06/30/2016
* USD 343,117.00

Attenuation, or its inverse, quality factor (Q), is one of the most fundamental
parameters of the Earth?s media. Measurement of attenuation at regional
distances traditionally uses seismic waves generated by earthquakes, which
generally requires either a good knowledge of the source or a special choice of
geometries to cancel out source effects. Research based on seismic ambient noise
correlation methodology has emerged as one of most rapidly expanding branches of
seismology. The approach has been demonstrated to be highly effective at
extracting seismic velocities. Extracting amplitude information is more
challenging. The greatest challenge is that the Earth?s ambient noise field is
highly anisotropic, non-uniform, and variable with time. Here, we propose to
explore the methodologies and procedures for extracting surface wave attenuation
from empirical Green functions (EGFs) constructed from seismic ambient noise.
Our approaches are to combine sound theoretical understanding and practical
considerations with real data. We will use data from the USArray and ChinArray
as testing beds with the goal to produce surface wave attenuation maps of the
regions. Preliminary results from theoretical derivations and numerical
simulations show that even in the case of incompletely diffuse noise fields, we
can robustly recover not only travel times, but also ray arrival amplitudes, the
ambient field?s specific intensity, the strength and density of its scatterers
if any, site amplification factors, and most importantly attenuation. We propose
two approaches with detailed formulations: linear array methods and more general
methods for 2D station networks, each to be developed through applications to
numerically simulated data, and to real data.

Extraction of attenuation from ambient noise is a frontier research problem. In
particular, innovations are required to address the issue of non-uniform,
anisotropic, and time-variable ambient noise distribution on Earth.
Breakthroughs in this area will be transformative in producing a new way for
mapping the Earth?s attenuation beyond traditional earthquake based methods and
in our new understanding of the rapidly expanding ambient noise seismology. The
approach overcomes some of the disadvantages of traditional earthquake-based
method in mapping surface wave attenuation (such as earthquake source
information and earthquake and station distribution). New results from
attenuation maps and site factors with ambient noise have broad implications for
studies of Earth?s interior, earthquake sources, and earthquake hazards.