* 1215926
* RAPID:  Measurements of Aerosol Chemistry During Wintertime High-Ozone Events
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Shane Murphy, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2013
* USD 29,098.00

Ozone mixing ratio exceeds 100 parts per billion multiple times per winter in
areas of heavy gas and oil exploration in remote Utah and Wyoming basins, but
the exact chemistry that leads to elevated ozone remains unclear. A visible haze
consisting principally of organic and, to a lesser extent, nitrate aerosol is
formed during these events. This aerosol has significant impacts on the gas-
phase chemistry that regulates ozone formation. Aerosol particles play an
important role in the oxidized nitrogen budget, formation of nitrous acid, and
release of chlorine atoms after particle-phase formation of nitryl chloride from
dinitrogen pentoxide and particle-phase chloride. This project aims to study the
source, formation mechanism, and impact of aerosol particles formed during
wintertime high-ozone events. Aerosol composition will be measured with an
aerosol mass spectrometer (AMS) during a six-week field campaign from mid-
January to early March, 2012 titled, "Energy and Environment - Uintah Basin
Winter Ozone Study (E&E UBWOS)". The study includes a wide array of
instrumentation to measure volatile organic compounds, gas-phase nitrogen oxide
species, and oxidants. These gas-phase measurements will add significant context
and depth to the AMS measurements of particulate mass and chemistry.

Aerosol formed during high-ozone events degrades visibility and is a health
concern for the people of Utah and Wyoming. The results of E&E UBWOS will be
compiled into a final report that will be referenced by the Utah Department of
Environmental Quality during future decisions on how to address the ozone and
aerosol problems in the region. The data will also be publically available after
one year. Data from the AMS will be analyzed by graduate students, presented at
national conferences, and written up for publication in relevant journals with
graduate student co-authors. Data from this study will be integrated into the
atmospheric chemistry course in the Department of Atmospheric Science at the
University of Wyoming as a locally relevant case study. Participation in this
study will establish a new relationship between scientists in the department and
in the Earth Systems Research Laboratory at NOAA.