* 1215070
* Full Vector Studies of the Pringle Falls Excursion Recorded at Pringle Falls, Oregon
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Emilio Herrero-Bervera, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 06/30/2015
* USD 108,237.00

The main objective of this proposal is to investigate the relative
paleointensity of the lake sediments that recorded the Pringle Falls excursion
(ca. 218+/-1o ka) at the original site of Pringle Falls along the Deschutes
River in Oregon. Paleomagnetic directions (i.e. Declination and Inclination) as
well as the relative paleointensity (i.e. Full Vector) from the Pringle Falls
sediments will provide information on the spatial and temporal variability of
the Earth's geomagnetic field for the well documented aborted reversal at
Pringle Falls which duration is of few hundred years. Due to the fact that there
is a real need to obtain detailed records from high-resolution sediments (i.e.
high sedimentation rates, at least 10cm/year) in order to have a better
understanding of the generation of the field, we propose to study in detail five
sections sampled along the Deschutes River with the main objective of
understanding the directional behavior as well as the geomagnetic field strength
(i.e. relative paleointensity of the sections) recorded before during and after
the Pringle Falls excursion in Oregon.

The objectives of this proposed study are primarily related to the knowledge of
the paleofield variations during periods like reversals and excursions, and the
critical time intervals that precede and follow the high resolution (i.e. at
least 10 cm/year of sedimentation rates) Pringle Falls excursion (recorded in
Oregon) that so far have only been documented from a few sedimentary sequences
particularly between 30 to 220 thousand years of the geomagnetic history.
Reversal and excursion studies cannot be separated from the surrounding polarity
intervals and most records published so far were not long enough to provide
complete information. The lacustrine sediments along the Deschutes River
sections offer the first exceptional opportunity to document field changes over
a time period that includes a polarity episode that lasted a few hundred to, at
most, several thousand years, and thus document the field behavior over various
time constants. The results of the rock magnetic tests/experiments performed on
pilot samples indicate that the sediments in question are suitable for the
relative paleointensity studies proposed here. The magnetic results of this
proposed research will contribute to the understanding of the structure in the
core of the Earth, the core-mantle and the inner and outer core boundaries as
well as the related causes of the generation of the Earth's magnetic field.