* 1215144
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Photosynthetic Biocatalysts for Synthesis of Malic Acid
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Abhay Singh, MOgene Green Chemicals LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to engineer novel
biocatalysts for cost-effective production of malic acid from CO2. Malic acid is
a key intermediate in energy metabolism of all living species. Additionally,
presence of two carboxyl and one hydroxyl groups makes it an important building
block for production of diverse chemicals and chemical intermediates. Attempts
to engineer heterotrophic biocatalysts for production of malic acid have had
limited success due to the inherent limitations of accessing the substrate
required for the key biosynthetic enzyme. We have developed an innovative
strategy to co-localize this key enzyme within carboxysomes naturally found in
photosynthetic microorganisms. Carboxysomes are leveraged by
ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase to overcome their kinetic
deficiency for CO2, a cosubstrate. The engineered metabolic pathway will allow
conversion of 3- phosphoglycerate naturally produced inside carboxysome to malic
acid. The anticipated result of this SBIR Phase 1 research project is
establishment of a groundbreaking and cost-effective technology that will
convert CO2 into malic acid using energy derive from sunlight.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader/Commercial outcome of the proposed research
will be to offer multiple benefits and applications: 1) Development of an
efficient biocatalyst that could significantly reduce the production cost of
malic acid. Lower production cost and presence of multiple functional groups
will open new market opportunities. 2) Production of enantiomerically pure
L-malic acid from renewable feedstock, a preferred additive for food and
pharmaceutical applications over the racemic mixtures produced by the chemical
method. 3) An attractive and immediate opportunity to reduce carbon footprint of
the existing biofuel industries. 4) Opportunity to target other CO2 utilizing
enzymes to this locale within cells and to use CO2 more efficiently in making
other &lt;br/&gt;important biomolecules thus opening new commercial
possibilities. 5) Finally, it will open up the opportunity to link light
harvesting more effectively to carbon fixation since enzymes that make malic
acid have substantially higher turnover capability than RuBisCO. Success of the
proposed process technology will contribute to the economic and energy security
of the U.S. by reducing the dependence on fossil fuels and emission of
greenhouse gas emission, and use of CO2 in the chemical industry instead of
being an emitter.