* 1215023
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-cost nanostructured electrochromic smart window coatings
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Damoder Reddy, ARGIL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a low-cost
nanostructured smart window coating that reduces building energy consumption by
dynamically optimizing solar gain. Scalable solution processed techniques will
be used to create unique nanostructured electrochromic layers. The novel
electrochromic layers will be initially examined for compatibility and
performance then subsequently used to construct solid state energy efficient
windows. Systematic characterization of the solid state electrochromic device
will identify components in the system which are performance limiting. Upon
successful fabrication, the electrochromic windows expect to achieve enhanced
solar modulation at fast switching speeds.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project pertains to residential
and commercial buildings, representing a prime opportunity to improve energy
efficiency and sustainability worldwide. Currently, lighting and thermal
management within buildings accounts for 20% of domestic energy consumption. The
economic and environmental benefits of using electrochromic windows are clear:
reducing one quad (one quadrillion BTUs) of energy use would yield an average
savings of $10.6 billion, while eliminating the need for about 21.5 gigawatts of
power produced by fossil fuels, and saving nearly 59 million metric tons of CO2
emissions. It is estimated that the use of electrochromic windows in building
can achieve a 50% reduction in peak energy demand and a 30% reduction in overall
energy use. Still, current electrochromic windows in the market have not reached
their market potential due to their high cost. The novel electrochromic windows
in this project are based on an innovative design that increases lifetime and
performance while reducing production cost. Wide scale adoption of this unique
technology will not only enhance market penetration for dynamic windows, but
will establish a new benchmark for performance and cost.