* 1215166
* SBIR Phase I:  Low Cost, Low Energy, Biodegradable, Renewable SAP
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Asya Bakhtina, TMS Associates LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,953.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is aimed at the
development of super absorbent polymeric (SAP) materials derived entirely from
renewable resources and produced by a low-energy, water-based process. We have
discovered an unexpected phenomenon whereby a hydrogel can be prepared and dried
in a way as to exhibit comparable performance to petrochemical-based SAPs in
water absorption and retention (and with the potential for superior
performance). Current SAPs are petrochemical based products that suffer from
both cost fluctuations and a lack of biodegradability. Our discovery of using
renewable plant- and animal-based starting materials serves to eliminate these
two major concerns. This new methodology represents a step change. Besides being
highly absorbent, renewable, and biodegradable, tailoring the hydrogels'
properties will not require alterations in the process chemistry. Immobilizing
the osmotically active agent (cellulose sulfate) in a hydrophilic gelatin matrix
crosslinked with the hydrophilic compound isosorbide bisepoxide enables a
flexible platform technology that can be tuned to address a wide range of
applications in a facile manner. The main objective of the Phase I is to
determine and validate the optimal compositions of the hydrogels which allow for
maximum water uptake.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will stem from the
potential to provide an environmentally-responsible alternative to the current
dominant acrylate-based super absorbent materials. Global market demand for
highly absorbent polymers is projected to reach 1.9 million metric tons by the
year 2015, led by emerging economies, rapidly aging populations, and growing
health awareness among consumers. There is increasing concern that consumer
products based on these materials will become a landfill issue as populations
increase and lifespans lengthen. The proposed novel SAP materials based on
completely biodegradable polysaccharides and gelatin formulations potentially
represent a solution to this critical environmental problem. Further, this
technology represents a core platform renewable source SAP that can be modified
for water uptake and other physical properties. Interest from major specialty
chemical companies also indicates the possibility for expansion into other
applications that may include the controlled release of drugs, bacteriocins and
other active agents, agricultural water management, oil/gas fracking, and waste
management.