* 1215950
* SEES Fellows: Developing Semi-parametric Models, Algorithms, and Tools for Ecological Analysis of Species Biodiversity
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2017
* Rebecca Hutchinson, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2017
* USD 430,390.00

The goal of this project is to develop statistical methods to enable ecologists
to address critical problems in biodiversity modeling. The research will advance
a general semi-parametric methodology that applies to species distribution
models (SDMs) of species occupancy, abundance, demographics, and dynamics. The
approach will address two major challenges for SDMs: 1) statistically correcting
for missed detections in field observations of the species to attain unbiased
estimates of ecological quantities of interest, and 2) capturing complex
relationships between environmental inputs and model variables. While current
techniques in SDMs include parametric models that address the first challenge
and nonparametric methods that address the second challenge, the proposed
methodology will be the first to simultaneously address both. Hierarchical
models are one important class of species distribution models, which often
contain unobserved variables of ecological interest. These models have
parameters with biological meaning (e.g. extinction probability, etc.) that can
be linked to a set of input variables describing various environmental
characteristics (e.g. habitat, land use, climate, etc.). Once fit, the models
can be examined to understand the effects of the inputs on the parameters.
However, this fitting process is often difficult due to the need to carefully
select which inputs to include in the model and what to assume about the
functional form of their effects. The methods to be developed will incorporate
flexible nonparametric methods into these hierarchical models. The resulting
methodology will retain the semantics of the hierarchical model but allow the
input effects to be fitted flexibly, automatically capturing nonlinearities and
interactions without extensive model selection.

Rapid declines in habitat for native species are a global problem due to
increasingly human-dominated land-use, habitat fragmentation, and climate
change. To design reserves, conservation easements, and similar policy measures,
there is a need to understand habitat requirements and population dynamics of
threatened species across time and space. Hence, accurate models of the
demographics and distribution of species are needed. The methodology to be
developed by this project will advance understanding of key aspects of species
distributions that can guide conservation efforts. Modeling methodologies will
be applied to a variety of ecological frameworks, and feedback from
collaborators in ecology will help ensure usability by decision-makers.
Moreover, the interdisciplinary research efforts of this project will be
highlighted in outreach programs to elementary, middle, and high school
students.

This project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. With SEES Fellows support, this project will enable a
promising early career researcher to establish themselves in an independent
research career related to sustainability.