* 1215000
* SBIR Phase I:  Rectenna Based Broad Band Infrared Camera
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Akin Akturk, CoolCAD Electronics
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop
a novel technique and device for high-speed uncooled room-temperature infrared
(IR) imaging using micro-antennas and Metal-Insulator-Metal (MIM) rectifiers.
These antenna-rectifier structures, called rectennas, will be built to convert
electromagnetic waves at infrared frequencies to direct current proportional to
infrared radiation intensity. This technology will pave the way for high-speed
IR imaging which is currently unachievable by commonly used bolometers. This
method will also achieve high-resolution IR imaging without cooling the
detectors as is currently required by IR photo-detectors, Furthermore, through
this SBIR, large size pixel arrays containing these rectenna elements will be
designed and tested at infrared frequencies. To direct the design process,
scaled prototypes on PCBs and integrated circuits that operate in the tens to
hundreds of GHz range will be built. Testing and modeling of these scaled
prototypes will then guide fabrication of arrays of rectennas that can operate
in the THz range. Finally, readout circuits will be designed that scan the
rectenna array and convert output to an IR intensity level. The scaled prototype
results will be used in Phase II to implement the IR rectenna imager with
readout circuitry.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will directly affect the
scope of infrared (IR) imaging technology, and possibly bring it into the
mainstream similar to the visible light digital cameras. IR cameras with limited
cooling have obvious advantages, including the elimination of power-consuming
cooling systems; a reduction in size, weight, and cost; and greater reliability
(an increase in the useful life and mean time to failure). The number of
applications potentially affected by near room temperature IR camera technology
is widespread, including military applications such as battlefield sensors,
surveillance, marine vision, firefighting devices, hand-held imagers, helmet-
mounted sights, etc. This technology also has widespread civilian applications
in areas such as thermography, process control, imaging interferometry, laser
technology, long-wavelength optical communication, gas analyzers, and many
others. An especially attractive large market will be in the automobile industry
as an aid for driving at night and in limited visibility environments. Infrared
cameras on satellites are being increasingly used for mapping resources on
earth. A large sized rectenna based infrared focal plane array that can be
fabricated using nanoimprinting would increase the spatial resolution of
satellite based cameras.