* 1215858
* SEES Fellows: Translating agricultural greenhouse gas emissions modeling into decision making on landscapes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Sarah Collier, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2017
* USD 487,620.00

This interdisciplinary project will explore the relationship between soil,
climate and production variables in predicting agricultural greenhouse gas
emissions from U.S. swine production. The study takes Wisconsin swine production
systems as a test case for calibrating and implementing regionally appropriate
predictive modeling, and will involve three phases of research. Phase I will
involve collection of regional soil, climate, and production practice data, and
modeling of greenhouse gas emissions associated with field application of manure
under various regionally relevant combinations of environmental and production
variables. Phase II will involve model validation and calibration through on-
site gas flux measurement at Wisconsin farming operations. Phase III will
incorporate results into development of a regionally appropriate decision
support tool to facilitate farm-level improvement and innovation in sustainable
practices. Results will be incorporated into a nationwide Life Cycle Assessment
of the U.S. swine and pork industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Agriculture is a
major source of greenhouse gas production, and significant investments have been
made to quantify and model greenhouse gas production in the form of Life Cycle
Assessments (LCAs) for various agricultural products. While current LCAs provide
accurate large-scale averages, they do not account for the variety of ecologies
and farming practices that shape local agricultural landscapes, and therefore do
not inform the management practices of individual farmers. Through collaboration
with researchers in LCA modeling and in knowledge systems for sustainable
landscape management, together with industry partners, this work will address
the need for spatially explicit decision support capacity in the management of
agricultural landscapes. The proposed Wisconsin swine production test case will
serve as a model for similar approaches in other regions and other agricultural
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will broaden the participation
of underrepresented groups in sustainability science by aligning with the ?Ag
School in Every Community? initiative, focusing on the integration of the
proposed research with curriculum development in local high schools. The impact
and relevance of the research will be enhanced by the civic agency approach to
integrating the participation of educators, producers, and researchers in
addressing the challenges of agricultural sustainability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported under the NSF Science,
Engineering and Education for Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program,
with the goal of helping to enable discoveries needed to inform actions that
lead to environmental, energy and societal sustainability while creating the
necessary workforce to address these challenges. With SEES Fellows support, this
project will enable a promising early career researcher to establish themselves
in an independent research career related to sustainability.