* 1215340
* SBIR Phase I:  Automated Mortar Dispensing for a Semi-Automated Masonry Robotic System
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Nate Podkaminer, Construction Robotics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is aimed at developing
an automated mortar dispensing system, a major component of a semi-automated
masonry (SAM) robotic system. The current technology challenge is the
development of a mortar dispensing system that can accurately replicate the art
of manual mortar preparation and application. This means a system that can
account for the variability of mortar batch production as well as maintaining
the chemical and material requirements to relevant standards. This technical
effort will focus on key variables involved, such as reaction heat, pH,
viscosity, moisture retention, time variables and temperature/humidity
conditions. One of the major challenges of an automated mortar dispensing system
is the variability created by onsite weather conditions. This Phase I project
will allow us to investigate the feasibility of developing a measurement and
control system that can accurately determine the quality of the mortar and
adjust as necessary to produce consistent mortar that meets the requirements of
the SAM system. Masonry jobs are dynamic work environments that need to be
adjusted and corrected in real time, presenting numerous challenges for
automation, but if successful, the potential benefits are enormous.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project,
the SAM robotic system, is intended to revolutionize the masonry construction
industry. The system will significantly increase the throughput of brick masonry
production. Our core technology incorporates proprietary sensing and control
systems, with the dispensing of mortar to achieve information-driven automated
bricklaying. Brick-based construction represents a significant portion of the
global and US economies with over $20 billion spent on all masonry work in the
US, and over $5 billion spent on commercial brick masonry. This segment of the
construction industry has seen little innovation over the recent decades. The
SAM system will provide a per-job cost savings of over 30% based on increased
productivity of the masonry crew. This significant increase in the efficiency of
masons will make brick masonry more affordable. By using more technology in the
masonry industry, it will be easier to recruit younger talent to an industry
with an aging work force. The increase in the use of bricks in construction,
especially in regions that are susceptible to extreme weather conditions, will
provide many environmental and customer benefits such as increased durability,
insulation, fire resistance, and lower maintenance. These in turn will lead to
energy and resource conservation.