* 1215959
* Seismic Imaging of Alaska Using Spectral-Element  and Adjoint Methods
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Carl Tape, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 285,937.00

This project will apply spectral-element and adjoint methods to develop a three-
dimensional seismic reference model for the crust and uppermost mantle of
Alaska. Finite-frequency surface waves and body waves will be extracted from
full seismic waveforms in order to provide the greatest resolution for seismic
imaging. Major sedimentary basins will be incorporated within the initial three-
dimensional models by using existing information such as gravity data and
industry seismic data. A new catalog of seismic moment tensors will be
constructed by inverting measurements of body waves and surface waves for
earthquake depth and radiation pattern.&lt;br/&gt;Active tectonic settings
exhibit deformation in the form of earthquakes, geodetic strain rate, erosion,
and sedimentation. On longer time scales, these processes create a highly
heterogeneous crustal composition. For example, faults may offset two distinct
rock types, or a basin may open and accumulate kilometer-thick layers of
sediment. On shorter time scales, these settings experience abundant earthquakes
in response to stresses within the crust. By using these abundant earthquakes,
seismic imaging with accurate numerical methods can reveal the extreme
complexity within active tectonic settings. Spectral-element methods have been
used to model wave propagation in complex geological settings, such as those
with strong topographic variations and sedimentary basins. The accuracy of these
wave propagation methods can be embedded in an adjoint inverse problem to
improve subsurface images of Earth's crust. The primary product will be a three-
dimensional reference model for Alaska. This model will describe the spatial
variations in compressional wave speed, shear wave speed, and density in Alaska.
The quality of the model will be highest in the crust, and it will provide
opportunities for larger-scale tomographic studies of the entire subduction and
collisional setting. The reference model will be useful as a framework for the
upcoming GeoPRISMS focus in Alaska as well as the anticipated EarthScope
Transportable Array.