* 1215433
* Conference: 23rd International Conference on Arabidopsis Research, July 3-7, 2012, Vienna, Austria
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Dominique Bergmann, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 10/31/2013
* USD 40,100.00

Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The 23rd International Conference on Arabidopsis
Research (ICAR) will be held at the Hofburg Palace in Vienna, Austria, July 3-7,
2012. Worldwide intensive research efforts on Arabidopsis thaliana continue to
produce useful information that impacts our understanding of other plants as
well as non-plant species. Arabidopsis studies are increasingly facilitating
knowledge transfer to other plants and efforts are accelerating due to the
efforts of a vibrant research community and the leveraging of advances and
resources that inform studies in plants of economic importance including food,
feed and fuel crops. The focus of this conference is integrated across many
aspects of Arabidopsis biology relevant to topics supported by MCB. Arabidopsis
research continues to impact our understanding of other plants and of general
biology. A particular highlight of the meeting will be the session sponsored by
the Multinational Arabidopsis Steering Committee, which will feature talks on
the MASC Roadmap (from Bench to Bountiful Harvests). In addition, the meeting
will feature special sessions on other plants, agricultural topics, bioenergy,
systems biology and bioinformatics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The funding of this conference will be used to support the
cost of registration, housing and travel for underrepresented minorities and/or
faculty from MSI, HBCUs and 1890 institutions. The organizers have a well-
established program for encouraging participation and providing financial
support for minorities and early-career scientists. Previous NSF funding for the
22nd ICAR was used to support 10 underrepresented minority students and faculty,
22 domestic young researchers and 11 invited speakers who were also early career
scientists. The North American Arabidopsis Steering Committee began their
assessment efforts last fall. The surveys were sent to previous minority
awardees and early career awardees who were supported by NSF funding in the
periods since 2004. The results of the surveys were quite favorable and document
positive impacts of attendance at the ICARs, including facilitating publication
and new collaborations, submitting funding proposals and facilitating new
curriculum development.