* 1215014
* SBIR Phase I:  Modeling and Simulation Tools for Vacuum Science Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Timothy Deschenes, Spectral Sciences Inc
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,937.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a software
suite to simulate the large range of pressures and complex moving parts geometry
of high vacuum pumps, critical for many manufacturing processes. The approach is
new and leverages the direct simulation Monte Carlo (DSMC) method, a particle
based gas-flow approach used mainly for aerospace applications. Our approach
seamlessly spans high to low pressure regimes and includes innovative ideas for
flows over complex moving parts, both substantial advances over existing
methods. Currently, there are no commercial tools available to simulate the
rarefied to transition gas flow in high vacuum pumps and high vacuum
environments. Instead, engineers have relied on costly trial and error and often
settle on a non-optimal, compromise design. There is a clear need for predictive
software for the simulation and modeling of high vacuum pumps and high vacuum
environments. The objective of this Phase I is to demonstrate the feasibility of
an innovative software suite based on the DSMC method to simulate gas flows in
high vacuum pumps for real-world manufacturing processes. The software suite
will include advanced, automated procedures to produce high fidelity simulations
with few user inputs and modest computational
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is to develop an innovative simulation package that will satisfy current
and future needs of customers. The proposed software suite will impact high
vacuum pump manufacturing (a multi-billion dollar industry) and facilities which
maintain high vacuum environments for manufacturing and research (multi-million
dollars in annual operating costs). The proposed software suite would
significantly expand current simulation capabilities to predict high vacuum pump
performance and would enable the development of the next generation of low cost,
high performance vacuum pumps. A reduction in cost to create high vacuum
environments will have a direct impact on the manufacturing of photovoltaic
panels, glass coatings used on flat panel displays, water soluble
pharmaceuticals, mass spectrometers and semi-conductors, which all require high
vacuum pump systems. The significant reduction in fabrication energy through
improved pump designs will reduce costs and CO2 emissions for the production of
many consumer products. The predictive simulation results of the proposed
software suite will also enhance current scientific understanding of rarefied
gas flows which can be applied to other engineering development areas, including
micro- and nano-fluidics and micro-satellites designed for advanced space launch
systems.