* 1215658
* Subduction Zone Coupling and Strain Partitioning in the Philippine Plate Boundary Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Kaj Johnson, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2015
* USD 99,872.00

This pilot research project seeks to examine active tectonic processes in a
complex, subduction-dominated plate boundary zone in the Philippines island arc
through analysis of the surface deformation field using high-precision GPS
measurements. The project takes advantage of a newly available suite of data
from a 240-station network of continuous and campaign GPS sites in the
Philippine plate boundary zone, collected by the Philippine Institute of
Volcanology and Seismology (PHIVOLCS), together with international
collaborators. The project builds on a successful research collaboration between
Indiana University, PHIVOLCS, and two research institutes in Taiwan. The work
will focus on (1) improvement of regional plate motion and intraplate
deformation models for the Philippine island arc; (2) evaluation of strain
partitioning between subduction-related compression and intra-arc shear
deformation in Luzon, including assessment of post-seismic transient effects
associated with the large (Mw 7.7) 1990 Luzon earthquake; and (3) assessment of
spatially variable subduction zone coupling along the Manila and Philippine
trenches and its impact on earthquake potential. This proposal seeks to extend
and expand the ongoing studies in Luzon through analysis of existing crustal
deformation data, in collaboration with Philippine and Taiwanese counterparts.
Tasks include (1) extending kinematic modeling of elastic block interaction to
include the entire Philippine archipelago; (2) developing 3-D deforming block
models of fault-related deformation at the Philippine Fault and interaction with
subduction boundaries; and (3) examining spatially variable coupling along the
Manila and Philippine subduction zones through dynamic modeling of subduction-
zone creeping and locked segments. The expected models of plate boundary
earthquake potential can be used as input for ground-motion and tsunami-
generation models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has significant societal
impacts in the form of improved methods for detecting fault-related deformation
and subduction-zone activity in active plate boundary zones. In particular,
these observations will provide critical information for assessment of long-term
seismic hazards for the Philippines.PHIVOLCS and other Philippine collaborators
provides an avenue for technology transfer to colleagues in the developing
world. Because of the large population at risk from future earthquakes and
related secondary effects, the research conducted as part of this project could
have significant impacts in hazard mitigation for the Philippines. The project
would provide support for students at Indiana University and ongoing science
outreach activities.