* 1215040
* Assessing the Value of Research in Advancing National Goals
* SBE,SMA
* 05/01/2012,10/31/2015
* Miron Straf, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 10/31/2015
* USD 1,200,000.00

In response to the request by the Congress in the America COMPETES Act, the
National Academies' National Research Council (NRC) is investigating some of the
many pathways through which research contributes to our economy and well-being
and serves other national goals. A diverse committee of experts is appointed to
explore various methodological approaches to measurement of research quality,
productivity, and impact; examine the explanatory power, predictive ability, and
incentive effects of various measures of the potential impact of research on
society; and identify the research and data needed to develop measures or other
means to assess the impact of research. The committee's work includes examining
prior efforts to assess research output and impact in industry, as well as in
government, and relevant experiences of other
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purview of the study is all federally
supported research and spans basic research that contributes to fundamental
understanding to use-inspired basic research. The committee, therefore, must be
selective in identifying research areas for some in-depth
investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The committee's charge includes
recommending how research could be better organized and supported to further
contribute to advancing national goals. In particular, the committee is asked to
address how the U.S. research enterprise can further adapt to a competitive and
highly linked world with a globalized economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts. The resulting assessments of research are critical to those who make
decisions on the allocation of research funds. The study is expected to
influence the pursuit of scientific research by many institutions and funded by
many government agencies and other organizations.