* 1215358
* Collaborative Research: Reorganization of stresses beneath greater Tokyo after the 2011 Tohoku-Oki M9 earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Andrew Freed, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 148,000.00

The March 11, 2011, Tohoku-Oki earthquake at magnitude 9 was the largest event
in Japan's 1400+ years of recorded history. The impact of the earthquake and
resulting tsunami on the people of Japan was severe, from the approximately
20,000 fatalities and unaccounted persons to the estimated Â¥10 trillion (US$ 120
billion) of economic loss. The Tohoku-Oki rupture was located north of Tokyo,
leading to a strong societal interest within Japan as to what is in store for
their capital city. Specifically, whether the Tohoku-Oki earthquake may have
accelerated the next significant earthquake to more directly impact the Tokyo
metropolitan region. Recent Japan government studies estimate that a shallow
megathrust earthquake similar to the 1923 M7.9 "Great Kanto" earthquake would
result in ~11,000 fatalities and up to US$ 3 trillion in economic damage.
Concern for a worsening of seismic hazards in Tokyo region is warranted based on
recent advances in earthquake science that indicate (a) that an earthquake that
relieves stress in one area will build up stress in adjacent areas, and (b)
while stress changes occur rapidly during the earthquake, postseismic processes
will lead to the redistribution of crustal stresses for years to many decades
after a large earthquake. Understanding the ongoing time-evolution of stress
buildup in the Tokyo region adjacent to the 2011 Tohoku-Oki rupture, and its
influence on active faults in that region is the primary objective of this NSF-
supported project. This project is a collaboration with Japanese scientists who
seek improved estimates of seismic hazards in the Tokyo region both currently
and for decades to come. This project will provide research training to U.S.
students, as well as international research experience, and also seeks to help
our Japanese colleagues improve their ability to conduct this type of seismic
hazard research. This project seeks to understand the evolution of crustal
stresses and associated seismic hazards in the Tokyo region in the years and
decades to following the Tohoku-Oki earthquake. Stress changes will occur due to
two primary postseismic processes, afterslip and viscoelastic relaxation. The
former is associated with aseismic slip along the North America/Pacific plate
interface within and below the region of coseismic slip, while the latter
involves the relaxation of hot weak mantle beneath the converging plates. Both
processes will cause a time-dependent transfer of stress to the seismogenic
upper crust. It is our goal to understand this process of stress transfer and
how it works to load active faults in the Tokyo region. This will be achieved by
developing an observationally constrained finite element model that can
accurately calculate stress changes due to afterslip and viscoelastic
relaxation. Observational constraints will primarily consider seismological data
that describes the tectonic geometry and elastic structure of the region, and
geodetic constraints that will enable a determination of the rheology (viscous
strength) of the region. Most importantly, the model should enable us to
separate out the relative contributions of afterslip and viscous relaxation to
postseismic geodetic data, which is not only required for an accurate
calculation of stress changes, but will provide invaluable insights as to the
nature of these two processes that will benefit our general understanding of
subduction zone tectonics. It is the unprecedented postseismic GPS coverage
within Japan that will enable these insights to be achieved.