* 1215782
* Strain Partitioning in Northwest Venezuela:  Potential for a Great Quake
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Roger Bilham, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 290,275.00

The 5 km elevations of the Venezuelan Andes are the result of oblique
convergence between NW Venezuela and the eastward moving Caribbean plate.
Oblique convergence in the Earth is typically manifest as shear faulting on
strike-slip faults and by thrust faulting on nearby dip-slip faults. Such
partitioning of shear and thrust motions is evident in NW Venezuela. Were all
19.6 mm/yr of relative motion between S. America and the Caribbean plate
absorbed by the thrust and strike-slip faults of the Andes, the thrust faults
flanking the Andes would absorb convergence at 11 mm/yr, and the Andean Bocon
fault system would slip in a dextral sense at a rate of 15 mm/yr. GPS
measurements across the Andes, however, reveal that dextral shear here does not
exceed 12 mm/yr, with convergence of at most 5 mm/yr. Thus approximately 3
mm/year of shear and 5 mm/year of convergence remain unaccounted for between the
Andes and NW coast. We contend that that much of the missing convergence is
absorbed by relatively slow subduction near the coasts of NW Venezuela and NE
Colombia. Seismic reflection profiling and microearthquake seismicity reveal
that the Caribbean plate dips 10-26 SE into the mantle. Existing sparse GPS data
suggest fault creep is not an important mechanism on this subduction zone. As a
result a large patch (200 km x100 km) is locked and might rupture in a future
large earthquake. The area that is locked is uncertain, and a primary objective
of the current proposal is to estimate its downdip extent by quantifying the
surface strain field between the Andes and the northern coast using GPS methods.
The researchers believe that the magnitude of a future earthquake could exceed
Mw=8.5. Synthetic models of its slip indicate that a tsunami generated by this
potential earthquake would result in 1-10 m of coastal run-up on the northern
shores of Colombia and western Venezuela, and on the south-facing shores of
central America, Jamaica and Haiti. The severity of its effects depend on the
proximity of the downdip locked rupture to the coast, and to the potential slip
stored since the last earthquake, which we know to be at least 500 years, and
possibly much longer. The work's measurements are designed to confirm and refine
the dextral and convergence rates discussed above, which in the Andes are higher
than indicated by Holocene faulting, and to quantify the seismic hazard posed to
the Caribbean community by a great earthquake in the Venezuelan subduction zone.

The researchers believe that a great earthquake may occasionally occur in NW
Venezuela. That none have occurred in the past 500 years means either that these
inferred great earthquakes recur at long intervals of time, or that possibly the
sparse measurements that currently lead us to this conclusion, may have an
alternative explanation. Of concern is that a great earthquake in NW Venezuela
would be accompanied by a large tsunami, that would affect the noerthern coast
of Venezuela and Colombia and several other island nations in the Caribbean. The
effects of a great earthquake here are in fact global: two million tourists
visit Jamaica and 1.5 million visit Aruba each year, both islands in the direct
path of this damaging tsunami. Similar densities of tourists can be found on the
beaches of a dozen other islands that will experience a tsunami surge. The
interruption to oil supplies from the Gulf of Maracaibo following a great
earthquake and tsunami will adversely subdue the global economy. Two graduate
students will be associated with the research: one in Venezuela and the other in
Boulder, Colorado. The measurements we propose are made possible by strong ties
between scientists in Venezuela, in Colombia, CU Boulder and in UNAVCO, who are
installing and maintaining a new GPS network (COCONET) throughout the Caribbean.