* 1215539
* SBIR Phase I:  Improved Solution Processible Small Organic Molecule Architectures for Lightweight-Flexible Photovoltaics.
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Corey Hoven, Next Energy Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,995.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop new soluble
small molecule (SSM) architectures for organic (plastic) photovoltaic (OPV)
technology. SSMs are low-cost plastic semiconductors that can be printed as an
ink or spray painted onto conventional plastic sheets to fabricate extremely
inexpensive, lightweight, and flexible solar cells. Development of organic solar
cells has primarily been based on small molecules deposited from vapor (an
expensive and constraining process) or solution-processed polymers;
semiconducting polymers by nature are inherently impure and are limited to small
batch sizes with inconsistencies between batches. SSM-OPV technology removes
these critical development and manufacturing barriers. The overall objective is
to further improve the efficiency and lifetime of already highly efficient SSM-
OPVs through an approach that is expected to lead to substantially improved
isotropy in the optical and electrical properties, which in turn can lead to
better charge transport and enhanced efficiency. It is also expected to improve
the device lifetimes by reducing degradation over time via crystallization.
Therefore this project will be addressing two of the most critical barriers to
the commercialization of OPV technology.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the promise of very
low-cost solar cells that are extremely lightweight and flexible, and which are
domestically manufactured via low-cost roll-to-roll processing. These plastic
solar cells promise to be substantially lighter and more flexible than existing
technologies, with competitive efficiencies and lifetimes for the niche portable
solar market. The market for niche solar applications made from lightweight
flexible photovoltaics includes stand-alone portable chargers for military and
retail users as well as integrated systems including integration with tents,
awnings, recreational vehicles, and tensile fabric structures. This market is
relatively new and is quickly growing despite the fact the market needs are
poorly met by currently available technologies. Currently available
photovoltaics in the portable solar market have limited flexibility thereby
increasing their collapsed volume and weight. While still new, the niche
flexible solar market is predicted to surpass 32 gigawatts (GW) and $58 billion
by 2019. The market for OPV stand-alone portable chargers alone is predicted to
reach $222 million by 2015. There is also potential that SSM-OPV technology
could make inroads into the building integrated PV (BIPV) market or the even the
much larger utility scale market.