* 1215961
* SEES Fellows: Development of Luminescent Solar Collectors for spectral selective energy harvesting in agricultural and biofuel production
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Carley Corrado, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 06/30/2015
* USD 278,912.00

This interdisciplinary project seeks to develop solar windows consisting of
semitransparent Luminescent Solar Concentrators (LSC) with optimized efficiency
for the utilization of electrical, chemical and thermal solar energy. The LSC
design includes the use of organic or quantum dot dyes that absorb the solar
spectrum with high efficiency and minimal self-absorption while passing
wavelengths needed for plant growth. Optimization of the LSC cells and
incorporation into a small greenhouse structure will be performed in order to
monitor reliability and power generation during one year of exposure in outdoor
testing conditions. The robustness of the LSC greenhouse to a variety of weather
conditions, shading, and 20-year lifetimes under accelerated conditions will be
evaluated. The impact of the window-integrated LSC technology on plant growth
and water retention will be studied. Separately, studies on algae response to
wavelength specific lighting will be used to design an LSC optimized for algal
growth, and that LSC will be tested for its energy harvesting capability and
algae growth enhancement on site where algae is being grown for bio-fuel
production.

In addition to the research, this project will establish ?EarthReach,? a program
of public outreach and engagement of undergraduate and graduate students in
teaching junior high and high school students about environmental
sustainability.

Building-integrated photovoltaics offer a large market opportunity for solar
power installations since the cost of the building can be used to offset the
cost of the integrated solar panels. The goal of this project is to accelerate
deployment of photovoltaics through the research and development of solar
windows that can produce energy at a competitive cost, are robust to outdoor
weather and shading conditions, and meet 20-year accelerated lifetimes. This
technology can then be tailored to meet demands of agriculture, building
integration, and larger scale power plants. This would reduce carbon emissions
by achieving cost parity of renewable generated power with fossil fuel-based
power and provide a technology platform for CO2 capture that benefits the
agriculture community.

This project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. With SEES Fellows support, this project will enable a
promising early career researcher to establish themselves in an independent
research career related to sustainability.