* 1215103
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of an Adaptive Dual-Fuel Injector to Enable High Efficiency Clean Combustion for SUV and Light Duty Truck Engines
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Deyang Hou, QuantLogic Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project investigates the
technical and commercial merits and potential commercial feasibility of an
Adaptive Dual-Fuel (ADF) Injector for direct injection of gasoline and diesel
fuels to enable high efficiency clean combustion. Gasoline and E85 fuels are
among the most widely available fuels, but are mostly used on spark-ignition
port injection gasoline engines with 30~40% less thermal efficiency than diesel
engines. The key innovation of the ADF injector enables direct injections of
both gasoline/E85 and diesel fuel selectively on-demand from a single injector.
The ADF injector can enable simultaneous reduction of NOx and particular matter
(PM) emissions and improve engine efficiency through advanced low temperature
combustion. It can gain about 30~40% efficiency improvement for gasoline and E85
fuels by using a diesel engine platform. The adaptive dual-fuel injector also
provides flexibility for enabling engines to run on either pure diesel,
gasoline-diesel, or E85-diesel dual fuels. The Phase I work includes design,
alpha prototyping, spray visualization imaging and laser measurements to
identify merits and feasibility of the proposed ADF injector.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project
will be significant benefits for energy security and environment protection. The
industry-university collaborated engineering research can also provide deeper
understanding on characteristics of dual fuel injection. The dual fuel injector
provides new capabilities which can potentially enable transformative combustion
methods and regimes for ultra high efficiency clean combustion. This project
will significantly benefit US consumers through significant fuel cost saving,
facilitate implementations of new CAFE standards with low cost, and benefit US
economy.