* 1215978
* CAREER: The Metabolic and Mutualistic Activities of Microbial Subsistence in Oligotrophic Cave Environments.
* BIO,EF
* 10/12/2011,07/31/2014
* Hazel Barton, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2014
* USD 331,027.00

Using caves as a model for microbial community adaptation under starved
conditions, the research will integrate a number of methods from the biological,
geological and chemical sciences. Within biology, molecular techniques will be
used to asses the size and structure of the communities present, the genes
expressed and whether parasites, such as bacterial viruses, play a role. Using
alternative techniques for cultivation, the research also aims to determine
whether mutually beneficial interactions between species are important factors
for survival. Methods from chemistry and materials science will address how and
why starved microbial species affect the local chemistry of the surfaces on
which they grow, while techniques in geology will make it possible to determine
what role geochemistry plays in diversity under starvation. Together, the
results obtained should significantly contribute to our understanding of the
interactions and processes microbial communities use to survive extreme
starvation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a broader context, this research will
address one of the outstanding questions in microbial ecology; why are the
majority of microbial species in the environment non-culturable? Most microbial
species in nature are living under conditions of extreme starvation, in which
they may rely on mutualistic interactions with other cells in order to survive.
Such interactions might limit the growth of many microbes in tradtional
laboratory culture media. If this is the case, knowledge learned from this
project could significantly increase the number and type of bacterial species
that can be grown under laboratory conditions. The isolation of such species
could greatly benefit not just our understanding of microbial activity in the
environment, but provide species with important traits for the biotechnology and
pharmaceutical industries. The research described will be carried out in a
primarily undergraduate research laboratory. By involving undergraduate students
in this advanced research, they develop practical and critical thinking skills,
more effective time management and an increased ability to communicate their
science. The research and scientific techniques will also be integrated directly
into the curricula, allowing a large number of students to be involved in the
design and implementation of research methods and data management, while hands
on research actively enhances the educational experience.