* 1215661
* Collaborative Research: Towards an understanding of the Holocene paleomagnetic record through new data (Hawaii/North American) and time series/spherical harmonic model comparisons
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Mark Abbott, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 246,552.00

Historical and recent paleomagnetic observations, along with geodynamo modeling
studies highlight the importance of non-axisymmetric flux concentrations, not
only as an indicator that the mantle has an important influence on the
geodynamo, but also that it may act as a potential organizing structure that
might control much of the dynamics of the geomagnetic field including
paleomagnetic secular variation (PSV). Comparison of specific, well-dated
Holocene PSV time series of inclination, declination, and paleointensity at key
locations suggest the existence of a relatively simple first order pattern that
is most clearly observed over the last four thousand years where the highest
quality data are available. Over this time range, the field morphology can be
roughly broken into two "modes": The first mode having a dominant flux lobe over
North America and the second a dominant flux lobe over Europe. The "North
American mode" is consistent with the historically time averaged field. The
"European mode" is consistent with the time averaged mid-to-late Holocene field.
A new inclination anomaly reconstruction for the NE Pacific region derived from
Alaskan, and older Hawaiian and Oregon records, suggests that the influence of
this oscillation may extend into the Pacific and continue through the Holocene
and possibly beyond. The discovery of such an oscillation would be a significant
step toward an understanding of what drives PSV. Unfortunately, available PSV
data from North America and the northeast Pacific, because of uncertain
chronologies and limited modern relative paleointensity records, are not
adequate to fully assess whether the relationship observed persists over longer
paleomagnetic time intervals. This three-year study will focus on the North
American and northeast Pacific records to improve observational constraints and
assess the relationship between data derived PSV time series and continuous
spherical harmonic models to inform the interpretation of the PSV record. Data
quality, including chronology is a limiting factor in our understanding of the
geomagnetic causes of PSV. This will be improved through a synthesis of existing
data and radiocarbon dates, and the collection of new cores from classic
paleomagnetic sites and other nearby locations with proven sedimentary records,
but where modern dating and paleomagnetic practices have yet to be
employed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We study the paleomagnetic record for many
reasons, with the most fundamental being to understand the past history of
Earth's magnetic field. Paleo-geomagnetic observations from rocks, sediments,
and archeological artifacts provide fundamental information about geomagnetic
field generation process that cannot be obtained from the short historical
record. These observations tell us that large amplitude geomagnetic changes in
direction and intensity occur over timescales that range from decades to
millions of years. Yet our knowledge of the processes and boundary conditions
that govern paleo-geomagnetic change are far from complete resulting in
significant uncertainty in our understanding of the geomagnetic field and any
process controlled by geomagnetic change, from magnetic stratigraphy to space
climate. This study is designed to determine if boundary conditions may act as a
potential organizing structure that might control much of the dynamics of the
geomagnetic field including millennial and centennial scale changes know as
paleomagnetic secular variation (PSV). Results will help to differentiate
between the contributions of geomagnetic and solar forcing of terrestrial cosmic
ray flux and cosmogenic isotope production with practical implications for
telecommunications, human health, global ecosystems and climate. The potential
linkage between climate change and field morphology is a relatively new topic of
research and one that deserves special attention at this time of rapid climate
change. Holocene magnetic stratigraphy has a long history, but its usefulness is
ultimately limited by how well we know the paleomagnetic record. An
understanding of the geomagnetic cause of paleomagnetic change will provide
significant new magnetic stratigraphic opportunities. This project will support
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral education, providing training in core
collection, stratigraphy, paleomagnetic data analysis, environmental magnetic
data analysis, geomagnetism, geochronology and paleoclimatology.