* 1215839
* SEES Fellows: Optimization of Next-Generation Biofuel Energy Tax Credits under Market Distortions to Achieve Positive Environmental Outcomes
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Adam Christensen, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Leah Nichols
* 07/31/2015
* USD 507,593.00

This project focuses on the integration of engineering, environmental, economic,
and policy concepts in the context of biofuels tax policy. A detailed survey of
biofuels producers will be used to collect information on the nature of existing
market failures. Multiple criteria will be identified and used to evaluate tax
credit performance. To systematically design and assess different tax credits, a
novel approach to evaluating industry effectiveness will be developed through a
modified real options valuation model. While traditional real options models
rely heavily on decision tree analysis and assume constant discount rates,
contingent claims analysis (CCA) incorporates time dependent risk adjusted
interest rates. With an extension of the risk adjustment process to include non-
traditional business risks, such as political risk and environmental risk, new
features will be developed and used in an extended industry-level CCA model. The
model will then be used to extract industry trends and develop key metrics to
measure tax credit effectiveness. To gain more detailed insight into the
conclusions of the CCA model, the National Energy Modeling System software
developed by the Energy Information Administration will be modified to accept
various tax credit proposals and used to project the production, importation,
conversion, consumption, and prices of biofuels. By combining both models, it
will be possible to verify and assess the effectiveness of various tax proposals
at multiple scales.

While a number of tax credits are in place to incentivize the production of
renewable biofuels, the design and implementation of those credits has been done
in a piecemeal fashion. This project will develop/adapt modeling tools and
techniques for evaluating tax credit effectiveness. The overall goal is
development of a toolbox that can enable a politically feasible, environmentally
progressive, and business friendly biofuels tax codes re-design.

This project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. With SEES Fellows support, this project will enable a
promising early career researcher to establish themselves in an independent
research career related to sustainability.