* 1215518
* SBIR Phase I:  A Real Time, High Sensitivity Atmospheric Benzene Vapor Monitor
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Anthony Miller, Entanglement Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2013
* USD 179,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (BSIR) Phase I project will address the
need for a trace benzene vapor sensor for ambient air. Benzene is a carcinogen
and significant Mobile Source Air Toxic (MSAT) released during incomplete
combustion of fossil fuels, and is commonly emitted from motor vehicles and many
industrial sites. Entanglement Technologies proposes to determine the
feasibility of developing a benzene vapor sensor with sensitivity better than
100 pptv in 30 minutes based on the combination of cavity ring-down spectroscopy
(CRDS) and diffusion time-of-flight (DiTOF). This combination allows the use of
the extremely sensitive CRDS technique to detect large molecules that cannot be
distinguished spectrally using CRDS alone. The Phase I project will develop a
prototype detector to evaluate and demonstrate the critical technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impacts of this research are the
development of a sensor with the ability to detect benzene and map its dispersal
into the environment. This will directly impact health hazard mitigation,
liability exposure reduction, and reduced regulatory compliance costs in
numerous industries. The improved sensitivity and reduced cost of the sensor
indicate strong market demand for the sensor. The technology platform will be
readily extended to a wide variety of other air toxics including toluene, ethyl-
benzene, and xylenes. In the long term, this technology will be applied to
biomedical science, industrial process monitoring, environmental remediation and
explosives detection. Diffusion-based selectivity will allow separation and
quantification of the many hydrocarbon gas components in human breath, that are
useful for non-invasive diagnosis of disease.