* 1215762
* SEES Fellows: Re-localization and Sustainability - Linking industrial and political ecology on Molokai and the Big Island, Hawaii
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Anjali Gupta, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Leah Nichols
* 07/31/2015
* USD 382,944.00

The study of sustainability, an inherently social and ecological concept,
requires simultaneous consideration of social, economic, and environmental
systems, the feedback loops between those systems, and the long-term viability
of those systems. One approach to sustainability is "re-localization" - a
movement to encourage sustainable production and consumption of food, energy and
goods in the same geographic region. This research will integrate the approaches
of industrial and political ecology to assess re-localization efforts in Hawaii,
and their implications for sustainability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To determine
whether and how re-localization is a viable pathway to sustainability, this
project will examine the different ways in which re-localization is articulated,
the conditions that enable or disable re-localization, and the ecological,
cultural, and socio-economic effects of re-localization on the islands of
Molokai and the Big Island within the Hawaiian Islands. The research will
qualitatively examine the politics of re-localization, how are 'local'
boundaries defined, whose interests are represented, and who wields the power to
re-localize, as well as quantitatively measure baseline material flows and the
material change that is precipitated by re-localization
movements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve significant engagement
among a variety of stakeholders, including academic researchers, government
agencies, NGOs, and civic organizations, as well as educational opportunities
via visits to local schools, mentoring of undergraduate students, and community
forums. Findings from this project will elucidate potential spaces for
collaboration between various demands for re-localization within the context of
ensuring the sustainability of local communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. With SEES Fellows support, this project will enable a
promising early career researcher to establish themselves in an independent
research career related to sustainability.