* 1215853
* Hydrogeochemical dynamics of natural carbon dioxide &amp;#64257;elds: Analogs for geological carbon storage and constraints on convective dissolution
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2018
* Marc Hesse, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 07/31/2018
* USD 471,471.00

Geological carbon dioxide storage can be used to reduce carbon dioxide emissions
only if the carbon dioxide remains in deep geological formations for thousands
of years. Unfortunately free-phase carbon dioxide in sedimentary basins is less
dense than the formation water and therefore leakage of carbon dioxide from
these storage reservoirs back to the surface is a major concern. Over time,
however, carbon dioxide dissolves into formation waters and increases the water
density. Dissolved carbon dioxide will then sink to deeper parts of the
sedimentary basins and it is very unlikely to surface again. The faster carbon
dioxide dissolves the sooner it is stored safely. This project will evaluate the
dissolution of CO2 on two scales: (1) The geological and geochemical record of a
large natural carbon dioxide reservoir called Bravo Dome in New Mexico will be
used estimate how fast carbon dioxide has dissolved on the geologic timescale
and how tight the natural CO2 trap has been; (2) This study will also build
scaled laboratory models for the transport of the dissolved carbon dioxide that
determine the overall rate of carbon dioxide dissolution. The spatial structure
of the dissolved carbon dioxide currents will be imaged with x-ray tomography.
The experiments will be used to calibrate a dynamic model that can then be used
to model laboratory observations and to interpret the observed field data to
constrain the dissolution and sequestration rates for CO2 over long
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together fluid mechanics,
geology, and geochemistry and will provide a first estimate of carbon dioxide
dissolution rates in the field, to inform the debate about the long-term safety
of geological carbon dioxide storage. The experimental study will address
several fundamental questions about the migration of solutes due to density
differences that have implications for a broad set of questions for salt-water
intrusion to geothermal energy. The models that will be developed will capture
the essential physics of these processes. The development of such models is key
to enable uncertainty quantification in geological CO2 storage.