* 1215063
* SBIR Phase I:  Adaptive Hybrid Intelligent Systems Managing Uncertainty in Operational Environments
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Emory Fry, Cognitive Medical Systems
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,532.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
research improvements in rule engine technologies that enable the development of
autonomous "smart systems" that can identify when and how they must adapt to
unexpected environmental conditions. Reasoning technologies are important in a
variety of commercial systems providing valuable control, monitoring, and data
analysis capabilities. Within healthcare, they provide indispensable services
for patient monitoring, disease surveillance, and decision support, etc.,
allowing such systems to operate reliably and predictably. Nevertheless, real-
world environments are characterized by unexpected events that autonomous
systems find difficult to recognize and compensate for without human assistance.
These challenges suggest the need for a high-level Management Component capable
of identifying when operational conditions change and when the system must re-
configure or re-train its control algorithms. We will research the development
of adaptive hybrid intelligent systems combining two or more reasoning
technologies into a general-purpose management framework that promises to
improve an autonomous system's responsiveness and
adaptability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project can be readily illustrated within the healthcare market where the
volume of patient data now being generated cannot reliably be analyzed by any
one provider. New clinical decision support technologies and products are
desperately needed to process and reason over complex patient data and to assist
clinicians in making appropriate decisions. If successful, the proposed hybrid
intelligent system architecture is potentially applicable to many medical
devices. For example, gas blenders that are currently adjusted manually to
maintain adequate patient oxygen saturation could be servo controlled with
algorithms that safely detect and alarm when simply increasing gas delivery is
not appropriate. Furthermore, the utility of hybrid intelligent system
architectures is not specific to the medical domain. Any use case where
contextual awareness is required for optimal performance of a control algorithm
or model could be a potential candidate. Hybrid control architectures promise to
reduce the dependency that such systems have on human oversight, and if
appropriately applied, could reduce human error, improve cost-effectiveness and
yet still maintain quality standards.