* 1215933
* Temporal Variations in the Seismogenic Zone, Cook Inlet, Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Jeffrey Freymueller, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2016
* USD 365,000.00

Over the last decade we have observed a variety of transient slow slip events,
episodes of slip on a fault that are very slow compared to the slip that
generates earthquakes, but significantly faster than tectonic plate motions and
steady fault creep. Recently, the investigators of this study have detected a
transient event that appears to be the opposite of a slow slip event: a ?locking
event? in which a section of a fault that had been creeping stopped for a few
years, and then began creeping again. Or perhaps it represented the end of one
slow event and the start of another. It appears that the behavior of the downdip
end of the seismogenic zone at subduction zones is more dynamic and subject to
change than previously thought. The proposed work will follow up on this new
discovery, and attempt to explain the cause of these changes. The researchers
will determine more precisely what part of the subduction plate interface
changed its behavior, or whether some other explanation is required to explain
the observations. We will then determine whether these changes were led by,
accompanied by, or followed by changes in tectonic tremor or seismicity
patterns, and evaluate the stress changes acting on and caused by slip on the
subduction megathrust. Specifically, we will measure the extent and magnitude of
velocity changes, by augmenting the PBO data with repeat surveys of campaign GPS
sites surveyed from the 1990s to mid-2000s, construct source models to relate
the observed changes to changes in the slip distribution on the plate interface,
evaluate stress and stressing changes and seismicity rate changes, to evaluate
possible causes and effects of the changes, and explore the implications of this
discovery for earthquake hazard assessments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of the
largest earthquakes (magnitude larger than 8) occur at subduction zones, where
one of Earth?s tectonic plates is being thrust beneath another. Earthquakes
occur in the shallow part of the interface between the plates, extending from
the surface (usually the seafloor) to about 30-40 km (18-25 miles) depth. The
hazard from great earthquakes and tsunamis makes it critical to understand
better what controls the extent of these earthquake ruptures ? why do they stop
at certain depths, and how can we assess earthquake potential before destructive
earthquakes occur? The pattern of deformation of the Earth, which can be
measured very accurately with high precision GPS measurements, can be used to
make such assessments. Between earthquakes, the region landward of the deep-sea
trench of the subduction zone contracts, which reflects the storage of energy
within the earth to be released in future earthquakes (compression or extension
of a spring is a useful analogue).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, the deformation
pattern at some subduction zones changes with time, which suggests that some
parts of the plate interface are alternately slipping slowly and sticking
together. In the Cook Inlet region of southern Alaska, we have now observed two
relatively abrupt changes in the deformation pattern, in late 2004 and early
2010. The simplest explanation for these observations is that a section of the
plate interface that had been creeping stopped for a few years, and then began
creeping again. This behavior had not been clearly observed anywhere before. It
demonstrates that the behavior of the deeper end of the seismogenic zone at
subduction zones is more dynamic and subject to change than previously thought.
The project will follow up on this new discovery, and attempt to explain the
cause of these changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information relevant to earthquake
hazards in Alaska will be communicated directly to the Alaska Seismic Safety
Commission, in addition to the usual communication to scientists. We will work
with the Kachemak Bay Research Reserve in Homer, Alaska, Kenai Fjords and Lake
Clark National Parks, and the Alaska Center for Climate Assessment and Policy to
educate the public and land managers about tectonic motions through public
lectures and webinars. There is a growing need for reliable scientific
information about vertical crustal motions in particular, due to the need to
assess the impacts of sea level rise. The graduate student for this project will
be directly involved in these efforts in addition to their research work.