* 1215659
* Numerical Improvements, Mesh Adaptation and Parameter Identification for Parallel Finite Element Stokes Ice Sheet Modeling
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Lili Ju, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2015
* USD 157,618.00

The numerical modeling of land ice evolution has been a subject of growing
interest because of the crucial role land ice plays in global sea level and
other parts of the climate system. Nonlinear 3D Stokes flow is the gold standard
among conceptual models for ice sheet dynamics. The current widely-used shallow-
ice, shallow-shelf, L1L2, and higher-order approximations are all obtained as
reduced forms of the 3D Stokes model by means of scaling analysis, but in many
situations, with an attendant loss of fidelity. The PI has closely collaborated
with a team of collaborators on the preliminary development of a parallel finite
element nonlinear 3D Stokes dynamical core for ice sheet modeling. The goal of
the proposed project is to advance the current finite element Stokes ice sheet
model by further studying and enhancing its efficiency, accuracy, usability, and
robustness. The PI will first investigate some issues related to the finite
element Stokes ice sheet dynamics solver, including analysis and implementation
of Newton-based fast iterative methods for treating both rheological and basal
boundary condition nonlinearities and an adaptive hybrid discretization scheme
for enhancing the local conservation properties in our numerical model. In the
ice-sheet model we consider, the Stokes ice sheet dynamics equations are fully
coupled to the equation for temperature evolution, thus stable and accurate
finite element temperature solver with accuracy commensurate with that of the
Stokes solver is desired and will also be developed. It is well-known that the
adjoint equation approach allows one to directly obtain accurate solutions for
the quantity of interests. The PI will also investigate and develop adjoint
equation-based methods for adaptive mesh refinement and identification of basal
boundary sliding parameter using goal-oriented optimization
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although numerical ice sheet models have
steadily improved in recent years, much work is needed to make them more
reliable, efficient and usable at long time and whole ice sheet scales. The
enhanced numerical Stokes ice sheet model will achieve high degrees of
efficiency and accuracy through the use of high-order accurate adaptive finite
element discretization schemes, highly scalable parallel linear and nonlinear
system solvers, goal-oriented variable resolution meshing strategies, and
effective inverse design for model parameters. The proposed investigation would
offer new insights through numerical simulations to the understanding of land
ice evolution. The PI will actively disseminate his research results and tested
software not only toresearchers in the area but also to much broader communities
with interests in numerical methods and computational geophysics through
publications, attending meetings, maintaining an informative web-site. The
potential impact of the project is very substantial. Direct and transformative
innovations resulting from the proposed project will greatly improve
computational ice sheet model capabilities in the climate system modeling. In
addition, this project will also offer a unique educational opportunity for
graduate students with interests in computational and applied mathematics by
having them participate in an interdisciplinary research program that combines
mathematics, computer science and geological sciences.