* 1215746
* Collaborative Research: Fundamental Research on Oscillatory Flow in Hydrogeology
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Michael Cardiff, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 06/30/2015
* USD 173,815.00

Collaborative research: Fundamental Research on Oscillatory Flow in Hydrogeology
Peter Kitanidis, Stanford University Michael Cardiff, University of Wisconsin
Warren Barrash, Boise State University

The conventional approach to representing the governing physics of fluid flow in
hydrogeology is based on the premises that (a) fluid flow can be treated
separately from deformation in the solid matrix and (b) changes in flow
conditions are gradual (i.e., allowing simplifying assumptions about momentum
changes to be valid). Oscillatory flows may violate these premises in certain
?intermediate? frequency ranges, regardless of whether they are created
deliberately at a well for purposes of monitoring or site characterization, or
are created accidentally from a natural or man-made source. These violations
raise important questions for understanding oscillatory fluid flow in subsurface
porous media at core and field scales (i.e., scales of interest in hydrologic
applications): (a) must Darcy?s law be modified? and (b) do controlling
hydraulic parameters such as permeability and elastic storage change with
oscillation frequency rather than remain constant? This research is a
comprehensive study of oscillatory flows at intermediate frequencies involving:
a careful mathematical study of flow at the pore scale and upscaling to the core
scale to generalize Darcy?s law; experiments in a laboratory sandbox to
test/validate the theoretical developments and examine heterogeneous cases
including infiltration of an immiscible fluid; and upscaling to hydrologic scale
with controlled oscillatory flow experiments in the field at a highly
characterized research wellfield to test/validate theoretical developments and
models. Expected results include a rigorous theoretical treatment of oscillatory
flow mechanics leading to predictions and modeling of oscillatory signal
propagation characteristics and frequency dependent aquifer parameter behavior
at laboratory and field scale for a range of porous media materials.

This project has broad impacts for society overall and for the scientific and
engineering communities because it deals with basic hydrologic research in the
subsurface, where most of the available freshwater is stored. In the United
States, groundwater is the primary source of water for over 50 percent of
Americans, and roughly 95 percent for those in rural areas. In the world, many
of the most important aquifers are being gradually depleted or contaminated.
This research will lead to better methods for the restoration and management of
this important resource. In particular, oscillatory flows may become important
tools for characterization of subsurface volumes to determine the 3D
heterogeneity of aquifer parameters and to monitor for changes in water quality
or aquifer status without having to remove water (that may be contaminated and
hazardous). Oscillatory flows also have potential applications in enhancing
mixing, which can enhance reaction rates and result in more efficient site
remediation technologies.