* 1215787
* Collaborative Research: The Hawaiian PLUME deployment in a global context
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Cecily Wolfe, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 03/31/2014
* USD 3,823.00

Hawaii's location far from any plate boundary provides an excellent opportunity
to test the plume hypothesis: whether hot upwellings from the deep mantle
generate hotspot volcanism at the Earth?s surface. Initial seismic imaging for
the "Plume-Lithosphere Undersea Melt Experiment" (PLUME), consisting of a
temporary deployment of land and ocean bottom seismometers, has revealed the
first high-resolution 3-D images that support the presence of a deep-anchored
mantle plume. Yet, the PLUME seismic recordings have yet to be exploited to
their fullest. The body and surface wave datasets that have so far been analyzed
independently, as is usually the case, must be modeled jointly. This will help
distinguish between temperature anomalies, which are usually assumed to cause
seismic anomalies, and other causes such as changes in rock composition or
mechanical strength. Another part of this research is the understanding of how
seismic waves attenuate beneath Hawaii, and this project will extract new
attenuation data from the seismic records. We will also place the PLUME dataset
in a global context by embedding it in a global model. Global tomography can
address fundamental questions that an isolated interpretation of the PLUME
dataset cannot provide: Does the Hawaiian plume have its own isolated origin
near the core-mantle boundary or does it originate from the large low shear-
velocity province in the Central Pacific? Is the currently imaged tilt of the
deep mantle anomaly in the regional body wave images a robust feature that
persists in a global model? Does a connection with the East Pacific Rise exist
in the asthenosphere that would explain some of the complex chemistry found in
Hawaii's basalts?

Scientists have long debated whether hotspots such as Hawaii, Yellowstone, or
Iceland are the product of hot, buoyant upwelling "mantle plumes" from the lower
mantle, perhaps originating as deep as the core mantle boundary, or are rather
the result of processes in the shallow mantle. Seismic studies can help resolve
such questions, because seismic waves can be used to reveal Earth?s internal
structure through tomographic images and detect regions of high temperatures,
mantle rock anomalies and melt. This project will perform enhanced analyses of
data from a unique deployment of land and ocean bottom seismometers (OBSs)
around the Hawaiian Islands and across the anomalous region of uplifted seafloor
known as the Hawaiian Swell. Prior analyses of this deployment for the "Plume-
Lithosphere Undersea Melt Experiment" (PLUME), support the presence of a mantle
plume, but more detailed studies are needed to help answer fundamental
questions, including: Does the Hawaiian plume originate from its own isolated
origin near the core-mantle boundary or does it originate from the large low
shear-velocity province in the Central Pacific? Is the plume in fact a
continuous chimney-like feature or does it break up into several blobs? Is the
currently imaged tilt of the seismic anomaly a robust feature that persists in a
global tomography model? Does a connection with the nearest major mid-ocean
ridge, the East Pacific Rise, exist in Earth's shallower layer known as the
asthenosphere, which would explain some of the complex chemistry that
geochemists have found in Hawaii's lavas?