* 1215587
* SBIR Phase I:  A Sustainable Wavelength Selective Energy Producing Greenhouse
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Glenn Alers, Soliculture
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2013
* USD 178,875.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project entitled "A
sustainable Wavelength Selective Energy Producing Greenhouse" will demonstrate a
greenhouse that can utilize land for both food production and electricity
production. A cost effective and highly durable greenhouse panel has been
developed that simultaneously facilitates plant growth, reduces cooling
requirements and generates power at less than $1/watt incremental cost. The
greenhouse uses a proprietary material to selectively absorb the green portion
of the solar spectrum that is not used by plants. The Green light is then
transferred to photovoltaic cells mounted at the edge of the panel for power.
The color tuning associated with controlling the red/blue ratio of transmitted
light has been shown to facilitate fruit production in tomatoes and increase
flower production. The color tuning materials have achieved greater than a 20
year lifetime in full sun based on high humidity / high intensity UV aging
studies. This project will build a full greenhouse with these materials and
obtain results on both plant growth and demonstrate a sustainable, energy
neutral, "off the grid" greenhouse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project will be to better utilize the
limited land and water resources of this country. Much of the remote land that
might be suitable for solar energy is too far from transmission lines or sub-
stations to be economically viable and is environmentally sensitive.
Agricultural land already coexists with population centers and contains the
necessary infrastructure for power transmission. Merging both power generation
and food production can increase the productivity of land near population
centers with greenhouses that will bring the food source closer to the consumer,
extend the growing season and conserve/recycle valuable water resources. The
commercialization of this power generating greenhouse will start a complimentary
energy-agriculture industry that can best utilize our scarce natural resources.
Greenhouse construction is a multi-billion industry and is growing as population
and food consumption grows. The project will work with local universities to
create a new generation of botanist/biologist/physicist that can serve a rapidly
growing solar/agriculture market sector. The demonstration greenhouse will be
used as a learning center for students from middle school to graduate school.