* 1215401
* SBIR Phase I:  Double-Sided Advertising Exchange
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Moses Ma, Metanet, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,966.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop
and validate a real-time, double-sided auction framework AdEx, for intelligent
advertisements. This system significantly increases the likelihood of more
relevant matches at a lower cost between consumers and advertisers, buyers and
sellers. The key innovation is to directly utilize user-purchasing and interest
profiles, culled from aggregated exchange data and social networking
information, and use this data to create fungible trading objects. Aggregating
groups of these objects with similar interests and profiles will enable real-
time bidding for both the producer and consumer of advertising over a multi-
variable bidding space. Configured as a dynamic exchange, AdEx facilitates three
novel functionalities: 1) double-sided dynamic bidding; 2) allows dual
programmable trading agents for optimized marketing; and 3) auctions would be
cleared and use linear programming to assess the outcome. Thus allowing
synthetic liquidity generation, and interconnection between disparate
advertising networks with commission sharing resulting in more efficient
markets. This double-sided advertising exchange, a component of MetaNet's vision
of efficient interconnected enterprise social extranets, will form the fabric
for the next growth phase of the Information Revolution allowing corporations to
connect with customers and collaborate with trusted partners in remarkable new
ways.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be the facilitation
of more efficient automated markets, which will transform advertising and direct
marketing. The new revenue models possible, based on knowing more about who will
be communicating with and why, are vast. The search engine industry was able to
connect any user to any other user on the web. Eventually, both types of
connections will combine with impact to marketing ROI. Currently the launch of a
new consumer brand could cost between $10-100 million, with most of this spent
on advertising. MetaNet?s vision could reduce the cost of launching a new brand
disruptively by enabling a revolution in the ease-of-launching new products and
businesses. If deployed universally, it could enable a reduction of friction
causing a dramatic rise in global productivity. Finally, as spam overtakes our
Inboxes and Facebook updates, signal-to-noise ratio for electronic communication
is dropping. This innovation is designed to improve the ability to target
consumers intelligently, and thus, may be the seed for a new communications eco-
system that could someday eliminate spam.