* 1215879
* Collaborative Research:  Role of Interfacial Turbulence in Hyporheic Exchange and Fine Particle Dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2016
* James Best, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 12/31/2016
* USD 247,464.00

It is essential to improve understanding of interactions between surface water
flows and underlying porewaters in order to advance our ability to assess
connectivity in aquatic ecosystems, evaluate the propagation of carbon,
nutrients, and contaminants through river networks, and predict the net effects
of human modification of watersheds. Previous NSF-supported research found that
hydrodynamic interactions caused rapid exchange between rivers and underlying
porewater, along with ongoing deposition and resuspension of fine particles.
These processes are expected to substantially influence downstream migration of
solutes and particles in river networks. Unfortunately, very little information
is available on the hydrodynamic mechanisms that control this behavior because
it has been extremely difficult to directly measure solute and particle dynamics
in porewaters. The objectives of the current project are to improve fundamental
understanding of hydrodynamic interactions between freestream flows and
porewaters, and to use the information gained to transform conceptual and
quantitative models for solute and particle dynamics in rivers. The project will
use an array of new flow visualization technologies to obtain direct
observations of fluid exchange between rivers and streambeds, and the associated
fluxes of solutes and fine suspended particles. The results will be used to
identify the main fluid flow processes responsible for solute and particle
transport across porous environmental interfaces. This work will yield improved
models for the surface-subsurface flow continuum, as well as new probabilistic
models for downstream solute and particle transport. The project will contribute
to the broader education of students and the public by incorporating project
results into major outreach efforts at Northwestern University and the
University of Illinois. Focus will be on helping K-12 students and neighborhood
communities to understand how river processes influence water quality, human
health, and natural ecosystems. The PIs will also work with several university
student groups to develop a new program involving regular on-campus activities
and mentoring for students from populations underrepresented in the sciences.
Overall, the project will engage ~1,500 K-12 students and adults citizens each
year (~4,500 over the lifetime of the project) in laboratory activities and
discussions of the significance of hydrological processes to sustainability.

The major scientific contributions of this work will be an improved
characterization of fundamental mechanisms of flow coupling between rivers and
riverbeds, and new models for the migration of dissolved and suspended materials
in rivers. Such models are essential to enable the prediction of large-scale,
long-term dynamics required for sustainable management of river systems. The
project will characterize important components of interfacial flux currently
missing from solute transport models, and provide critical new observations of
fine particle deposition and resuspension. This information is needed to address
pressing problems in freshwater systems, including contaminant interactions with
sediments, protection of ecological diversity within rivers, nutrient retention
and carbon processing in rivers, and waterborne disease transmission. The models
developed in this project can be used to evaluate the factors that produce high
risks of transmission of contaminants and waterborne diseases, and thereby
improve management of watersheds to minimize these risks. The project will also
contribute to longer-term sustainability of drinking water resources and aquatic
ecosystems by improving our capability to predict long-term biogeochemical and
ecological dynamics in rivers.