* 1215657
* SEES Fellows: A bio-economic study of an introduced biological control agent: ecological, evolutionary, and economic factors in sustainable agricultural systems
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2012,03/31/2014
* Yukie Kajita, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2014
* USD 424,542.00

This interdisciplinary project will use advanced genomic sequencing techniques
to investigate how biological control agents are established, undergo genetic
variation, and adapt to novel environments. The genetic evaluation will use a
globally distributed species of ladybeetle, Coccinella septempunctata, to study
the relationship between human introduction efforts and demographic processes
that affect the establishment and spread of this predator in the United States.
The study will also include an ex-post benefit-cost analysis to assess the
economic value of using C. septempunctata as a biological control agent.

Biological control, the introduction of natural enemies to control pests and
weeds in agricultural systems, can promote sustainable agriculture and
environment, and enhance biodiversity, food safety, and human health, by
reducing the need for pesticides. Despite a long history, classical biological
control has not developed as a predictive science, frequently resulting in
unexpected ecological and economic costs. To improve the sustainable use of
biological control agents, decision makers need better tools to understand
biological control programs as multidisciplinary efforts that require integrated
knowledge of ecology, evolutionary biology, and economics. This project will
study a widely distributed ladybeetle as a model control agent with the intent
of improving current methods and procedures for the introduction of beneficial
insects for biological control applications.

The principal investigator on this project will also be an active participant in
an international biological control working group, and will work with teachers
and students on the design of sustainability science courses at a local middle
school.

This project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. With SEES Fellows support, this project will enable a
promising early career researcher to establish themselves in an independent
research career related to sustainability.