* 1215440
* SBIR Phase I:  Electrostatic Normal Force Modulation for Haptic Touch Screens
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Gregory Topel, Tangible Haptics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 1 project describes
technologies that address the lost sense of touch inherent with touchscreens.
Found on billions of products ranging from smartphones to automobiles, touch
sensing technology has grown increasingly sophisticated in recent years, while
touch output haptics has lagged. Most devices have either no touch output or
crude vibrotactile confirmations. Thus, virtual keyboards are much more
difficult on a lifeless touchscreen and visual demands are great even where they
shouldn?t such as in automobiles and applications for the visually impaired. The
proposed research addresses these deficiencies by developing a novel haptic
technology based on production of lateral force to create haptic effects such as
the edges of keys. Prior research proved lateral forces can be controlled via
coordination of electrostatic and vibrational effects. This Phase I research
will focus on the electrostatic component. An innovative electronic design and
use of high-k dielectric materials will lead to low-power, mechanically robust,
and manufacturable haptic solutions for touchscreen environments. The
investigation will focus on wear and defect mechanisms, and quantify the
tradeoffs between transparency, resistive losses, actuation power and voltage
versus the dynamic range of lateral forces that can be
produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is creating a true haptic feedback that will enable touchscreen devices
to communicate through the sense of touch rather than just sight and sound. The
prevalence of touchscreens began decades ago but really exploded with the
introduction of smartphones. Worldwide double-digit growth of touchscreens is
expected for the next five years as automobiles, computers, and many other
applications continue to adopt this versatile interface. While consumers are
attracted to the flexibility of touchscreens, they have simply learned to deal
with the shortcomings including a lack of touch sensory. The proposed haptic
technologies create multi-touch lateral forces rather than simple vibrations
that produce palpable virtual objects and dynamic effects such as keyboards,
dials that click, and strings that stretch. This technology could replace
buttons and dials on an ultrasound machine to allow technicians to feel tangible
controls but allow for an easily cleanable surface. Automobile drivers could
feel for radio preset buttons and count the number of roads before their
destination through the sense of touch. It is this expansion of communication
that will be valued by users, thus creating a true demand for haptics which has
to this point been an afterthought.