* 1215450
* SBIR Phase I:  On Demand Verification for Analog Integrated Circuits
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Michael Krasnicki, Zipalog, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 174,250.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes an on-demand
verification (ODV) facility for analog / mixed-signal application (A/MS)
specific integrated circuits (ASICs). The technology innovation is a virtualized
cloud-based verification platform that supports all aspects of A/MS ASIC
verification for integrated circuit design centers, including behavioral
modeling, test bench management, simulation planning, simulation farming, and
data mining. The proposed ODV system scales with ASIC complexity and design
staff expansion by leveraging cloud computing resources. More importantly, the
proposed verification resources can be scaled down once verification tasks are
complete, creating opportunities for small design centers to create high quality
designs with competitive cost structure for design operations. The initial
proof-of-concept design system will be equipped with open source EDA design,
modeling, and verification software tools. The modularity inherent in the
proposed verification platform will also support the installation of best-in-
class commercial partner software solutions and their use in ASIC verification
activities by subscribers to the ODV facility.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to improve the
competitiveness of U.S. semiconductor industry by reducing A/MS design
verification cycle time, improving first pass design success and reducing time-
to-market. The complexity of A/MS ASIC design has aggressively followed Moore?s
law, but innovations in design verification have not. Small, fabless analog
design centers in particular struggle to compete in complex design creation
given the existing EDA licensing model. Equipping a small design team with the
proper verification and analysis tools, for example, is financially equivalent
to quadrupling the staff. The results of this research work will lower barriers
to entry and innovation for small and emerging companies by providing a scalable
verification service without the onerous burden of additional software licensing
costs and infrastructure overhead. In addition, the ODV system enables more
collaborative innovation among the market players through a cloud-based
platform. This would materially benefit the existing semiconductor market
participants and open the door for new participants.