* 1215765
* Collaborative Proposal: Developing a Link Between Dynamic Friction and Fracture Mechanics Models of Earthquake Rupture using a new Dynamic Double-Direct Shear Apparatus
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Vikas Prakash, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

There is broad agreement amongst researchers in the geophysics community that
similar rocks may undergo very different weakening processes in different normal
stress and/or slip velocity regimes. Consequently, inference of weakening
behavior of fault rocks in situ from laboratory experiments at interfacial
conditions of relevance to earthquake physics cannot be done simply by scaling
exercises, and relatively small changes in normal stress and/or the slip speed
can result in changes in the slip weakening distance of an order of magnitude.
Motivated by these observations, the investigators propose to advance the
current state of our understanding regarding the frictional constitutive
behavior of earthquake faults using two principal approaches: (1) implementing a
new dynamic shear friction testing apparatus by synergistically combining the
split-Hopkinson pressure bar and the double-direct shear friction apparatus to
the study of dynamic friction in both intact and granular geo-materials; and (2)
developing a methodology for testing the efficacy of parameters extracted from
dynamic friction experiments in dynamic rupture models. The intellectual merit
of this proposal is strengthened by the fact that it addresses some of the
outstanding problems in earthquake-physics, including the influence of slip and
slip-velocity on fault strength during a typical fault rupture event. No
laboratory experiments to-date combine the large displacement, high slip rates,
and normal stresses that are understood to characterize dynamic earthquake slip
at natural fault interfaces. These failings mean that processes that may occur
during dynamic slip in earthquakes have not been explored experimentally. The
new experimental configuration proposed in here, which is a modification of the
well-established experimental procedures employed routinely in engineering for
investigating high-strain-rate behavior of engineering materials (split
Hopkinson pressure bar) and quasi-static friction studies in geo-materials
(double-direct shear apparatus), has the potential to provide friction data in
the slip-speed and normal stress range of direct relevance to earthquake
physics. Furthermore, the two-pronged methodology of our proposed work aims to
fundamentally change the way we approach studying the frictional resistance of
faults. The first task guarantees significant results that will advance the
state of understanding of dynamic friction during earthquake rupture under
relevant conditions, whereas the second approach will further constrain the
inferred frictional constitutive models by comparing predictions of dynamic
rupture models that incorporate lab-derived frictional slip constitutive
behavior with laboratory rupture experiments.

The proposed research will contribute toward our understanding of earthquakes in
several ways. To construct theoretical models of the earthquake process, we must
understand how frictional resistance on faults changes during an earthquake. In
particular, the weakening mechanism that we propose to study have profound
implications for the magnitude of stress-drops during earthquakes and
consequently for the magnitude of strong ground shaking. The manner in which
fault strength varies with displacement and rupture velocity, as well as the
rate at which healing occurs as the slip velocity decreases behind the rupture
tip, can control the mode of rupture propagation, i.e. as a crack or a pulse.
Thus, understanding dynamic friction is important not only for practical matters
related to predicting strong ground motions and resulting damage, but also for
answering major scientific questions receiving considerable attention, e.g. the
strength of the San Andreas fault/the heat-flow paradox, the question that
ultimately is responsible for the San Andreas Fault Observatory at Depth (SAFOD)
project. The proposed program also provides exciting opportunities for
interdisciplinary research and educational interactions by involving faculty and
graduate students from two neighboring institutions.. Both universities are
strongly encouraging the involvement of undergraduate students in cutting edge
faculty research, and this would occur for the proposed work as well. Special
attention will also be given to recruitment of underrepresented minority
students for the project. Dissemination of research results is planned by
conference presentations and publications in relevant peer-reviewed journals.
The investigators will also employ internet and mass-media-based information
dissemination to increase awareness of the potential impact of the proposed
research in earthquake hazard mitigation.