* 1215009
* SBIR Phase I:  Assistive Control System Harnessing Vestigial Neuromuscular Biosignals
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Sandy Heck, Reach Bionics
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2013
* USD 177,424.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will explore
whether electromyographic (EMG) signals from a vestigial neuromuscular system
can serve as a virtual ?controller? for those with spinal cord injuries.
Repurposing these unused muscles could open a new channel of innate and
intuitive control over a computer cursor, nearby electronics, or a motorized
wheelchair. This project will recruit several subjects for a pilot study
evaluating the ability to control a computer interface via EMG signals recorded
by surface electrodes placed over the muscles. This project will culminate in
the development of a headset capable of capturing, processing and wirelessly
transmitting the intended EMG signals to any target device.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be
greatest in the assistive technology space. Limitations of mobility and
interpersonal interaction are primary factors determining functional
independence and quality of life in people with physical disabilities, yet
existing assistive devices remain cumbersome and usurp the individual?s few
remaining still-functioning motor systems. This innovation in assistive
technology could bring a new computer interface device to those with even the
most severe spinal cord injuries and many of the most severe brain lesions, and
has the potential to change how anyone interfaces with their environment. Users
would, in essence, develop a new mode of command output that can be wirelessly
applied to any target device.