* 1215317
* SBIR Phase I:  A Consumer Robot Designed to Help Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders Practice Critical Social Skills
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Seema Patel, Interbots LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2012
* USD 146,639.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses on optimizing
the design of a&lt;br/&gt;robot for children with Autism Spectrum Disorders
(ASD). Research has shown that children&lt;br/&gt;with ASD interact more easily
with inanimate devices, such as robots, than with humans.&lt;br/&gt;Despite this
promising research, there are currently no consumer robots on the
market&lt;br/&gt;specifically designed to interact with ASD children. The goal
of this research is to investigate&lt;br/&gt;what set of features are optimal
for a robot designed to be an effective and affordable therapy&lt;br/&gt;tool
for children with ASD. Initial designs will be generated based on existing
research and&lt;br/&gt;previously conducted user tests. These designs will be
used to create prototypes which will then&lt;br/&gt;be used to conduct user
studies with ASD children to determine which designs elicit
the&lt;br/&gt;greatest engagement, measured by proximity to robot, number of
interactions (physical &amp; eye&lt;br/&gt;contact), duration of interactions
and number of vocalizations. The expected results are a&lt;br/&gt;validated
design of an affordable consumer-ready robot that addresses the specific needs
of&lt;br/&gt;children with ASD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project involve both the direct impact
of&lt;br/&gt;providing a beneficial new therapy tool for children with ASD as
well as providing a platform&lt;br/&gt;from which additional research can be
launched. The CDC currently estimates that 1 in 88&lt;br/&gt;children in the
United States will be diagnosed with an Autism Spectrum Disorder and
ASDs&lt;br/&gt;are reported to occur in all racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic
groups. Early intervention can&lt;br/&gt;make a significant difference in the
lives of these children and their families. Tools that allow&lt;br/&gt;children
to practice and reinforce skills learned in formal therapy sessions are strongly
desired&lt;br/&gt;by parents. The goal of this project is to develop a validated
design for a robot to help children&lt;br/&gt;with ASD practice social
referencing skills. By designing both for effectiveness
and&lt;br/&gt;affordability, it will be the first autism robot targeted towards
the home therapy market.&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, the results of this project
will also be beneficial to researchers studying the use of&lt;br/&gt;robots as
autism therapy tools. This robot will serve as an affordable alternative to
expensive&lt;br/&gt;research robots, most of which were not designed
specifically to interact with special needs&lt;br/&gt;children.