* 1215580
* SBIR Phase I:  Bio-inspired Multilayer Therapeutic Contact Lens to Treat Dry Eye Disease
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Karen Havenstrite, Tangible Science, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a contact lens for the treatment of dry eye disease, which affects more
than 6 million people in the United States. The contact lens is designed to be
placed on the surface of the eye to relieve symptoms of pain and irritation
associated with ocular dryness. There is no device currently on the market with
this design and function, and the objectives of this research are to refine and
characterize the lens as well as to test the safety and efficacy of the device
in animal studies. Ultimately, this research will enable efficacy studies in
humans.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this proposed project is the
potential to improve treatment of dry eye disease. The cost of treating dry eye
disease in the United States is $2 billion dollars annually, despite the
relative ineffectiveness of current therapies. Not only will this device improve
the quality of life of millions of people, but it will also validate the use of
our unique material/design for medical devices in general, which may have a much
broader application. This device represents one of very few non-pharmaceutical
therapies for dry eye disease, and, therefore, has the potential to broaden the
thinking of the scientific community with regard to methods of dry eye
treatment.