* 1215856
* Collaborative Research:  Physical properties of the Alpine Fault, New Zealand: Mechanical and hydrological processes in the brittle fault core and surrounding damage zone
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Chris Marone, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2016
* USD 316,000.00

Scientists have long known that most large, destructive earthquakes are caused
by the slow buildup of stress on fault zones at the boundaries between tectonic
plates. Friction between the two sides of the fault holds it together and
prevents slip while stress accumulates until the point of failure, precipitating
the earthquake itself. However, the nature of how and why that failure occurs
and grows into a large earthquake remains poorly understood. It is thought to be
governed in large part by the materials that make up the fault zone ? the rock
that is fractured and broken down by past earthquakes and the water that fills
pore spaces in that rock, as well as the tectonic stresses at the depth of
earthquakes. To further our understanding of how faults work, an international
team of scientists is conducting a 3-stage project to drill into New Zealand?s
Alpine Fault, a major fault zone similar to the San Andreas of California, with
a history of magnitude 7-8 earthquakes, and future potential for more. Drilling
into the Alpine Fault will provide fresh samples from the fault zone unaltered
by the negative effects of earth-surface weathering and erosion. The first
stage, already drilled to 150 meters depth, obtained core samples across the
fault zone and made measurements of the rock properties made by instruments
placed down the holes. In the next stage, one or more holes will be drilled to
more than 1500 meters depth, and is intended to sample across the fault at
earthquake depths. As part of that effort, the University of Wisconsin-Madison
and Penn State University partnership will measure a range of properties of
these samples, including their strength (friction-based resistance to slip and
the capacity to store up strain without breaking), permeability to pore water
movement, and the speeds with which they transmit two types of seismic waves (a
widely used way to measure rock properties remotely) under realistic conditions.

Furthermore, instruments lowered down the drill holes will be used to measure
similar and additional properties at a broader scale. Using the results of
sample and the drillhole data, the investigators will evaluate competing
hypotheses for the strength of fault zones and the conditions therein, helping
discover what happens inside faults between earthquakes, and how they may change
leading up to future seismic activity. They will also evaluate the nature of
groundwater flow (or lack thereof) in and around the fault zone at depth,
important for understanding the pressure and temperature conditions during fault
activity. This research, when combined with the complementary work by New
Zealand-based collaborators and others, will yield a new understanding of how
fault zones work and why earthquakes happen in the ways that they do. It will
likely also yield new clues to understanding the future earthquake hazard on the
Alpine Fault in particular and on major faults in general.