* 1215431
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of microalgae for commercial hydrogen biofuels
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Svetlana Oard, BHO Technology, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2013
* USD 146,030.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will employ an
innovative approach to metabolically engineer algae and enable low-cost, carbon-
free hydrogen production at medium to large scale. One approach to achieving
high hydrogen production involves the use of green algae, which produce hydrogen
by using sunlight to split water. Hydrogen production in green algae is based on
the existence of highly active hydrogen-forming enzymes, hydrogenases.
Accordingly, the processes for hydrogen production in algae have utilized
mechanisms to prevent the generation of oxygen, which inactivates hydrogenase.
However, these processes, based on anaerobic sulfur-deprivation in light have
resulted in low yields. The investigation herein will assess the feasibility of
applying a novel strategy to direct metabolic flux toward hydrogen production in
the presence of sulfur. During Phase I, chimeric genes encoding a hydrogenase
and maturation proteins will be introduced into the algae genome. Engineered
strains will be evaluated for hydrogenase activity, and hydrogen production
levels under typical sulfur-deprivation and sulfur-containing conditions will be
determined. We anticipate that this innovative strategy will enable abundant
accumulation of hydrogenase in an active form that shifts competition for an
electron donor in favor of hydrogenase to continuously generate hydrogen at high
rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is the impact on our nation's ability to reduce its use of foreign oil
and create many new jobs. This project will expand our fundamental understanding
of the function of hydrogenase and light-powered generation of hydrogen in
algae. The innovation will enable commercial generation of cost-effective,
renewable, and environmentally clean hydrogen. The commercial hydrogen
production currently is burdened by major dependence on electricity and carbon
dioxide emission. The proposed approach, if successful, provides a commercial
process for hydrogen production, which will generate electricity and sequester
carbon dioxide. The abundance of low-cost, renewable hydrogen should expand
hydrogen markets to generate electricity and fuel vehicles. Just 200,000 ha of
algal ponds using improved strains could displace 20% of imported crude oil.
Thus, the project will have great commercial impact by enhancing national energy
security. Moreover, this technology will promote diversification and
sustainability of agricultural production in the U.S. through development of
algae farming, which will not require arable land. Potentially, this technology
will produce the most ecologically clean biofuel theoretically available.
Therefore, this project could have great social impact by decreasing carbon
footprint and promoting economic diversification in rural areas.