* 1215739
* Collaborative Research:  Analysis of AIDA (Aftershock Imaging with Dense Arrays) data from the the 2011 M5.8 Virginia earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* John Hole, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2015
* USD 75,223.00

The August 23, 2011, magnitude 5.8 earthquake in Louisa Co., Virginia, provided
an opportunity to test a novel type of high-density aftershock deployment
utilizing EarthScope Flexible Array instruments. This event had a NE-striking
reverse faulting focal mechanism, a hypocentral depth of 6 km (USGS), and
occurred in a previously recognized seismic region known as the ¡§Central
Virginia Seismic Zone¡¨. Beginning August 27, AIDA deployed 201 stations in
three phases, including lines with a 200-m station spacing above the aftershock
zone and a 60-km long regional profile. The survey was designed to record
wavefields at sufficiently dense spacing to minimize spatial aliasing and lower
the event detection threshold. This use of array methods will allow the location
the aftershocks with high precision and the imaging of geologic structure with
resolution on par with typical controlled-source crustal surveys. Preliminary
work has focused on joint tomography for seismic velocity and hypocenter
locations, synthesizing high resolution seismic reflection (CRP) profiles from
Vertical Seismic Profile (VSP) processing of earthquake records and body wave
and surface wave imaging using ambient noise techniques. In addition, this
unique dataset will allow the investigators to test seismic interferometric
methods for synthesizing virtual seismograph records at the physical location of
the earthquake sources. Preliminary aftershock locations define a best-fitting
plane striking ~25?a and dipping 55?a E, consistent with the moment tensor
solution for the main shock. Initial application of seismic interferometry has
recovered both virtual body waves and surface waves, and VSP to CRP techniques
can be effectively used to produce reflection imagery of structure throughout
the crust. Ongoing work includes locating more of the &gt;1000 events with high
signal-to-noise, event imaging using reverse-time waveform migration, and using
seismic interferometry/CRP stacking to produce high quality images of earth
structure in 3D . The resulting high-resolution subsurface images and aftershock
characterization will not only constrain key geologic relationships at depth for
this important, intraplate hypocentral region but should provide a template any
future ¡§High Definition¡¨ aftershock deployments (e.g. 1000+
channels).&lt;br/&gt;The use of high density arrays the the one that is
prototyped with AIDA represents a major advance in a) our ability to reconstruct
in detail what happens at depth during an earthquake and b) to use the signals
from earthquakes to provide imagery of the surrounding earth volume in
unprecedented detail. Such ¡§high definition¡¨ imaging will greatly aid in
probing/monitoring other important subsurface processes, from volcanism to
hydraulic fracturing for energy and other resources. In both cases, these
techniques represent an important new tool in detecting, understanding and
mitigating natural hazards. These results should have a major impact on how we
study earthquakes and related tectonic phenomena.