* 1215176
* SBIR Phase I:  Extraordinary Electroconductance Label-Free Breast Cancer Arrays
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Renee Carder, PixelEXX Systems, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project develops a
prototype gene expression platform for accurate cancer diagnosis, prognosis and
treatment monitoring. Current platforms have many limitations, including slow,
complex, labor-intensive processes; and suboptimal sensitivity. The proposed
device will 1) provide similar or better net sensitivity compared to existing
multivariate gene-expression assays, 2) is free of labels; 3) offers the
flexibility of much smaller array elements; and, 4) is manufactured
inexpensively compared to competing technologies. The sensor uses novel,
proprietary, metal-semiconductor hybrid structures that exhibit strongly
enhanced sensitivity to external electric fields. The sensor device geometry has
been shown to have much higher sensitivity and lower noise than other electric
field detection devices that are deployable as array-based sensors. The
objectives are to develop the essential components of an initial prototype that
is able to image, with high spatial resolution, individual ionic events
associated with nucleic acid base pairing; test the dynamic range and limits of
detection in a complex background, where the target sequence is present within a
relatively large excess of non-complimentary nucleic acids; and, validate and
benchmark a 12-pixel array for breast cancer and reference genes in normal human
breast and breast cancer ribonucleic acid. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project centers on the global
deoxyribonucleic acid and gene chip market, which is expected to reach $1,425.2
million by 2015. Gene expression products have diverse usage in areas such as
clinical diagnostics, biodefense, and agriculture. Cancer diagnosis and
treatment application is expected to dominant the applications market through
2015; accounting for about a 24% market share. The proposed technology excels
over current gene expression assays, offering significant improvements in
sensitivity, specificity and an array format, with the promise of driving
feature sizes into the nanoscale regime - all in a label-free format. The label-
free format eliminates time-consuming chemical labeling; the need for high power
excitation sources as well as sophisticated scanning instrumentation; and,
potential biasing of results. With significantly improved sensitivity and
specificity smaller samples can be used and/or less processing will be required;
and, some of the more interesting biomarkers with low copy number can be
reliably used. The potential advantages of achieving such ultra-high resolution
without compromising sensitivity and specificity include the ability to
consolidate several predictive cancer-related biomarkers into a single
diagnostic test. Because the proposed sensors are produced using traditional
methods, they can be economically produced as high-density arrays.