* 1215308
* SBIR Phase I:  Extracting Valuable Information Automatically from Objects with Surface Impressions via Photographs and Interactive Digital Surrogates
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Donald Sanders, Learning Sites, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will create new
software for automatically creating textured, 3D digital models of cuneiform
inscriptions from multiple digital photographs and for automatically performing
geometric character recognition on the impressions in order to derive meaning.
The proposed system (more accurate, faster, and a more effective detective tool
than any current alternative) comprises: (1) reconstructing detailed models of
cuneiform tablets from multiple photographs; (2) isolating individual cuneiform
strokes and distinguishing meaningful characters from background cracks; (3)
classifying, against lexicons, the characters based on geometric
characteristics; and (4) performing preliminary automatic word identification
leading to translation of the texts. Ancient written records (Mesopotamian
cuneiform tablets; Egyptian hieroglyphic carvings; or Roman political
inscriptions) hold the keys to understanding our cultural heritage, but go
unread because there are too many of them, their translation takes too long, and
there are too few linguistic experts. Other arenas have objects with surface
impressions (tire tracks, bootprints, and fossil remains) that must be measured
for analysis and compared to like objects for identification, but such results
cannot be efficiently obtained with current methods. The time lost, the
inaccuracies created, and the potentially false interpretations presented can
have dire consequences.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project are the significant
benefits afforded to the target institutions allowing creation of accurate and
precise 3D digital models of inscribed objects in their collections without the
need for special equipment or experts. Since camera calibration, tripods, or
special lighting are unnecessary, the process can be completed quickly, easily,
and cheaply. Beyond the insight into the past that will inevitably accrue by
using the proposed system, economic and technological advantages will motivate
its commercial adoption. Museums, archaeological sites, and other collections
need no longer pay for expensive scanners and their maintenance and upgrades,
nor hire specialists to run the equipment and massage the results. Scholars need
not travel to see inscriptions firsthand, still the traditional method of
studying ancient written documents (photographs or drawings are insufficient for
understanding the texts). The proposed system thus accomplishes many tasks the
tools for which are unavailable; and it goes far beyond what has been attempted
to aid the study and dissemination of information about ancient texts (e.g.,
Cuneiform Digital Library Initiative; Digital Hammurabi Project; Persepolis
Foundation Archive). The software has extensive applications, such as in
geology, forensics, and crime investigation, which we will explore in Phase II.