* 1215942
* Magnetically Frustrated Materials via Complex Oxide Heteroepitaxy
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Yuri Suzuki, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2015
* USD 360,000.00

Technical: This project is on spinel structure oxide thin film heterostructures
and seeks to develop new materials through the stabilization of magnetic ground
states in geometrically frustrated complex magnetic oxides via epitaxial strain.
These magnetically frustrated materials do not exhibit a unique ground state but
have a large degeneracy of ground states that gives rise to spin, charge or
orbital frustration. These frustrated systems are particularly susceptible to
small perturbations of parameters such as magnetic or electric field and strain.
By synthesizing atomically precise, coherently strained epitaxial films of these
materials, the research project aims to achieving novel magnetic ground states,
potentially opening up a new class of materials of fundamental and technological
interest. Understanding how changes in lattice symmetry induced by coherent
epitaxial strain in geometrically frustrated systems induce the stabilization of
magnetic ground states is at the core of this research
project.&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical: The project addresses basic research issues in
a topical area of materials science. Success of the research can have
significant impacts on not only oxide materials systems but also more broadly
materials science and device physics. The educational goals of the project will
be accomplished through the development of educational and training
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students in an interdisciplinary
environment and through apprenticeships and modular materials science curricular
program for high school students. An internship program with a local high school
has been established by the PI several years ago and will continue to introduce
high school students to materials, engineering and research.