* 1215987
* Tractability of High Dimensional Problems for Quantum and Classical Computers
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Joseph Traub, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 299,861.00

The continuation of the study of algorithms and complexity for the solution of
high dimensional continuous problems is proposed.  Examples of such problems
occur in quantum chemistry, molecular dynamics, and condensed matter
physics. Typical continuous mathematical formulations include partial
differential equations, continuous optimization, high dimensional integration,
and path integration. Dimension measures the size of a continuous problem. Just
as in the rest of complexity studies the PIs are interested in solving large
problems; that is, problems of high dimension. One cannot enter a function of
real or complex variables into a digital computer. One has to discretize it to
obtain the computer input. Thus the computer has only partial information about
the continuous mathematical input. This permits adversary arguments at the
information level pioneered by the PIs and their colleagues which lead to lower
bounds on the problem complexity. This may be contrasted with discrete problems
where the information is complete, there are often no adversary arguments at the
information level, and one has to be content with conjectures that the
complexity hierarchy does not collapse. Because of the importance of
information-based arguments the study of the complexity of continuous problems
is called information-based complexity (IBC).

A central issue is to determine for which settings and spaces a problem is
tractable; that is, its complexity is not exponential.  There is a huge
literature on the computational complexity of d-dimensional problems.  Most of
these papers and books obtain results which are sharp with respect to 1/E, where
E is the error threshold, but have unknown dependence on d. But to determine if
a problem is tractable one needs to know the dependence on both 1/E and d. This
requires new proof techniques.  This is the subject of the monograph
"Tractability of Multivariate Problems" by E. Novak and H. Wozniakowski. Two
volumes of the monograph have been published in 2008 and 2010. These two volumes
include 91 open questions. Research will be devoted to trying to answer some of
these open questions.