* 1215885
* Symposium:   Growing the Next Generation in Plant Genomics, A Symposium to be held at Botany 2012; 7-11 July; Columbus, Ohio
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2012,11/30/2013
* Ashley Egan, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 11/30/2013
* USD 7,462.00

PI: Ashley Egan (East Carolina University)

Next generation sequencing techniques are becoming mainstream in life sciences
research, providing new avenues for addressing novel and important questions.
Only now, however, are the ramifications of these technological advances being
seen for botanical science. This award will provide partial support of a
symposium entitled "Growing the Next Generation in Plant Genomics", which will
be held as part of the Botany 2012 Meeting at the Greater Columbus Convention
Center in Columbus, Ohio, 7-11 July, 2012. This annual conference is spearheaded
by the Botanical Society of America but also includes participation by a number
of other societies including the American Bryological and Lichenological
Society, the American Fern Society, the American Society of Plant Taxonomists,
and the Canadian Botanical Association/L'Association Canadienne de Botanique.
This symposium will bring together leading scientists to share research in which
they have employed next generation sequencing methods and discuss how these
techniques have opened up their research to new ideas and trajectories. The
symposium will provide attendees with examples of how next generation sequencing
methods can be used to address questions in plant biology. As such, the meeting
will provide opportunities for students and young investigators to interact with
leading scientists in the field, see how next generation sequencing methods can
be applied to botanical questions, and establish collaborations to further
learning and research development. NSF funding will be used to broaden
participation of young scientists, particularly women and under-represented
minorities, as speakers in the symposium.