* 1215910
* SEES Fellows: Socio-technical and Environmental Pathways to Sustainable Food and Climate Futures
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Joshua Elliott, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2016
* USD 505,440.00

This interdisciplinary project will leverage high-performance computing to
assess key challenges of climate change vulnerabilities, impacts, and
adaptations by applying an economic modeling and analysis framework using
biophysical and statistical models. The overall goal is an improved
understanding of the interactions of climate and socio-economic changes on: 1)
the supply and demand of agricultural commodities, 2) local land-use and land-
cover, and 3) regional and global food sustainability. A number of research
efforts and technologies are anticipated, including a new framework for
massively parallel simulations of impact models, a methodology and software
suite for scaling the resulting measures to arbitrary spatial scales, a set of
validation experiments, and a set of scenario based adaptation experiments to
evaluate socio-technical and environmental pathways to sustainable food and
climate futures. The project will use a new high-performance information
technology system (Framework to Advance Climate, Economic, and Impact
Investigations with Information Technology, or FACE-IT) that is designed to
enable, record, share, and distribute data products and software between
different communities. The project will also develop new tools for delivering
information directly to decision-makers operating at various scales from
international policy-makers to local watershed managers and agricultural
development authorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary way in which humans
interact with their physical environment is through the possession and
management of land. Accommodating increasing demands for agricultural
commodities, forest products, mining resources, and urban sprawl with limited
nutrient reserves, water resources, soil depletion, and changing climates is a
constant struggle. The primary drivers of changes in land use continue to be
economic, social, and technological and the primary decision makers continue to
be individual farmers, corporations, and developers operating in a highly
complex socio-technical, political, and environmental landscape. In the coming
decades, policymakers and stakeholders at every scale and level of government
and industry will be required to make multi-billion dollar decisions around
agricultural production and food supply. Models developed in this project will
be applied to various regional, national, and global sustainability and climate
vulnerabilities, impacts, and adaptations assessments. The information products
and interactive web applications on the impacts of climate change, growing
populations, and changing diets and demographics on global food sustainability
will better enable science-based decisions related to these critical
sustainability issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also make
information about food sustainability available to the general public, and will
engage high school students and teachers in sustainability science activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported under the NSF Science,
Engineering and Education for Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program,
with the goal of helping to enable discoveries needed to inform actions that
lead to environmental, energy and societal sustainability while creating the
necessary workforce to address these challenges. With SEES Fellows support, this
project will enable a promising early career researcher to establish themselves
in an independent research career related to sustainability.