* 1215094
* SBIR Phase I:  'Smart Filter' for Fast Chemical Reaction Clean-up
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Bo Xu, Rigid Solutions LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2013
* USD 179,997.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project entitled ?Smart Filter
for Fast Chemical Reaction Clean-up? tackles an important problem in the
manufacturing industry, namely, the labor-intensive nature of chemical synthesis
and its hazardous conditions, which, unfortunately, have not changed much in the
last 60 years. Our novel concept of ?rigid solvent extraction? speeds up
reaction clean-up, by elimination of the liquid-liquid extraction step. The idea
is very simple: reactions are conducted in the usual way and quenched with a
suitable aqueous solution; however, instead of using relatively large amounts of
organic solvent to extract the aqueous/organic mixture, we use a solid supported
organic liquid phase (that we call a ?rigid solvent? phase). ?Rigid solvents?
are easier to handle than liquids. Our clean-up cartridge design is also simple,
it is a cartridge filled with highly porous rigid organic polymer. The reaction
cleanup cartridges address the technology gap that exists between the deployment
of high throughput synthesis and the analytical advances in chromatography
columns. Because the workup step that lies between the synthesis of a compound
and its final purification is laborious our technology will significantly close
that gap providing an efficient and safe handling alternative of potentially
hazardous chemistries.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies in its potential to
reduce costs and improve safety in chemical operations during the discovery
stage of most chemical manufacturing processes, including pharmaceuticals,
agrochemicals, or advanced materials, a large number of compounds need to be
prepared in amounts that range from mg to g or kg. An estimated 10,000 compounds
are tested on average during drug discovery and preclinical stages in order to
come up with one successful drug. And the individual synthesis of these
thousands of compounds require between five to ten synthetic steps each from
commercially available raw materials. The sheer number of compounds that need to
be synthesized constitutes a nightmare scenario for medicinal chemists. The
labor intensive nature of reaction clean-ups and rising labor costs have caused
the outsourcing of synthetic chemistry work, traditionally conducted in the US,
to other developing countries that have cheaper labor, less stringent worker
protection, and lax waste disposal regulations. Our company ? Rigid Solutions,
aims to develop an automation product that can make synthetic chemistry less
labor-intensive and offer better protection for workers from hazardous
substances, thereby reducing labor costs, synthesis time, and waste, and helping
to keep chemical synthesis jobs in the US.