* 1215290
* SBIR Phase I:  Real-Time Rehab to Improve Gait Symmetry in Amputees
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Stacy Bamberg, VERISTRIDE, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 03/31/2013
* USD 148,424.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to
demonstrate the technical and commercial viability of wireless instrumentation
and smartphone technology used for feedback to amputees about their real-time
performance for ubiquitous rehabilitation in situ. The goal is to improve the
mobility and quality of life of persons with ambulatory disabilities (5.2% of
U.S. adults ages 18-64). This research will provide a new paradigm for
rehabilitation that occurs throughout the patient's daily life with reduced
reliance on a therapist. The intellectual merit of the proposed research lies in
the opportunity to profoundly transform the field of rehabilitation and to
advance healthcare by enabling a fundamental shift toward low cost, ubiquitous
rehabilitation that can be used away from the clinic. The technology seeks to
provide feedback anytime and anywhere to enhance the proprioception - the sense
of where limbs are in space- that has been impaired by disability. Active cueing
(in contrast to current reactive cueing methods) will provide a more
proprioceptive feedback that will better enable persons with amputations due to
systemic complications (e.g. diabetes) to respond and make changes in their
gait.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes the focus on
mobility limitations in persons with lower-limb amputations, which affect twice
as many minorities as Caucasians. The commercial potential is vast: with
diabetes as the major contributor to amputations, the number of amputees is
forecast to triple to 3.6 million by 2050. In addition, the knowledge gained can
be expanded to impact individuals with a wide variety of mobility limitations,
e.g. stroke, Parkinson's disease, multiple sclerosis, cerebral palsy, etc. The
orthopedic market- 773,000 total hip/knee replacements performed annually in
U.S.- is also commercially relevant, as patients must effect an asymmetric gait
following fracture repair or joint replacement to reduce weight-bearing on the
healing limb. Another significant group are athletes seeking to improve
performance or recover from injury through precision gait analysis and real-time
feedback. In this Phase I proposal, this research will quantify the effect of
this research by enabling persons with amputations due to diabetes to use
individualized proprioceptive feedback and to participate in the design of the
personalized feedback methods. This work will enable a wealth of information
collected away from the clinic, including a way to investigate how and whether
patients follow treatment protocols.