* 1215769
* Improving Resolution of Finite Fault Inversions with Increasing Bandwidth
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Ralph Archuleta, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2017
* USD 359,859.00

Because the process of an earthquake cannot be directly observed, we must infer
the process by determining source parameters that describe the relative motion
between the two sides of the fault, i.e., the kinematics of the rupture. At each
point on the fault the source parameters are: 1) the slip-rate time function,
characterized by a functional form and generally specified with a few
parameters, 2) the rupture time?a time relative to the origin time of the
earthquake at which the slip rate function starts and 3) the final slip, a
vector with one component along strike and the other up-dip (i.e., perpendicular
to the strike component), that gives the relative displacement of one side of
the fault with respect to the other. The investigators assume a priori the
velocity and attenuation structure of the medium in which the fault is embedded
as well as the geometry of the fault and the hypocenter of the earthquake. With
this information we can compute the ground motion at any point in space, in
particular, at the locations of the seismic and geodetic instruments that
recorded the earthquake. To find the source parameters they will solve an
inversion problem in which they continuously adjust the source parameters. With
each adjustment they will compute ground motion time histories (synthetics) at
the recording sites and compare the synthetic time histories with the recorded
time histories. At the same time they compute the static displacements for
comparison with the geodetic measurements, GPS or InSAR. Using a predetermined
cost function that measures the misfit between data and synthetics, we continue
the procedure of adjusting the source parameters until we have an acceptable
level of misfit.

Until relatively recently the emphasis has been on reducing the misfit between
the data and the synthetics. However, that is now being recognized as not the
issue because any number of different kinematic descriptions can fit the data.
The number of free parameters (i.e., source parameters) is often far greater
than the number of independent data making it possible to find nearly perfect
agreement between synthetics and data. This raises two questions to be addressed
in the proposal: 1) Is there additional data, not yet used, to constrain the
source parameters? 2) Rather than measure the misfit between synthetics and
data, how can we determine the difference between models? That is, how can we
decide if one source description is better than another?



An earthquake is one of the most fundamental phenomena in the natural world. How
two massive blocks of earth move past one another in a matter of seconds, tens
of seconds, perhaps a few hundred seconds for the very largest earthquakes
(e.g., 2004 Sumatra; 2010 Maule, Chile; 2011 Tohoku, Japan) releasing strain
energy accumulated over hundreds or thousands of years is a basic scientific
question. It is also a societally relevant question. The shaking and subsidiary
effects (e.g., tsunamis, landslides) created by an earthquake critically affect
the built environment. In order to prepare for future earthquakes it is
essential to understand the process of earthquake ruptures. By using the data
from an earthquake we can infer some of its behavior. By studying many different
earthquakes we can understand what features are common among earthquakes. We can
also understand what features of an earthquake contribute most to the strongest
shaking and to the subsidiary effects.

Because we cannot directly observe an earthquake, we invert the seismic,
geodetic and geologic data created by the earthquake to infer the relative
motion between the two blocks of earth. The kinematic source parameters describe
how the rupture evolves in time and space, i.e., the time when a point on the
fault starts to slip (controlled by the rupture velocity) and the growth of the
slip at each point on the fault (controlled by the stress relaxation of the
medium). Conceptually the inverting the data is similar to finding the
parameters (slope and intercept) of the best fitting line to a group of points.
The difficulty with inverting for the source parameters of an earthquake is that
the number of parameters being sought exceeds the number of independent data.
Thus multiple, best-fitting earthquake models may be found. The problem is
assessing how different one model is with respect to other models that fit the
data equally well and what features different models have in common. In both
respects the information can guide simulations of earthquakes for estimating the
range of ground motions from future earthquakes.