* 1215076
* SBIR Phase I:  Cultivation of Duckweed for Bioremediation of Delaware and Chesapeake Watersheds, and for the Sustainable Production of a Renewable Chemical Feedstock
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Shawn Jones, ELCRITON, INC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2013
* USD 174,707.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a
duckweed system for poultry waste bioremediation and use of the duckweed as a
renewable feedstock for Clostridium acetobutylicum (Cac) biofuel production.
Runoff from agricultural, municipal and other sources leads to eutrophication of
the Chesapeake and other bays, with approximately half of the loads from
agriculture, particularly poultry production on Delmarva. This work will provide
an alternative nutrient reduction strategy, while simultaneously providing
feedstock for clostridial biobutanol fermentation and poultry feed supplements.
Current biobutanol work relies on corn hydrolysate, and duckweed is an
attractive renewable feedstock. Life cycle assessments of environmental impacts
indicate the ideal systems combine strategic placements of small/medium-scale
wastewater remediation with biofuel feedstock production.

The broader/commercial impacts of this research are the development of poultry
waste bioremedation strategies coupled with the development of that biomass for
renewable chemical and biofuel technologies. The goal of this Phase I project is
to maximize manure remediation while producing biomass for Cac biobutanol
fermentation. Depletion of non-renewable energy sources, leading to high oil
prices, highlights the importance of economically-viable technologies for
production of biofuels from renewables. Renewable biomasses should be carbon-
neutral and be efficiently used in biorefinery production. The economic
potential of biorefineries is hindered by cellulosic materials that compete with
food supply economics (i.e. corn). The commercial potential of a biomass from a
nuisance plant, duckweed, combined with the use of clostridia biobutanol
production is exceptional, but remains unexplored. This project aims to
demonstrate this potential.