* 1215896
* SEES Fellows: A heads up view of aquatic ecosystem sustainability - understanding the terrestrial landscape scale impacts of urbanization on aquatic biota
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Robert Smith, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2016
* USD 518,933.00

This project will assess the role of landscapes in maintaining and protecting
aquatic resources while allowing for land development. The project will examine
how patterns of stream fish and insect community composition relate to
watershed-scale versus landscape-scale land-use patterns. Information about the
biology of stream fish and insects (e.g., species life history traits, dispersal
abilities, tolerances to poor habitat and pollution, etc.) will be used to
develop metrics describing characteristics of urbanized landscapes that may lead
to mortality or reduced fitness of stream organisms. This information will be
used, together with existing community data and Geographic Information System
(GIS) analysis of land-use patterns, to examine how land-use development
scenarios impact the suitability of land acquisition strategies for conserving
stream fish and insect communities. Incorporating land-use development models,
and working in partnership with local government agencies, a decision-support
system (DSS) will be developed to aid agency personnel in their efforts to
acquire land for conservation purposes.

Sustainable land-use development must take into account the trade-offs between
conserving the function and diversity of stream ecosystems and promoting socio-
economic benefits for residents. A balance among environmental, social, and
economic goals is necessary to sustain healthy stream ecosystems in coupled
human-environment systems. Research on the effects of land-use change on stream
communities has typically focused on human activities at the watershed scale.
This project will expand such research to include broader, landscape-scale
perspectives. Results of the research will enable local government agency
personnel to make more informed decisions about land acquisition for the
purposes of habitat protection and conservation of biodiversity. This project
will include participation of undergraduate students in the research and an
outreach program to residents of urban areas communicating the ecology and
conservation importance of stream fishes and insects.

This project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. With SEES Fellows support, this project will enable a
promising early career researcher to establish themselves in an independent
research career related to sustainability.