* 1215292
* SBIR Phase I:  Expanding the Sustainability of Bio-plastics and PLA by Postponing End-of-Life through the use of Reactive Extrusion Chemistries
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Adam Pawloski, Interfacial Solutions LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Phase I project proposes to address the issue of
end-of-life management of a family of bioplastics, specifically polylactic acid
(PLA). The majority of products today manufactured from PLA are land filled or
incinerated once reaching their end of life. Although PLA is a compostable
bioplastic, there is a significant lack of industrial composting infrastructure
in the United States. Furthermore, PLA is not typically recycled due to a
significant loss of mechanical properties during reprocessing of the plastic. In
the proposed work, a reactive extrusion process will be used to recycle waste
PLA to produce hyperbranched PLA polymers. Hyperbranched PLA exhibits mechanical
properties that are improved relative to virgin, linear PLA. The reactive
extrusion process to impart hyperbranching is cost-effective and scalable,
enabling a viable business to sell recycled PLA and license the process
technology to other processors. The proposed research will demonstrate how both
post-industrial and post-consumer waste PLA can be converted into hyperbranched
PLAs having improved mechanical properties. This process will significantly
enhance the value of scrap PLA, by converting a waste stream into a
product.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is the development and commercialization of an important, novel, and
cost effective way to meet the pressing need of making plastics more sustainable
by adding value to the most broadly used bioplastic, PLA. Creating improved
mechanical property PLAs from a lower cost feedstock will ultimately expand
commercial applications. The current U.S. market for PLA is approximately 300
million pounds and growing at approximately 15% annually. Commercial plastic
processors that use PLA will be able to replace or supplement use of virgin PLA
with recycled PLA. Additionally, by providing a commercially-attractive method
to recycle PLA, this new process will effectively incentivize recyclers to
remove PLA from their waste sources. The only current competitive technology for
recycling PLA is to use existing polymer recycling processes without
hyperbranching, but these methods are unable to provide recycled materials with
useful properties. Other options for reclaiming PLA include composting and
chemical recycling back to lactic acid. Both of these technologies offer a
reasonable way to dispose of PLA at its end of life; however, only recycling of
PLA by hyperbranching offers a way to significantly extend the end of life.