* 1215886
* SEES Fellows: Designing and Testing Quantitative and Spatial Measurements of Socio-Cultural Values for Sustainability Planning
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Kelly Biedenweg, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Leah Nichols
* 06/30/2014
* USD 351,539.00

This study will develop metrics and measurement tools for quantitatively and
spatially capturing data on social and cultural human values that can be used to
address the human dimensions of sustainability in relation to environmental
planning, urban development, and other land-use decision-making contexts. The
research will include 1) Web-based geospatial values mapping, 2) surveys and
workshops to collect data using value trees and relative preference, and 3)
comparisons of how outcomes from non-monetary measures compare to those obtained
with standard economic methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build
linkages among several organizations working to better understand how human
dimensions fit into sustainable development and ecological restoration in the
Pacific Northwest. The collaborations will include regional and federal land
management agencies, academic institutions, and non-profit research and
conservation organizations. The project will provide a service to the community
by identifying ways in which social and cultural values can be incorporated into
decision-making, and by emphasizing the inclusion of all value types, including
traditionally underrepresented groups such as Tribal Nations, immigrant
populations, and rural communities. The project will integrate research and
education by offering research and mentoring opportunities to graduate and
undergraduate students, and by sharing research methods and results through
community forums, regional media, workshops, and publications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported under the NSF Science,
Engineering and Education for Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program,
with the goal of helping to enable discoveries needed to inform actions that
lead to environmental, energy and societal sustainability while creating the
necessary workforce to address these challenges. With SEES Fellows support, this
project will enable a promising early career researcher to establish themselves
in an independent research career related to sustainability.