* 1215251
* SBIR Phase I:  Low Cost High Performance Fully Integrated Into MATLAB And Accessible FDTD Simulator of Wireless Body Area Networks (BANs)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Sergey Makarov, Neva Electromagnetics LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,462.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a low-cost,
high-performance, user-accessible Finite Difference Time Domain (FDTD) based
simulator of wireless Body Area Networks (BANs), written entirely with the
MATLAB software package. The simulator, with real-time visualization of
electromagnetic fields in and around the human body, is to be used for training
of the next generation of biomedical and electrical engineers, and medical
students. The proposed software will give students an intuitive feel for
electromagnetic wave propagation, wave scattering and absorption by material
structures, and the effects on signal integrity due to human body interference.
It is also intended for performing applied and fundamental research in the area
of wireless healthcare. The simulator supports mathematical foundations and
software implementations of the FDTD method, and modern broadband/ultrawideband
communication and localization techniques. It will be developed by Neva
Electromagnetics, LLC (Neva EM) in collaboration with Worcester Polytechnic
Institute, Michigan State University, and Harvard University Medical School. The
key feature of the simulator is a new model for small coil antennas, which are
commonly used in wireless healthcare. This model is based on the FDTD Dipole
Moment (DM) method, a simple and powerful technique recently developed at
Pennsylvania State University.

The broader impact and the commercial potential of this project is in transition
of the BAN electromagnetic modeling tools to a much wider audience of scholars
and engineers via the accessible and highly visual MATLAB platform. In the past
decade, wireless sensor networks have emerged as an industry showing great
potential to stimulate the US economy. The most promising area of economic
growth in sensor networks today may be the wireless healthcare industry,
including wireless BANs. The developed product targets Received Signal Strength
(RSS), Time of Arrival (TOA), and Direction of Arrival (DOA) estimations for
basic small antenna sources (small coil and dipole antennas) in BANs, various
pulse forms, and different antenna topologies. The product is capable of
modeling multi-sensor networks and body-scanning antenna arrays, which are
subject to mutual coupling between individual radiators. A large library of
high-resolution, realistic body meshes exported into MATLAB is included. Due to
its flexibility, the product also targets potential secondary commercial and
educational markets: body-worn antennas, ground-penetrating radar, remote
sensing applications, and underwater wireless links. Open-source I/O and
parameter identification MATLAB codes make it possible to customize the
simulator to address the unique needs of potential customers from academia,
industry, and government.