* 1215845
* SEES Fellows: Enabling Energy Efficiency through Integrated Utilities - Technical and Social Challenges to Forward Osmosis Microbial Bioreactors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,10/31/2016
* Meagan Mauter, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2016
* USD 496,833.00

An essential feature of sustainable urban design is the maximization of resource
productivity through efficient exchange of "waste" streams. Forward Osmosis
Microbial Bioreactors (FOMBRs) are a novel water reuse technology with the
potential to alleviate the growing tension between energy and water resources.
Rather than decoupling energy from water, FOMBRs integrate the processes of
energy production, wastewater treatment, and drinking water purification in a
symbiotic exchange of material byproducts. This project will probe the technical
and social challenges to FOMBR implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
engineering/materials-related effort will leverage advances in materials science
to alleviate membrane biofouling in Forward Osmosis systems for wastewater
reuse. Grafted polymeric coatings with different physicochemical properties will
be compared, and the interaction between membranes and developing biofilms will
be characterized. Feasibility tests and analysis of membrane performance will be
carried out on a FOMBR pilot treating municipal sewage from the Ben-Gurion
University campus in Israel. The project will also address the urban
infrastructure, economic, regulatory, and sociopolitical barriers to FOMBR
implementation in a three-tiered approach. Tier one will employ industrial
ecology and economic models, including geoinformatics, cost-benefit analysis,
social network analysis, and system dynamics, to identify policies that
incentivize byproduct transfer among utilities. Tier two integrates sub-models
into a generically descriptive system dynamics model and identifies policy
deployment scenarios to accelerate FOMBR implementation. Tier three applies
systems research in an urban case study to evaluate policy validity under
discrete conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported under the
NSF Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows)
program, with the goal of helping to enable discoveries needed to inform actions
that lead to environmental, energy and societal sustainability while creating
the necessary workforce to address these challenges. With SEES Fellows support,
this project will enable a promising early career researcher to establish
themselves in an independent research career related to sustainability.