* 1215712
* Collaborative Research:  Particulate Nitrate Photolysis as a Daytime Nitrous Acid Source and a Reactive Nitrogen Recycling Pathway in the Troposphere
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Jochen Stutz, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2016
* USD 276,640.00

This project will investigate the hypothesis that photolysis of particulate
nitrate in aerosol particles, and to a lesser extent nitrogen dioxide conversion
on organic aerosols, are major daytime sources of nitrous acid (HONO) under low
nitrogen oxide conditions in the troposphere above the surface boundary layer.
Since HONO is readily photolyzed to hydroxyl radical (OH) and nitric oxide, it
is further hypothesized that photolysis of particulate nitrate (pNO3) in aerosol
particles represents an important pathway to recycle nitric acid/nitrate back to
photochemically reactive nitrogen oxides in the troposphere. A series of
research activities will be undertaken involving field measurements, laboratory
experiments and modeling. Specifically:

* Measurements will be made during flights of the NSF/National Center for
Atmospheric Research C-130 research aircraft to establish HONO concentration
distributions in background continental and oceanic air masses over the
southeastern U.S and adjacent coastal waters and to establish relationships
between the daytime HONO production and other physical and chemical parameters,
including pNO3, particulate organic matter, nitrogen dioxide, ozone, aerosol
particle surface area, and solar radiation.

* Aerosol samples collected from the C-130 will be used in laboratory
experiments to determine the HONO production rate from the photolysis of aerosol
pNO3 on filters.

* Model calculations will be done based on the results of field measurements and
laboratory experiments, to examine pNO3 photolysis and nitrogen dioxide uptake
on organic aerosol as a HONO source and investigate if pNO3 photolysis is an
efficient re-recycling pathway for nitric acid/nitrate, and

* To evaluate the role of this processes in tropospheric photochemistry

The research will provide information on the vertical distribution of HONO,
nitric acid, pNO3 and other relevant parameters in the troposphere. If the above
two hypotheses are proven valid, there are significant atmospheric implications:
The troposphere may be more photochemically reactive than generally predicted,
due to the remobilized HONO and nitrogen oxides as well as elevated OH levels,
generally leading to an enhanced production of ozone and secondary particles.
The research may therefore significantly improve our understanding of
tropospheric reactive nitrogen chemistry and atmospheric oxidation capacity on
regional and global scales. The project will also provide research and training
opportunities for postdoctoral researchers, graduate, undergraduate, and high
school students in the field of atmospheric chemistry. The research is also
relevant to the larger question of air quality and global climate change, i.e.,
the results from the research will provide useful information regarding
atmospheric oxidation capacity and thus insights into how atmospheric
pollutants, including some greenhouse gases, are degraded.