* 1215297
* SBIR Phase I:  GigaShield USB Security
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Charles Herder, Gigashield Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will address the
rapidly growing threats to endpoint security from attacks and data loss over
Universal Serial Bus (USB). At present, virtually all USB security measures are
located as software on the host or as a secured physical device. Neither of
these approaches is truly capable of addressing the vulnerability as a whole -
software solutions can be bypassed and a physical peripheral device cannot
secure the data that is transmitted on the bus. The proposed technology is
located external to the host, so it is capable of securing the entire bus. The
specific technical objectives include the construction of a security device
capable of stopping representative attacks in the USB threat model that are not
solved by existing solutions. Such a device would enable a breakthrough
improvement in the field of USB cybersecurity. The anticipated results for
proposed research are to demonstrate that such a device can stop attacks and
data loss without introducing prohibitive overhead.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is understood by recognizing
that it represents a disruptive change to USB security. USB security has become
critical for many organizations, especially healthcare, financial, and defense
institutions. The number of data loss incidents over USB has exploded with the
availability of smart devices and tablets. USB attacks compromised Predator
drones in 2011 using USB drives, and the Military has implemented USB bans,
degrading productivity and increasing costs. Despite USB bans, attacks and data
loss over USB continue due to workarounds and limitations of current solutions.
The proposed technology will provide unprecedented levels of security to USB and
a framework to build future security infrastructure. To stimulate continued
innovations, the platform will be opened to the greater scientific and
commercial community to develop the next generation of algorithms to stop
attacks and data loss over USB. In addition, the device provides unparalleled
access to USB data with a simple interface, so it can enable students and
professionals to rapidly ramp up their understanding of USB without the
currently necessary prerequisites of expensive hardware and proprietary
software. The device can ultimately be integrated into computers, which would
impact the security of every computer.