* 1215977
* RCN:  Evaluating the Impacts of a Changing Ocean on Management and Ecology of Infectious Marine Disease
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2019
* Kevin Lafferty, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 06/30/2019
* USD 572,120.00

Infectious diseases of marine organisms are increasing, and yet processes
governing host infectivity, pathogen virulence and invertebrate-microbial
interactions are poorly understood in marine systems. Impending ocean changes
due to human activities are likely to impact the prevalence and severity of
marine diseases. During an NSF-OCE convened Ecology of Marine Infectious Disease
workshop in February 2011 several ways to increase our understanding of disease
ecology and the impacts of climate change in marine systems were discussed. A
primary recommendation of the workshop was for increased collaboration and
capacity building among marine researchers and related fields. Greater
collaboration across scientific disciplines, including natural, physical and
social sciences (e.g. ecology, microbiology, oceanography, economics,
communications) will greatly advance our understanding of marine disease and how
climate change may impact disease dynamics in the ocean. This project will
increase the ability of scientists and managers to predict and respond to marine
disease outbreaks, ultimately informing decisions on how to enhance the health
and resilience of marine systems. The research into public perceptions of risks
will also suggest ways to apply this research to reducing anthropogenic
stressors associated with marine disease. The Research Coordination Network
(RCN) project described here was developed in response to these recommendations
and the two primary activities are as follows: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshops -
Five annual gatherings of RCN participants will address specific network goals,
including 1) linkages of disease outbreaks with climate change and
acidification, 2) modeling economic consequences of climate and disease
synergisms, 3) advances in marine disease diagnostics, 4) oceanographic factors
important in disease transmission, 5) warming oceans and tropical disease.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research Training Module - Two five-week hands-on research
training modules will provide cross disciplinary training to graduate and
postdoctoral participants in 1) field disease surveys, 2) pathogen culture and
diagnostics, and 3) host immune biochemistry. The students will then apply these
methods to ecological questions about disease dynamics, including the effects of
temperature and pH, in group projects that will be presented at the annual RCN
workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The diversity of participants in this RCN,
including graduate students, junior scientists, and female scientists, supports
the NSF goal of promoting diversity in the STEM fields. The workshops will
involve a broad representation of stakeholders, including underrepresented
groups (e.g. Native Americans in the Puget Sound region), to better understand
and address their concerns. An RCN website will be developed and include access
to publications and presentations that will aid in the broader dissemination of
knowledge garnered from RCN activities. We will also work with the Communication
Partnership for Science and the Sea (COMPASS) as well as other local and
national media outlets to publicize our activities and findings. Information
from the RCN could also align with several emerging federal policy initiatives
related to climate change and oceans such as the National Ocean Policy and the
National Fish, Wildlife, &amp; Plants Climate Adaptation Strategy. Additionally,
we will work with Google Ocean to develop interactive global marine-disease
related maps. The spatially explicit nature of marine disease outbreaks, coupled
with the expertise within our RCN, provides an excellent opportunity to map
these events on this broad and accessible platform.