* 1215454
* NEESR-SG: TSUNAMOS: A Validated, Multi-Scale Tsunami Model for Hybrid Numerical-Experimental Simulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/23/2011,09/30/2012
* Patrick Lynett, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2012
* USD 78,251.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project focus on developing
sufficient scientific knowledge and appropriate engineering tools on which to
base comprehensive tsunami mitigation plans and communicate this information
effectively to decision makers, the emergency planning community and the public.
The detailed objectives of the research program are (1) Improve our
understanding of nearshore, three-dimensional tsunami evolution through an
extensive set of physical experiments using NEES facilities; (2) Create an
extensible framework to provide a systematic structure for validating
computational models with experimental and field data; (3) Refine modeling
capabilities and couple the various components together to create a multi-scale
simulation tool; (4) Develop a sustainable education and outreach program that
educates the general public about tsunamis and appropriate responses to
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The facilities for physical experimentation provided
by the NEES program at Oregon State make it possible to model the behaviors that
have been most problematical for tsunami researchers. Existing numerical models
will be augmented through directed experimental work specifically intended to
fill key gaps in our current understanding of tsunami behavior. Nearshore
evolution of tsunami waves, such as 3D breaking through focusing and bathymetry,
and overland flow across irregular and rough topographies, will be investigated.
Concurrent to the experimental effort, a comprehensive tsunami simulator,
TSUNAMOS, will be developed. The numerical modeling of tsunami hydrodynamics
will utilize a multiple-scale, hybrid modeling methodology. This simulator will
be composed of a number of different numerical models with different application
limitations, interfaced together such that full scale prediction can be
undertaken with overall accuracy equivalent to the state-of-the-art 3D,
turbulent models. An established earthquake engineering software framework,
OpenSees, will be adapted for the tsunami simulator, which will be made
transparent and open-source to facilitate widespread adoption. TSUNAMOS will be
used to guide the experimental beach design and input wave conditions, and will
be coupled with full scale simulations from the Indian Ocean and Papua New
Guinea tsunamis as an example of hybrid numerical-experimental simulation.
TSUNAMOS will be made available through the shared NEES simulation
repository.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To effectively reduce the loss of life and
property due to tsunamis, the population at risk needs to be aware of the hazard
and associated risk and be prepared to respond in case of a tsunami. Here,
researchers from the University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez, a Hispanic serving
institution, and from the University at Hawaii will develop extensive Education,
Outreach, and Training (EOT) programs. Efforts will be focused on developing
greater tsunami awareness on K-12 students, emergency managers and decision
makers. Both Hawaii and Puerto Rico have been carrying out EOT initiatives for
many years, but through this project many of the existing materials will be
updated, placed on line and new resources will be created. Although both Hawaii
and Puerto Rico have a history of tsunami EOT, this will be the first time that
they will have a platform for the systematic exchange of the EOT experiences.
The results of the experiments will be incorporated to the EOT efforts to
reinforce the destructive forces of tsunamis. The proposed EOT plan is closely
aligned with the strategies put forth by NEESinc, including significant
involvement of underrepresented groups in engineering, a workshop plan which
integrates NEES research with outreach and training, and a rapid mechanism to
transfer the tools developed into practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;