* 1215894
* SEES Fellows: An integrated study of the biogeochemical cycling and human health implications of In, Ga, Ge, and Te, elements critical to emerging energy technologies
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* SarahJane White, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2016
* USD 350,179.00

While semiconductor technologies are rapidly advancing, little is known about
the environmental behavior or toxicology of the new metals that will be used in
future semiconductors. Industry needs the ability to make choices early on to
avoid surprises that may threaten the sustainability of new technologies. This
project will address the need for the early assessment of novel industrial
materials in order to prevent future adverse environmental and human health
impacts. The project will result in a better understanding of the industrial and
natural cycling of a suite of important but understudied metals, and their
releases from mining processes. It will also contribute to deeper understanding
of the mining flux of metals that are mined as byproducts, which may in turn
support a framework for identifying and prioritizing emerging metal
contaminants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on the cycling of
indium, gallium, germanium, and tellurium, a suite of metals for which
environmental cycling is poorly understood, toxicity has been suggested, and
industrial use has the potential to increase dramatically due to new uses in
critical energy technologies. These metals exist as trace constituents in zinc
and lead ores, are mined as byproducts of these primary metals, and have cycles
that are influenced strongly by releases from mining and smelting operations.
The occurrence, mobility, and pathways of human exposure of indium, gallium,
germanium, and tellurium resulting from mining activities will be assessed at
the Tar Creek Superfund site, which can serve as a model site due to its history
of lead and zinc mining and present-day sources of mine waste. The metals will
be measured in environmental samples to establish their cycling and primary
exposure pathways to individuals living in the area, and in blood samples from
such individuals to link exposure to body burdens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to technical aspects, this project involves education and outreach
activities including engagement of undergraduate students in research, an
educational exhibit at the annual Cambridge Science Festival, and community
meetings with individuals living near Tar Creek and nearby Native American lands
to communicate results, seek input on continuing studies, and encourage active
participation in sustainability science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability
Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to enable discoveries
needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy and societal
sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address these
challenges. With SEES Fellows support, this project will enable a promising
early career researcher to establish themselves in an independent research
career related to sustainability.