* 1215021
* SBIR Phase I:  A novel economic, efficient, environmentally benign, and sustainable multi-component separation technology based on acoustophoresis
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Jason Dionne, Flodesign Sonics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2012
* USD 148,750.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses on the
development of a novel ultrasonic acoustophoretic separation technology that is
economic, efficient, sustainable, and environmentally benign. Current
technologies, e.g., hydrocyclones, and membrane filtration, suffer from
problems, such as high cost of energy, use of consumables, fouling, and limited
efficiency in separation of micron-sized particles. The proposed large volume
flow rate acoustophoretic separation technology does not generate waste, does
not use consumables, operates at a low cost of energy, and provides efficient
separation for micron-size particles. Ultrasonic standing waves are used to trap
secondary phase particles in a fluid stream, when the acoustic radiation force
exerted on the particles is stronger than the combined effect of fluid drag
force and buoyancy. The action of the acoustic forces on the trapped particles
results in concentration, agglomeration and/or coalescence of particles and
droplets. Heavier than water particles are separated through enhanced
gravitational settling, and lighter particles through enhanced buoyancy. This
project combines experiment and computer modeling to probe the interaction
between piezo-electric transducers and the acoustic field to maximize the
acoustic trapping potential and to provide results to create scalable systems
and economic models of capital and operational expense of the technology.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that the novel
acoustophoretic separation technology provides for a cheaper and lower cost of
energy separation of multi-component phase mixtures. It can function as a drop-
in replacement for conventional separation technology, such as hydrocyclones and
other methods. The societal impact is the development of separation technologies
that are sustainable and environmentally benign since they do not generate any
waste or use consumables. Enhanced extraction of micron-sized oil droplets from
water offer opportunities for enhanced oil recovery and oil-spill cleanup and
reduce the emission of micron-sized oil droplets into the environment. This
project increases the science and technology of acoustic radiation force in
ultrasonic standing waves. A full three-dimensional accounting of the acoustic
radiation force in realistic geometries will be done. Dissemination of this work
will be done by publishing our results in peer reviewed journals and
conferences. This project provides several internships to undergraduate
engineering students, an opportunity to learn and practice engineering,
innovation, and entrepreneurship at a small start-up company. FD Sonics has a
strong history and commitment to integrating undergraduate students in the
development of their technology through offering internships and providing
supervision for senior capstone design projects.