* 1215542
* Combined analysis of surface wave phase and amplitude data using finite frequency kernals: Towards a detailed mode of attenuation in the upper mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* T. Guy Masters, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2015
* USD 188,626.00

Studies of the 3D structure of the Earth usually focus on the speed of wave
propagation within the Earth, but the rate at which seismic energy is attenuated
is also of fundamental interest. Seismic attenuation operates through thermally
activated processes and is therefore a very sensitive indicator of temperature
variations within the mantle. Thus, combining wave speed variations with
attenuation variations gives a powerful tool for learning about the physical
cause of seismic anomalies within the Earth. The fundamental datum for learning
about seismic attenuation is the amplitude of seismic waves, but amplitudes are
affected by so many things, and intrinsic attenuation is not even the strongest
contributor to seismic amplitudes. Consequently, it has proven difficult to get
a reliable picture of seismic attenuation within the Earth. We use extremely
large datasets of the seismic amplitudes (and phase) of fundamental mode surface
waves to address this problem. The approach we use is not new and involves
trying to directly estimate the various factors affecting surface wave
amplitudes. The new feature of this proposal is to use a more robust theoretical
basis for assessing the effects of amplitude anomalies caused by focusing and
defocusing effects on the seismic wavefield -- one of the main contributors to
surface wave amplitude anomalies. Since phase and amplitude effects are
intertwined through the effects of physical dispersion, our research will also
provide improved understanding of the dispersion of seismic waves and
consequently of the elastic structure of the upper mantle. Our datasets are
sufficiently large to also address the effects of anisotropy on surface wave
propagation -- in itself an important topic of investigation.

This research focuses on improving our understanding of seismic wave propagation
with an emphasis on understanding how seismic energy is attenuated in the Earth.
Being able to accurately model the propagation of seismic waves in and on the
Earth has many societal implications. We give three examples. Firstly, there is
the issue of seismic hazard where being able to accurately model seismic
amplitudes after a large earthquake is crucial. Secondly, there is the issue of
being able to monitor a nuclear test ban reliably. Being able to locate and
estimate the size of seismic events of any kind is critical to this endeavor.
Finally, as part of this research, we will also be refining models of the
seismic sources of many thousands of earthquakes. Improving our understanding of
seismic sources is of obvious intrinsic interest to society.