* 1215785
* RUI: Theoretical Investigation of Observables Sensitive to New Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Ken Kiers, Taylor University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2015
* USD 90,000.00

This award funds the research of Professor Ken Kiers at Taylor
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of particle physics is entering a new
era, now that data collection and analysis have begun in earnest at the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC). LHC experimentalists have already made significant
progress in the search for the Higgs boson, and there are suggestive hints that
the Higgs may soon be discovered. In addition to searching for the Higgs, the
LHC has an ambitious program of research aimed at searching for "new physics"
--- that is, physics beyond the Standard Model. The next few years could witness
exciting discoveries as LHC experimentalists map out physics at the TeV energy
scale. Professor Kiers will undertake a theoretical investigation focused on
constructing observables that can be used to search for new physics and to
distinguish among different types of new physics, should physics beyond the
Standard Model be discovered. The research will be broken down into several
projects. One of the main projects involves using the production and decay of
the top quark to search for new physics. A second major project, which will be
undertaken as part of a joint theoretical-experimental collaboration, focuses on
supersymmetric extensions of the Standard Model. Finally, complementary projects
are envisioned that could provide analytical tools to help search for or analyze
new physics effects in other systems. New experimental results, as they become
available, will also provide significant direction regarding which observables
or models of new physics will be considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work
undertaken by Professor Kiers will also have a significant impact in a broader
sense at Taylor University. In particular, the direct involvement of several
undergraduate students in the research will enhance the educational experiences
of those students and will better prepare them for entrance into top graduate
schools. This level of undergraduate research will help the institution attract
highly qualified undergraduate students to the physics program and will be
particularly helpful in attracting more female and minority students, who are
currently underrepresented in the physics program at Taylor.