* 1215067
* SBIR Phase I:  Protecting Birds and Bats from Wind Turbine Hazards Using Ultraviolet Light Emitting Diodes
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Donald Ronning, Lite Enterprises Inc
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
the technical and commercial viability of a high-brightness ultraviolet light-
emitting diode (UVLED) system for inducing an involuntary avoidance response of
birds and bats. The purpose of this system is to reduce the mortality rates of
birds and bats by deterring them from entering the active rotor zone area of an
operating wind turbine and thus minimizing the risk of mortality or injury from
direct collision or barotrauma. Many avian and bat species have spectral
sensitivity to ultraviolet light and are known to react to signal colors and
bright light sources, whereas humans do not have spectral sensitivity to
ultraviolet light and would not have an overall awareness to the operation of a
UVLED system. Strict regulations for species protection by the Endangered
Species Act as well as general bird and bat mortality are guiding the permitting
approval process for siting new wind farms (both on land and off-shore) and the
operations of existing wind farms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial
potential of this project is that it addresses a major problem affecting the
permitting of new and existing wind farms. In addition, there are other numerous
additional potential applications for the UVLED system. These applications
include protecting airports? landing and take-off airspaces from bird strikes;
integrating UVLEDs into airplane landing lights to protect against bird strikes;
mounting on radio/TV and other towers to minimize bird mortality; mounting on
large buildings where bird mortality is known to be high; protecting tar pits
and similar hazards from bird mortality; and protecting bridges, rooftops, and
similar spaces from the nuisance of bird droppings. Also, bats save farmers
about $74 per acre by providing natural pest control. Pest control services
provided by insect-eating bats in the U.S. likely save the U.S. agricultural
industry at least $3 billion a year.