* 1215294
* SBIR Phase I:  Porous Carbon Substrate for Long Life Lithium-sulfur Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,02/28/2013
* Navaneedhakrish Jayaprakash, NOHMS Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2013
* USD 149,964.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will address issues
related to the development of high-energy lithium-ion batteries. Today, mobile
devices require faster performance and smaller sizes for greater portability.
However, the faster processors in these devices impose energy density
requirements that push today's lithium battery technologies to their limits.
State-of-the-art lithium-ion electrode materials used in mobile devices produce
a maximum energy density of 0.28-0.6 kWh/kg. Our team is developing a commercial
secondary/rechargeable Li-S battery with a theoretical energy density of 2.3
kWh/kg, which could dramatically alter the electrical energy storage landscape
for all portable devices. Development of this Li-S battery has been limited by
poor cycle life. This project will remedy this by developing an optimal porous
carbon host for sequestering sulfur in the battery cathode. The host will limit
polysulfide dissolution in order to increase cycle life of our current sulfur-
infused carbon nanostructure (S@C) composite cathode materials from 650 cycles
to 1000 (or more) cycles. In addition, by utilizing low-cost, commercially
available carbon feedstocks (carbon aerogels, graphene, and high-sulfur coal),
the results of this research will likely reduce the direct costs of
manufacturing carbon-sulfur composite cathodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is significant. Li-ion batteries
currently have a $11-13 billion market and the market size is expected to reach
$44 billion by 2020. Li-ion batteries account for close to 75% of all secondary
(rechargeable) batteries used in portable electronics. Secondary lithium-sulfur
batteries employing sulfur as the cathode and metallic lithium as the anode
offer the highest energy storage potential of any battery based on two solid
elements. These devices offer more than twice the energy capacity of the
currently deployed lithium-ion battery technology with half the weight. If this
potential can be brought to commercialization, it has the potential to displace
lithium-ion cell technology because of the higher energy density, low cost, and
widespread availability of sulfur. This could have significant impacts on mobile
devices, electric vehicles market, and the broader energy storage market,
enabling greater efficiency and performance in all those sectors.