* 1215034
* Seeded Growth of Noble-Metal Nanocrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Younan Xia, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2016
* USD 545,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry (SSMC)
program at NSF, will build a scientific basis for the synthesis of noble-metal
nanocrystals with controlled properties for a variety of applications. The key
approach is to separate and then independently control the nucleation and growth
steps using a seed-mediated method. The research will be organized into four
thrusts: i) Synthesis and characterization of single-crystal, cubooctahedral
seeds made of Ag, Au, Pd, or Pt, and with sizes below 10 nm. The effects of
capping agent, precursor, and oxidative etching on the crystallinity, yield, and
size distribution of the seeds will all be examined. ii) Growth of metals same
as the seeds. This work will seek to correlate the reduction kinetics with the
growth modes, including site-selected overgrowth, conformal coating, and
dendritic growth. It will also develop a screening method for rapid
identification of capping agents capable of promoting the formation of specific
facets. iii) Growth of metals different from the seeds. This work will address
issues such as galvanic replacement that will occur spontaneously when the metal
for seeds is more reactive than the metal to be grown by introducing a strong
reducing agent to setback the replacement reaction. It will also fully explore
the core-shell nanocrystals in terms of control over composition, shape, and
shell thickness. iv) Properties and applications of the novel nanocrystals. In
addition to a systematic study of the optical properties for nanocrystals with
different sizes, shapes, and compositions, this work will investigate how the
shells with various thicknesses shield the plasmonic excitation of the cores. It
will also systematically investigate the effect of a substrate in forming hot
spots with nanocrystals having different shapes. Furthermore, it will examine
the catalytic and electrocatalytic properties of core-shell nanocrystals with
both well-defined facets on the surface and tightly controlled thicknesses for
the shells

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Interest in noble-metal nanocrystals with controlled sizes and shapes has grown
steadily because of strong correlations between the size/shape of nanocrystals
and chemical, physical, electronic, optical, magnetic, and catalytic properties.
The interest has also been enhanced by the technological applications of these
nanocrystals in areas ranging from catalysis (e.g., in fuel cells and catalytic
converters) to biomedical research (e.g., as contrast and therapeutic agents).
However, attempts to systematically and predictably control these properties
have been met with limited success. One barrier is the lack of a mechanistic
understanding and experimental control of the evolution pathway from atoms to
nuclei, seeds, and finally nanocrystals. This work will bring significant
advances to the field by unraveling the essential knowledge and design rules for
synthesizing noble-metal nanocrystals with controlled sizes, shapes,
morphologies, compositions, and structures crucial to various applications. This
research will have profound impacts on the society in the following aspects: i)
developing novel materials for sensing, biomedical applications, and catalysis
that will address issues related to national security, health, environment, and
energy; ii) forging links between different scientific fields that include solid
state chemistry, condensed matter physics, surface science, materials science,
colloid science, catalysis, and photonics; iii) enhancing both graduate and
undergraduate education through multidisciplinary research and collaboration;
iv) generating and disseminating new scientific knowledge resulting from the
proposed work through peer-reviewed publications, reports, seminars, conference
presentations, undergraduate and graduate teaching, summer school lectures, and
websites; and v) promoting diversity in higher education by engaging women,
minorities, and other underrepresented groups into the research program.