* 1215965
* ICES: Small: Frontiers in Mechanism Design
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Tim Roughgarden, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2016
* USD 400,000.00

Mechanism design studies problems where the preferences of self-interested
participants --- such as a value of a good or a cost of performing a task ---
are a priori unknown to the decision-maker. The high-level goal is to design a
protocol, or "mechanism," that interacts with participants so that self-
interested behavior yields a desirable outcome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer
science has brought new ideas and techniques to the classical economic theory of
mechanism design. A primary signature of the computer science approach is
approximation --- the idea of building credibility for a proposed solution by
proving that its performance is always within a small factor of an ideal (and
typically unimplementable) solution. Approximation guarantees are a fundamental
tool for measuring suboptimality, which can arise in mechanism design because of
computational tractability constraints, the inefficiency of game-theoretic
equilibria, or information-theoretic barriers to obtaining full optimality. The
goals of the proposed research are: to further the theory of prior-independent
and prior-free auctions for revenue maximization; to apply the concept of
approximation to auctions with interdependent values; to pursue equilibrium
performance guarantees for auctions with low-dimensional bid spaces; and to seek
new results on tractable combinatorial auctions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader significance and importance of the project are as follows. First,
mechanism design has several applications highly relevant to&lt;br/&gt;the
computing industry, such as combinatorial auctions for wireless spectrum, search
keyword auctions, and the real-time allocation of both online and more
traditional advertising. The proposed research applies concepts and techniques
from theoretical computer science to obtain new insights about fundamental
models in mechanism design, and to produce new models and results that may be
more germane for computer science applications. Second, the project funding will
enable the mentoring of PhD students, innovation in graduate teaching, the
dissemination of technical surveys and educational materials, and the
recruitment of undergraduates into research.