* 1215808
* ICES: Small: Collaborative Research: Interaction, Information and Identification
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Dirk Bergemann, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 02/29/2016
* USD 199,941.00

Private and widely dispersed information across individuals is pervasive aspect
of economic environments. In financial markets, traders possess different
information about the value of an asset; in labor markets, employees and
employers have different information about the cost of a job. In the interaction
of the individual agents, the nature of the private information held by the
individuals influences the outcome of the entire economy. In particular, the
structure of the interaction - the form of the network - determines the
aggregate outcome. Yet from the point of view of an observer, be it as an
analyst or a regulator or a legislator, the precise nature of the private
information and network structure of the agents is rarely known.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The current research develops a method to analyze the behavior and
the welfare in an economic environment, online as well as offline, independent
of the structure of the private information and network structure of the agents.
Concurrently, the investigators will analyze the extent to which the structure
of the economic environments (payoffs, preferences) can be identified from the
empirical data without knowledge of the exact information and network structure.
The methods have epistemic and computational advantages over earlier approaches.
The investigators will identify bounds on the statistical moments of the
equilibrium distribution. Conversely, the statistical description of the
equilibrium outcome allows the investigators to give precise bounds on how much
can be learned from the data when the nature of the private information is
unknown.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This new approach to networks with private
information offers techniques to analyze the welfare implications of economic
rules and institutions by providing bounds that are independent of the knowledge
of the information and network structure. The method allows the investigators to
assess the implications of different policies and regulations regarding
information disclosure, trading restrictions, and reserve requirements that are
independent of the specific information held by the economic agents.