* 1215307
* SBIR Phase I:  Process scale-up for Manufacturing a New Class of Bulk Nanomaterials with High Thermoelectric Figure-of-Merit
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Rutvik Mehta, ThermoAura Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,989.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will scale-up a novel
manufacturing route to obtain a new class of high-figure-of-merit (ZT)
thermoelectric nanomaterials. Thermoelectrics are attractive for use in heating
or cooling systems without moving parts or the use of greenhouse gases, and for
generating electricity from waste heat, e.g., from vehicle exhausts and
factories. The low efficiency (measured by ZT) of presently used thermoelectric
materials limits their use in emerging applications. A recently developed method
provides a way for obtaining bulk thermoelectric nanomaterials of both p- and
n-type with 25% higher ZT, through a combination of chemical doping and
nanostructuring. The objective of this project is to scale up this method to
obtain kilogram quantities of pnictogen chalcogenides with ZT ~ 1. Our materials
synthesis and processing scale up efforts will be guided by thermoelectric
property measurements and materials characterization. The structure-processing-
property correlations unearthed during our studies will identify the synthesis
and processing parameters needed to retain the high ZT during scale-up, and will
provide clues to further increase ZT (e.g., to 1.5). The scaled-up process will
serve as a basis for expanding the range of application of thermoelectric
materials for applications in high-efficiency refrigeration and heat harvesting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project
will be to unlock and access the multi-billion dollar potential of
thermoelectrics for transforming solid-state cooling and heat harvesting. The
project findings will be applicable to multiple materials systems that can be
used for either solid-state cooling or power generation. Thermoelectric
materials already represent a billion-dollar industry, but have the potential to
access a market several times larger, if the conversion efficiency is increased
by a factor of two. The project will scale-up a nanomaterials manufacturing
technology targeted to create new high efficiency solid-state cooling devices
that can replace the current refrigeration and air-conditioning technologies
based on environmentally unfriendly gases, and create high-efficiency
electricity generators from waste heat, significantly expanding the
thermoelectric markets and impacting global energy usage and addressing global
environmental concerns. This project will also lead to introduction of a new
class of nanomaterials with superior properties to those available currently in
the marketplace. The project is anticipated to create at least 10-20 jobs in the
near-term, and will position New York state and the United States as global
leaders in thermoelectrics innovation and nanomaterials manufacturing.