* 1215837
* Evaluation of Partitioning Electron Donors for Enhanced Bioremediation of Chlorinated Solvent Source Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Natalie Capiro, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 350,411.00

Evaluation of Partitioning Electron Donors for Enhanced Bioremediation of
Chlorinated Solvent Source Zones&lt;br/&gt;Natalie L. CÃ¡piro and Kurt D. Pennell
(Tufts University; Medford, MA)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies have
demonstrated that microorganisms are capable of biodegradation within close
proximity to chlorinated solvent source zones. This biological activity can
enhance (accelerate) aqueous dissolution (removal) of chlorinated solvents, and
has the potential to provide more effective source zone treatment, thereby
reducing potential exposure and remediation costs. However, the performance of
bioremediation, and more specifically, biologically-enhanced dissolution, faces
two challenges; sustained release of electron donor (food source) and delivery
of electron donor to the intended target. To overcome these limitations, a
potential alternative are partitioning electron donors (PEDs), organic compounds
(e.g., n-butyl acetate) that are relatively water soluble, but also partition
into (directly mix with) chlorinated solvents. When a PED is delivered to the
subsurface contaminant source zone, it preferentially partitions into the
organic separate phase chlorinated solvent, and then slowly dissolves back into
the passing groundwater along with the contaminant. This strategy of electron
donor delivery is intended to promote the growth of chlorinated solvent
degrading bacteria in close proximity to the contaminant source zone, while
minimizing consumption of electron donor in microbial processes not associated
with chlorinated solvent bioremediation (e.g., methane production). The specific
objectives of this research are designed to assess the physical, chemical and
biological processes that govern PED delivery, mass transfer, and consumption to
support sustained microbial biodegradation in chlorinated solvent source zones.
A combination of laboratory-scale experiments and mathematical modeling will be
conducted using trichloroethene (TCE) as a representative contaminant. The
research program is structured around four tasks that will: (1) evaluate and
select PEDs for detailed study based on abiotic and biotic batch reactor
studies, (2) quantify PED delivery and release, and rates of bioenhanced
dissolution and degradation in columns containing residual TCE in comparison to
current electron donor delivery approaches, (3) measure the spatial distribution
and temporal evolution of PED delivery/release, TCE dissolution and degradation,
and microbial communities in heterogeneous aquifer cells to assess the potential
for improved bioremediation under more realistic conditions, and (4) implement
mathematical models to obtain mass transfer and utilization rate parameters from
experimental data, and predict responses to alternative PED delivery strategies
and subsurface aquifer conditions to support potential scale up to field-
application. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. EPA estimates that more than $209
billion dollars (in constant 2004 dollars) will be needed over the next 30 years
to mitigate hazards at 235,000 to 355,000 chlorinated solvent contaminated
sites, impacting nearly 30% of U.S. drinking water supplies. Additionally, these
cost estimates do not include many sites susceptible to vapor intrusion, which
is now recognized as a key exposure pathway in urban areas. The knowledge gained
from the testing and validation of this novel remediation technique will provide
a sustainable approach to reduce chlorinated solvent source zone longevity and
remediation costs through an improved understanding of enhanced biological
treatment. Integration of experimental studies with mathematical modeling will
yield guidelines and rate parameters necessary for practitioners and researchers
to assess PED performance for a range of potential remediation scenarios.
Furthermore, the project will incorporate educational initiatives into the
research and instructional activities of the investigators, with the goal of
extending the impact of acquired knowledge beyond the traditional framework of
journal publications and conference presentations. This goal will be achieved
through the following initiatives: (a) the inclusion of undergraduate students
conducting laboratory research, and (b) recruitment of female and
underrepresented minority science and engineering undergraduate and graduate
students, (c) dissemination of instructional tools to regulatory agencies and
impacted communities.&lt;br/&gt;