* 1215850
* Workshop to Investigate Approaches for Large Scale Senior Independent Living Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 12/15/2011,11/30/2012
* Tamara Hayes, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 11/30/2012
* USD 36,757.00

Maintaining the health and well-being of the aging US presents significant
challenges. The workshop brings together leaders in geriatric and biomedical
research, government, telecommunications, home monitoring companies,
pharmaceutical companies, and non-profit advocacy groups to identify strategies
that will support a national network of home-based monitoring and assessment
capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: The workshop will
identify research challenges and opportunities relating to identification,
monitoring, and analysis of activities across multiple time scales, locations,
specific actions, functional abilities and physiological changes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will focus on research challenges in creating
a scalable infrastructure and technology for large scale distributed
longiitudinal studies that help answer many unanswered questions regarding aging
and independent living through coordinated gathering and analysis of behavioral,
social, biological, clinical, genetic, economic, and environmental data. The
workshop is expected to produce a report, giving concrete examples of what is
needed to progress, from a technical standpoint and from a funding perspective.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: If successful, the workshop would help
identify the research challenges and opportunities in creating the
infrastructure and research networks needed to advance the understanding of
aging and to develop technologies that better support the health and wellbeing
of the aging population in the US. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;