* 1215234
* SBIR Phase I:  Engineering Hydrolytic Enzymes for Enhanced Sugar Recovery From Biomass
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Barry Olafson, Protabit LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,538.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to apply Protabit?s
state-of-the-art computational protein design (CPD) platform to engineer a more
thermostable and cost-effective set of lignocellulosic enzymes for converting
biomass to simple sugars. CPD is an innovative technology that yields enzymes
with novel or enhanced properties that cannot be found using traditional protein
engineering methods, and Protabit is actively developing the most advanced,
commercial-grade CPD platform available. In Phase I, Protabit and the Mayo Lab
at the California Institute of Technology will stabilize two important
commercial cellulases, H. jecorina Cel5A and Cel7A. The objectives of Phase I
are: (a) to apply CPD to design libraries of thermostable Cel5A and Cel7A
variants, and to use high-throughput screening to identify variants with optimal
cellulolytic activity at elevated temperatures; (b) to measure the degree to
which the most active thermostable variants reduce enzyme loading and hydrolysis
time on pretreated corn stover, and to estimate the corresponding cost savings;
and (c) to characterize the most active thermostable variants for other
commercially important properties such as pH profile and expression yield. In
Phase II, Protabit and Caltech will similarly engineer other key lignocellulosic
enzymes and optimize this core set for activity on corn stover, switchgrass, and
other biomass feedstocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts/commercial
potential of this research are: (a) to reduce the costs of converting biomass
into glucose and other simple sugars, which are a principal raw material input
in the rapidly growing renewable fuels and chemicals industries, and (b) to
demonstrate Protabit's versatile protein engineering platform technology on a
specific problem of commercial significance in industrial biotechnology. By
facilitating the bio-based production of advanced drop-in biofuels, ethanol, and
precursors for synthetic rubber, plastics, and other petroleum-derived
materials, this research can help reduce U.S. dependence on foreign oil and spur
domestic manufacturing, investment, and job creation. In addition, sourcing
sugars from cellulose, the most abundant polymer on the planet, can curb the
food-versus-fuel debate by reducing demand for edible corn as a biofuels
feedstock; it also encourages the farming of dedicated feedstock crops capable
of growing on marginal lands unsuitable for food production. Furthermore, CPD-
based protein stabilization methods enable new products and technologies in
myriad areas, including industrial enzymes, protein materials, novel antibody-
like scaffolds, and therapeutics with improved shelf-life or biological half-
life. With this project, Protabit and Caltech will help the U.S. take a major
step toward economic, energy, and environmental security.