* 1215249
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Particulate Mass and Count Monitoring Instruments Using Micro-Electro-Mechanical Resonant Balances
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Paul Neilson, FemtoScale Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 05/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop low-cost
light-weight miniaturized instruments, based on micro-electro-mechanical
resonant nanobalances, for real-time monitoring of concentration, and size
distribution of airborne micro/nano-particles. Aerosol particles in the diameter
range from nanometers to microns play important roles in air quality, human
health, visibility in the atmosphere, the radiation balance of the earth
(climate change), and stratospheric ozone depletion. Aerosol contaminants in
industrial cleanrooms can limit the size and quality of integrated circuit
elements. There has not been enough progress in light weight and low-cost
aerosol particle monitoring technologies over the past decades and the existing
technologies cannot address all the existing needs (e.g. in semiconductor
industry). The innovative approach proposed here integrates micro/nanoscale
electromechanical resonant balances within miniaturized micro-orifice cascade
impactors. Cascade impactors separate particles in the air flow based on their
size and deposit them on designated micro/nanoscale electromechanical resonant
mass balances performing real time mass measurement. The proposed instrument can
sample the surrounding air, separate airborne particles into several size
ranges, and measure the individual and/or cumulative mass of particles in each
size range.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is development of a more capable and cost effective category of airborne
particulate monitors. Currently available particulate monitoring systems can be
divided into two major categories: 1. Laser-based counters, and 2. Inertial
impactors. Other than being relatively costly and bulky and their need for
frequent calibration, lower cost laser-based counters can only detect particles
with diameters as small as 0.3Âµm. Inertial impactors on the other hand can
collect particles with diameters as small as a few nanometers, but such systems
generally offer no automated or real time processing capability. Collected
particulate matter in such systems is manually weighed after sampling a large
enough volume of air. Successful development of the proposed technology allows
real time monitoring of nanoscale airborne particles down to a few nanometers
size range using low cost, light weight instruments. The target market for the
proposed instruments can be divided into two major sections: a)
Cleanroom/controlled environment monitoring. This includes semiconductor/micro-
manufacturing and pharmaceutical cleanrooms, operating rooms, etc.; b) Personal
particulate mass exposure monitors for work place safety in industrial
environments prone to excessive micro/nanoparticulate generation and dispersion.
This includes Nanomaterials processing plants, mines (e.g. coal mines), metal
processing plants, etc.