* 1215989
* Deformation, Damage, and Fracture of Light Metals and Alloys Symposium; TMS 2012, 141st Annual Meeting March 11-15,2012 in Orlando, FL
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2013
* George Spanos, Minerals Metals & Materials Society
* Standard Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 01/31/2013
* USD 5,000.00

This proposal requests funding in partial support of the Symposium on
Deformation, Damage, and Fracture of Light Metals and Alloys, which is to be
held at the TMS 2012, 141st Annual Meeting March 11-15, 2012 in Orlando, FL.
This annual conference is organized by The Minerals Metals &amp; Materials
Society (TMS), to bring the Metals and Materials community together to present,
learn about, and discuss recent developments in the field. This symposium will
focus on deformation, damage, and fracture of light metals and alloys at room
and elevated temperatures in their service environments. NSF funding will be
used for registration-fee waivers for 6 students and 5 selected speakers or
attendees, and partial support of the symposium proceedings. Qualified students,
postdoctoral fellows, and select speakers or attendees will be identified by the
organizing committee. In addition to student, postdoctoral researchers, and
other authors that have already submitted abstracts for the symposium, the
organizing committee may invite such candidates by contacting university
departments and/or laboratories that are known to have strong programs in areas
related to the symposium topic. Every effort will be made to encourage
candidates from underrepresented groups to apply for the registration fee
waivers.