* 1215060
* MRI:    Development of a Confocal Instrument for Spatially Resolved Luminescence Measurements in Geologic and Archaeological Dating and Radiation Dosimetry
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Regina DeWitt, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 113,049.00

Funds from this Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program grant will support
development of a confocal instrument for spatially resolved optically stimulated
luminescence (OSL) dating at Oklahoma State University. The instrument will
support sedimentological/stratigraphic and archaeological research that relies
on dating of natural and man made materials where no other geochronologic
technique is possible (e.g., dating of Quaternary glacially rafted debris where
no organics are available for radiocarbon dating, fluvial terrace gravels, beach
boulders, mortars). Optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) dating allows for
establishment of time of deposition (date of the last sunlight exposure of
sediments) through the measurement of luminescence emitted from the sample
during irradiation in the laboratory. Sunlight zeroes out luminescence by
releasing the trapped electrons that accumulate at light sensitive crystal
defects. The intensity of the emitted light (the OSL signal) is proportional to
the radiation dose absorbed since burial, allowing calculation of time since
deposition. Commercially available luminescence readers and techniques are
limited to samples with individual mineral grains smaller than a few
millimeters, preventing application of the method to bulk materials such as
rocks, which excludes many geological and archaeological samples. The developed
confocal OSL microscope will allow for fully automated, micron-scale spatial
resolution of OSL dating over the depth of field. The instrument would expand
the application breadth of OSL dating technique to solid samples larger than a
few mm and therefore allow the technique to be applied to many previously
undatable deposits such as those from gravel beaches, braided streams, and
alluvial fans. The same dating technique may be used for determination of the
construction or destruction date of archeologically significant buildings, which
presently is only possible by dating the surrounding sediments. The instrument
will also allow for spatially-resolved dose measurements that could provide
information on microscopic variations in the environmental radiation dose rate
and therefore improving the accuracy of the conventional OSL dating technique.
The instrument will be the second confocal OSL instrument in the world and the
first in the United States. Students at Oklahoma State will be afforded a unique
opportunity to gain interdisciplinary experience in physics and engineering as
well as geology and archaeology.