* 1215883
* ICES: Small: Computational Fair Division: From Cake Cutting to Cloud Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Ariel Procaccia, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2016
* USD 390,000.00

For millennia thinkers have struggled with a seemingly simple question: how does
one fairly divide goods among several people? The 20th century has seen a shift
towards mathematically rigorous approaches to fairness; economists,
mathematicians, and political scientists have all contributed to the large body
of literature on fair division. In contrast, to date there is little work in
algorithmic economics on fair division, relative to this field's weight in
microeconomic theory. In particular, computational work on the fair allocation
of divisible goods (such as land, time, or computer memory) is rather sparse.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of this proposal is that computational thinking
can transform research on the fair allocation of divisible goods, while novel
research on the fair allocation of divisible goods can find compelling
applications in computer science. This theme is explored in two domains: (i) in
cake cutting --- a metaphor for the allocation of a heterogeneous divisible good
--- the proposed research focuses on issues such as complexity, representation,
and optimization; (ii) in cloud computing, where one needs to allocate multiple
homogeneous divisible goods (e.g., CPU, RAM), the proposed research aims to
design and validate algorithms that exhibit superior performance in practice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal focuses the attention of the algorithmic
economics community on fair division via four main activities: a book, a summer
school, magazine articles, and tutorials. In turn, the increased computational
attention can lead to a surge of deployed applications of fair division methods.