* 1215871
* SEES Fellows: Wastewater treatment with commodity chemical producing cyanobacterial biorefineries
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Andrew Markley, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2015
* USD 374,445.00

This interdisciplinary project will investigate a novel approach for converting
environmentally detrimental wastewater nutrients into biomass and the commodity
chemical -lysine. Genetically modifiable strains of cyanobacteria will be tested
for their ability to grow on anaerobic digestate wastewater samples. The -lysine
biosynthetic pathway will then be engineered to overproduce and secrete large
quantities of the valuable commodity chemical. A comparative life cycle
assessment will be performed to determine environmental and economic benefits
over current disposal based systems.

Recent increases in food and energy prices, along with mounting evidence of
environmental degradation, has demonstrated the need for a way to efficiently
treat and reuse our chemical fertilizer rich waste streams. The proposed work
has the potential to both transform the manner in which chemicals are
synthesized and waste is evaluated, along with contributing to the general
understanding of catabolism in bacteria. The research focuses on a fundamental
barrier to weaning our society off of fossil fuel based chemicals, developing
new waste stream-based feedstocks that have a positive value built into their
consumption. Harnessing these waste streams for product output would tip the
economic landscape towards the sustainable production of products from renewable
resources. This project will also include a series of educational activities
with the goal of attracting high school and undergraduate students into the
field of sustainability science.

This project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. With SEES Fellows support, this project will enable a
promising early career researcher to establish themselves in an independent
research career related to sustainability.