* 1215295
* SBIR Phase I:  High Sensitivity Optical Fiber Biosensor with Nanoscale Coatings for Rapid Diagnostics of MRSA
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Alfred Ritter, Virginia nanoTech LLC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2012
* USD 145,274.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project concerns the
development of an optical fiber biosensor platform that achieves exceptionally
high sensitivity through use of a nanoscale, high refractive index, self-
assembled polymer coating on the cladding surface. A rapid, specific, and
sensitive detection system for methicilin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)
and other biological analytes will be developed that is inexpensive, portable
and rugged. The key innovation is the combination of ionic self-assembled
multilayers (ISAMs), which allow deposition of a variety of materials including
polymers and nanoparticles into multiple layers each just a nanometer thick,
with turnaround point long-period gratings (TAP-LPGs), which have strong,
broadband attenuation peaks that are highly sensitive to changes on the exterior
of the optical fiber cladding. The TAP-LPG provides a highly sensitive, robust,
inexpensive biosensor platform where the presence of target materials is
detected simply by changes in the transmitted intensity at a particular
wavelength, while the ISAM film amplifies the sensitivity by providing a high
refractive index, high surface area, nanoscale coating on the cladding that can
be readily coupled to a vast array of receptor molecules such as antibodies.

The broader impact / commercial potential of this project includes the creation
of a novel, inexpensive, highly sensitive, rugged, portable biosensor platform
that will allow early and rapid diagnosis of MRSA infection. The broad
antibiotic resistance of MRSA makes it a particularly important target for rapid
diagnosis so that the proper treatment can be promptly administered. MRSA is
responsible for thousands of deaths annually in the United States and extended
hospital visits for >100,000 patients per year. Further, the proposed novel
biological diagnostic platform combines the precision of photonic sensing and
nanotechnology with a versatile affinity binding system to make ultrasensitive
measurements of biomarkers for a vast array of additional important targets for
medical diagnostics, drug discovery, and environmental monitoring. In addition,
the small size and low cost of the system makes it also applicable to remote and
impoverished areas of the globe. Furthermore, the project will provide
fundamental information on the optical properties of nanoscale self-assembled
films and their interactions with biological molecules and organisms.