* 1215957
* Radiative Thermal Conductivity of Upper Mantle and Transition Zone Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Sylvia-Monique Thomas, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2015
* USD 203,689.00

Structure and dynamics of our planet's interior depend crucially upon heat flow
and thus upon the thermal conductivity of its constituents. Temperature- and
pressure-dependent thermal conductivity of Earth's mantle materials, such as
olivine, is an important parameter for geodynamic models of mantle convection.
Thermal conductivity variations affect models of lithospheric geotherms,
subduction dynamics, and the structure of lithospheric slabs. Does the mantle
transition zone between a depth of 410 and 660 km act as a heat flux regulator
within the Earth's upper and lower mantle? Thermal conductivities of upper
mantle and transition zone minerals are poorly constrained, and there is little
experimental data on the radiative part of thermal conductivity, especially at
the high pressures and temperatures that exist in those regions. This
experimental study aims to complement continually evolving theoretical
frameworks, extend ongoing projects to all major constituents of the Earth's
mantle and indirectly measure temperature-pressure variation of radiative
thermal conductivity using in-situ optical spectroscopy as powerful tool. A
primary goal of the project is to further our understanding of a major driving
force of nature - heat flow within the Earth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
builds upon recent in-situ optical measurements, for the first time at
simultaneous high-pressure and high-temperature, studying two major transition
zone phases, hydrous wadsleyite and hydrous ringwoodite. We reported large
radiative thermal conductivities, which reveal an energy transmission 'window'
in the infrared and visible spectral range. We found that the mantle transition
zone may contribute significantly to radiative heat transfer, and we confirmed
predictions that hydration may enhance radiative heat flux. The current project
will extend those studies to olivine, majorite, and phase D. In addition, we
plan to systematically study the effect of compositional changes (such as iron
and water concentrations) on thermal conductivity properties of olivine and it's
high-pressure polymorphs wadsleyite and ringwoodite. This research is of highly
collaborative nature, and will take advantage of the expertise and facilities of
laboratories across the nation, as well as internationally, in particular the
Geophysical Laboratory of the Carnegie Institution of Washington (optical
measurements), the Earth and Planetary Science and Civil and Environmental
Engineering departments at Northwestern University (spectroscopy) and the
Helmholtz Centre Potsdam - GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences
(syntheses). This work will illuminate a fundamentally interdisciplinary topic
of deep concern to a broad audience, including mineral physicists,
seismologists, geodynamicist, geochemists, and planetary scientists. Our study
will provide a valuable learning experience for undergraduate students, as well
as important data, which will contribute to our knowledge of heat transfer in
the Earth?s interior and will help to improve geophysical models of heat flux in
the Earth.