* 1215361
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-complexity, High-throughput Wireless Networking
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Sung Eun LEE, Ratrix Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 12/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to improve
the efficiency and throughput of wireless networking (WiFi) systems through
advanced MIMO (multiple-input multiple-output) decoding. Current and upcoming
networking standards allow the use of multiple transmit and receive antennas to
improve reliability and data rates. However, for systems with more than two
transmit and two receive antennas, and for those with high data rate, accurately
decoding the transmitted symbols becomes prohibitively complex. Thus, it is
common to use simple techniques that are significantly less effective than is
possible. This project will develop technology that allows advanced mathematical
transformations to be efficiently performed on the signals received by from the
antennas. These transformations make it possible to approach theoretical limits
on signal decoding, paving the way for systems that vastly out-perform existing
wireless MIMO technology. The resulting systems will be able to scale for
operation on eight or more antennas and to reduce the received bit-error rate
substantially?all while increasing the computational complexity only slightly
over the simplest existing systems.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is maximized by its
receiver-side use. This project will directly result in the commercialization of
advanced equalization techniques for MIMO networking systems. As these advances
are compatible with existing systems, the significant gains in range, power, and
spectral efficiency can be realized without changes to existing infrastructure.
This multi-disciplinary project will provide a competent framework to understand
interrelationship among the hardware and software implementations. Such a
framework can be used to focus future theoretical communications research more
effectively on implementable systems that can benefit consumer, government, and
industrial sectors. This project will also establish a conduit for
commercialization of further advances in communications and enhance the research
partnership between the investigators and the researchers in the wireless
communication industry facilitating application of scientific discoveries to the
application domains.