* 1215280
* SBIR Phase I:  Analytical Modeling and Performance Prediction of Remanufactured Gearbox Components
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Raja Pulikollu, Sentient Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 184,539.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project shall develop analytical
fatigue models as applied to the performance analysis of remanufactured gearbox
coponents under NSF SBIR Phase I Solicitation 11-577 (Topic NM?Nanotechnology,
Advanced Materials, and Manufacturing, Subtopic M3-Modeling and Simulation). The
first step in developing this technology involves demonstrating basic model
capability through the simulation of a worn gear, remanufactured using an
isotropic superfinish (ISF) process, as described in this proposal. This model
will be based on the fundamental research of the applicability of the ISF
process to worn gears, the effects of ISF on gear characteristics (material
mictrostructure, microgeometry, residual stress, surface roughness), and the
subsequent effect on damage resistance. The model will be used to predict the
fatigue life of the remanufactured component, thus quantifying the benefits of
such processing and demonstrating the feasibility of such a tool. The results
will lay the groundwork for expanding Sentient?s simulation technology to
include various other remanufacturing processes in a more comprehensive design
and analysis framework capable of optimizing reman operations to extend the
useful life of high value added components.

The proposed development has immediate impact on industries that rely on the
reliable function of highly engineered (and thus expensive) gearboxes ?
aerospace, energy, and transportation. Components must operate in extreme
environments, often leading to premature removal or overhaul. Though worn or
damaged, these components still have the ability to function given the
appropriate remanufacturing processes are deployed. Doing so reduces a
significant amount of resources (materials, energy, manpower) otherwise required
to produce a replacement part. Furthermore, it is thought that the application
of certain remanufacturing processes can actually enhance durability of certain
components. Unfortunately, current design and analysis approaches require
extensive testing and evaluation to validate the effectiveness and safety of a
component that has been used in the field then processed outside of original OEM
specification. To test all possible combination of component coupled with
various levels of potential damage repaired through various options of
processing would be an impossibly expensive and time consuming feat, thus
prohibiting a broad deployment of remanufacturing processes across industry.
However, as postulated in this proposed effort, such evaluation and validation
can occur through modeling and simulation. The resulting advancement in
technology will provide immediate value in safely reclaiming useful life of
gearbox components.