* 1215898
* Collaborative Research: Role of interfacial turbulence in hyporheic exchange and fine particle dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Aaron Packman, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 06/30/2016
* USD 263,759.00

Collaborative Research: Role of interfacial turbulence in hyporheic exchange and
fine particle dynamics&lt;br/&gt;Aaron Packman, Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;James Best, Kenneth Christensen, Marcelo Garcia University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is essential to improve
understanding of interactions between surface water flows and underlying
porewaters in order to advance our ability to assess connectivity in aquatic
ecosystems, evaluate the propagation of carbon, nutrients, and contaminants
through river networks, and predict the net effects of human modification of
watersheds. In previous NSF-supported research, the investigators found that
hydrodynamic interactions caused rapid exchange between rivers and underlying
porewater, along with ongoing deposition and resuspension of fine particles.
These processes are expected to substantially influence downstream migration of
solutes and particles in river networks. Unfortunately, very little information
is available on the hydrodynamic mechanisms that control this behavior because
it has been extremely difficult to directly measure solute and particle dynamics
in porewaters. The objectives of the current project are to improve fundamental
understanding of hydrodynamic interactions between freestream flows and
porewaters, and to use the information to transform conceptual and quantitative
models for solute and particle dynamics in rivers. The investigators will use an
array of new flow visualization technologies to obtain direct observations of
fluid exchange between rivers and streambeds, and the associated fluxes of
solutes and fine suspended particles. The results will be used to identify the
main fluid flow processes responsible for solute and particle transport across
porous environmental interfaces. This work will yield improved models for the
surface-subsurface flow continuum, as well as new probabilistic models for
downstream solute and particle transport. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major
scientific contributions of this work will be an improved characterization of
fundamental mechanisms of flow coupling between rivers and riverbeds, and new
models for the migration of dissolved and suspended materials in rivers. Such
models are essential to enable the prediction of large-scale, long-term dynamics
required for sustainable management of river systems. The project will
characterize important components of interfacial flux currently missing from
solute transport models, and provide critical new observations of fine particle
deposition and resuspension. This information is needed to address many pressing
problems in freshwater systems, including contaminant interactions with
sediments, protection of ecological diversity within rivers, nutrient retention
and carbon processing in rivers, and waterborne disease transmission. The models
developed in this project can be used to evaluate the factors that produce high
risks of transmission of contaminants and waterborne diseases, and thereby
improve management of watersheds to minimize these risks. The project will also
contribute to longer-term sustainability of drinking water resources and aquatic
ecosystems by improving our capability to predict long-term biogeochemical and
ecological dynamics in rivers. The project will contribute to the broader
education of students and the public by incorporating project results into major
outreach efforts at Northwestern University and the University of Illinois. The
focus will be on helping K-12 students and neighborhood communities to
understand how river processes influence water quality, human health, and
natural ecosystems. The investigators will also work with several university
student groups to develop a new program involving regular on-campus activities
and mentoring for students from populations underrepresented in the sciences.
Overall, ~1500 K-12 students and adults each year (~4,500 over the lifetime of
the project) will be engaged in laboratory activities and discussions of the
significance of hydrological processes to sustainability.