* 1215055
* SBIR Phase I:  Commercialization of Innovative Low Refractive Index, High Temperature Perfluorocyclobutyl Polymers
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Jeffrey DiMaio, TETRAMER TECHNOLOGIES, L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2012
* USD 149,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will determine the
technical feasibility and the commercial value proposition of a high temperature
fiber optic laser coatings for photonic crystal (PC) fiber lasers and large mode
area (LMA) double-clad laser. Fiber lasers hold great potential for extreme
power, outstanding beam quality, and excellent operational efficiency; however,
nonlinear effects dictate that shorter fiber length with higher temperatures be
used. Increasing thermal stability of polymeric coatings would allow for
shorter, more efficient, and more powerful lasers. Additionally, reducing the
refractive index of the coatings could mitigate the non-linear effects in LMA
lasers. Tetramer has developed new synthetic chemistries to prepare polymer
architectures that meet these technical needs, allowing for sustained operation
up to 350 C and reduced refractive index. During this program, Tetramer will
synthesize new monomers and polymers and evaluate their properties for use as
fiber coatings. At the end of this program, Tetramer anticipates the development
of new polymers with a set of performance characteristics that are not available
from any single material today. As a result, these materials will not only find
applications in the enabling of high powered lasers, but in a host of other
commercial products as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project strongly correlates with the universal trend within
laser applications; fiber optic lasers are rapidly becoming the preferred method
for laser fabrication. By enabling fiber lasers to operate at higher
temperatures, an immediately increase in output power and service lifetime is
accomplished. Doubling power output via improved coatings will have a major
competitive advantage across industrial applications such as metalworking
(welding, cutting, and engraving/marking), micromachining, and medical devices.
Additionally, in the area of defense applications, the increased power from
fiber lasers would place researchers much closer to developing directed energy
beams. This is of national importance, and a domestic source of these types of
coatings would be strategically critical. In addition to the clear benefits
which come from improved device performance, Tetramer will use this Phase I/II
program to train undergraduate and graduate level students from nearby Clemson
University and will work with industrial partners to develop commercially viable
materials. In South Carolina, successful commercialization after Phase II will
create 10 jobs to help replace those lost in the textile industry. These jobs
include the PhD, MS, BS, and technician level positions, as well as outreach
programs for high school science students.