* 1215120
* SBIR Phase I:  Full-Page Electronic Braille Display
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Neil DiSpigna, Polymer Braille Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2012
* USD 139,319.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is for the
development of a full-page, portable, low cost, refreshable Braille display
based on the state-of-the-art electroactive PVdF polymer technology. The full-
page Braille display is a very useful device which will promote Braille literacy
and increase education, job opportunities, and quality of life for the visually
impaired. The current commercial displays are based on a 30 year old PZT Braille
cell technology. Both the materials and their processing are expensive, making
the price of such a display very high. In addition, intrinsic material
properties limit these displays to only one or two lines of Braille characters.
In this proposal, a novel strap actuator using PVdF polymers will be used to
make Braille cells that will provide large displacement, supporting force, and
fast response time. In addition, these miniature Braille cells will be scalable
to full-page displays. Highly integrated microelectronic processing will be
employed to enable low cost Braille displays. The focus of this effort will be
to take the current prototype dot and scale it down to the required dimensions
and evaluate it in terms of firmness, displacement and refresh rate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project
includes a specially designed full page Braille display that can demonstrate
both Braille characters and graphic information, which can help blind people
read icons, drop-down menus, shapes, and curves with Braille labeling on a
computer screen. This will greatly enhance the ability of blind people to
operate computers and handle complicated tasks. Since the electroactive polymer
Braille cell will be developed at a low cost; more blind people will have an
opportunity to own a Braille display device. This includes blind children in
their early stages of education. This will not only help them to understand the
importance of learning Braille, but also provide them with a very effective way
to study various Braille codes such as literary code, Math Nemeth code, computer
code, etc, in the digital age. This will increase Braille literacy, which has
become a growing issue among blind individuals over the past several decades.
Braille literacy has been directly linked to factors such as completion of a
high school education, employment, and economic situation. Also, the market for
Braille displays and assistive technologies will increase, contributing to job
and economic growth.