* 1215745
* Volatile-Bearing Phases at High Pressures and Temperatures: Volatile Release and Retention in Earth's Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Quentin Williams, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2017
* USD 293,268.00

The amount of water retained at depth within the Earth, and particularly within
Earth's mantle, is a topic of key importance for understanding (1) the genesis
and long-term volume of Earth?s oceans; (2) the genesis of magmas within the
deep interior of the Earth, and thus the occurrence of volcanism in subduction-
related environments, such as the circum-Pacific ring-of-fire; and (3) the
viscous behavior of the deep planet, and hence for how the mantle flows and
plate tectonics occurs. By the same token, the retention of carbon dioxide
within the deep Earth is of critical importance for not only how much carbon the
planet retains, but also for how much carbon dioxide has been cycled between the
surface and the interior (and vice-versa). This project is designed to probe the
properties at the high pressures and temperatures of Earth?s interior of a range
of minerals known to retain water or carbon dioxide at either subduction zone or
deeper mantle conditions. It is oriented towards providing data that will
constrain how much water and carbon dioxide is retained at depth through, for
example, constraining the likely presence and abundance of water and carbon-
containing minerals at depth (through their likely signature in seismic studies)
and their geochemical behavior (through probing their stability and high-
pressure phase transitions).

Specifically, the volatile-bearing phases lawsonite, topaz, phlogopite, dolomite
and phase D will be primarily targeted, as these represent major volatile-
bearing phases within material that is subducted from the near-surface into the
planet's interior. Both x-ray diffraction and spectroscopic probes will be
utilized, and the focus will be on simultaneous high-pressure and high-
temperature experiments-these will take advantage of both extant and recently
augmented high-pressure, high-temperature capabilities. These studies build and
expand on a broad suite of characterizations of hydrogen- and carbon-bearing
phases on compression at 300 K conducted by the PI and collaborators. The
results will provide new constraints on the bonding properties of water and
carbon within minerals at high pressures and temperatures, as well as on the
thermodynamic properties (and particularly the equations of state) of these
materials.