* 1215613
* SBIR Phase I:  Nanostructured Composite Transparent Electrodes for Touch Panels
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Whitney Gaynor, Sinovia Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop the
technology necessary to pattern transparent conductive films previously
developed by our group, allowing them to be integrated into functional consumer
devices, such as capacitive and resistive touch sensors for flexible displays.
Our team currently makes transparent conductive films based on silver nanowire
technology. Silver nanowire meshes represent one of the most promising
technologies to replace tin-doped indium oxide (ITO) in consumer devices. Films
utilizing silver nanowires offer several advantages over ITO including lower
cost, flexibility, and durability. For these bulk films to be useful in most
applications, they need to be patterned into electrical circuits. This project
focuses on the feasibility of direct laser patterning of these transparent
conductive films for lab scale touch sensor development, as well as developing
lithographic methods that will be compatible with processing techniques used in
the electronics industry. Once these processes have been developed, we will
create prototype touch sensors using these conductive films, demonstrating their
use in one of many commercial applications to which this technology can be
applied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impact of this project lies
in both the development of the patterning technology itself, as well as the
ability to turn our existing conductive film into a working electronic
component. By enabling the integration of raw material into a working component,
this research will allow for the integration in an actual touch screen device.
Such demonstrations will allow the company to gain inroads with manufacturers of
electronics that make use of touch sensor technology, permitting these
manufacturers to begin integration of our transparent conductor technology into
their products. Beyond these impacts, the research on lithographic patterning of
nanowire films will push the patterning technology further, transitioning from a
low-throughput, time-intensive method (direct laser patterning) to a high-
throughput, accepted industry standard (lithography). Because most electronics
manufacturers already process ITO lithographically, developing this technique
will enable our materials to be a direct replacement for ITO in current
manufacturing lines, eliminating the need for costly retooling.