* 1215061
* Studies of Mantle Dynamics and Evolution
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Richard O'Connell, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2016
* USD 252,136.00

This work will investigate the relationship between plate tectonics and the
evolution of the Earth throughout its history. We will study the effects of
radioactive heat sources and the viscosity of the Earth's mantle on the speed of
tectonic plates and the rate of melting and heat loss at mid-ocean ridges. Our
recently developed theory of mantle convection with plates on the surface has
predicted different styles of plate tectonics, and we will determine how this
may have influenced the thermal evolution of the Earth, the cooling of the
Earth's core (which controls the magnetic field) and the rate of the formation
and recycling of the continents and the ocean over Earth history. The results
will help determine the amount of radioactive heat sources within the Earth, and
the rate of recycling the water in the oceans back into the solid Earth, as well
as the temporal variability of convection and plate tectonics on the Earth, and
estimate how similar the present state is to previous conditions over Earth
history.

The new model of boundary layer convection includes strong plates on the surface
as well as viscosity layering in the mantle, which allows a much more realistic
treatment of the Earth's thermal evolution than previous uniform-mantle models.
The model is based on conservation of mechanical energy for the lithosphere and
the upper and lower mantles, which results in an analytical formulation for heat
transport, plate and convection speeds as functions of the Rayleigh number and
other parameters. The dependence of the results on parameters in the model is
apparent from the analytic formulation and results, unlike the case for
numerical simulations. The solutions can be evaluated in seconds, compared to
hours (or days) for fully numerical models. The main determinant of plate
behavior is the ratio of viscous stress on the lithosphere from mantle flow to
the strength of the lithosphere. Mantle stresses depend on mantle viscosity,
which depends strongly on temperature and water content, and the upper and lower
mantle may have different dependencies. The model allows these to be
investigated efficiently, for the first time. Preliminary results already
indicate that the model may resolve a longstanding discordance between
geochemical estimates of mantle radioactive heating and inferences from
geophysical thermal evolution models (the Urey ratio), which is a central issue
related to current studies and debates about the precise composition of the
Earth. The incorporation of the effects of water on rheology together with
models of recycling the oceans through the mantle will contribute to
investigations of variation of ocean volume over geologic time, as well as more
general problems of geochemical recycling. Lastly, the general analytic
formulation and realization of the model will allow its application to other
planets, both within the solar system and as exoplanets around other stars.