* 1215814
* ICES: Small: Collaborative Research: Interaction, Information and Identification
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Stephen Morris, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2015
* USD 200,000.00

Private and widely dispersed information across individuals is pervasive aspect
of economic environments. In financial markets, traders possess different
information about the value of an asset; In labor markets, employees and
employers have different information about the cost of a job. In the interaction
of the individual agents, the nature of the private information held by the
individuals, influences the outcome of the entire economy. In particular, the
structure of the interaction, the form of the network, determines the aggregate
outcome. Yet, from the point of view of an observer, be it as an analyst or a
regulator or a legislator, the precise nature of the private information and
network structure of the agents is rarely known.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
current research develops a method to analyze the behavior and the welfare in an
economic environment, online as well as offline, independent of the structure of
the private information and network structure of the agents. Concurrently, the
PIs analyze the extent to which the structure of the economic environments
(payoffs, preferences) can be identified from the empirical data without
knowledge of the exact information and network structure. The methods have
epistemic and computational advantages over earlier approaches. The PIs identify
bounds on the statistical moments of the equilibrium distribution. Conversely,
the statistical description of the equilibrium outcome allows the PIs to give
precise bounds on how much can be learned from the data when the nature of the
private information is unknown.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This new approach to
networks with private information offers techniques to analyze the welfare
implications of economic rules and institutions by providing bounds that are
independent of the knowledge of the information and network structure. The
method allows the PIs to assess the implication of different policies and
regulations regarding information disclosure, trading restrictions, reserve
requirements, that are independent of the specific information held by the
economic agents.