* 1215260
* SBIR Phase I:  High Efficiency Multi-fluid Jet Refrigeration
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Joseph Boswell, ThermAvant Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2012
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate a
highly efficient&lt;br/&gt;supersonic ejector vapor compression technology that
converts low-to-medium grade thermal energy&lt;br/&gt;(200-400F) into useful
refrigeration (20F-50F) at high condenser temperatures (100-120F). The
proposed&lt;br/&gt;multi-fluid jet cooler maximizes heat transfer efficiency by
using a propellant with relatively low latent to&lt;br/&gt;continuously entrain
and compress an immiscible low temperature refrigerant of relatively high
latent&lt;br/&gt;heat. Initial prototypes have 400% higher efficiencies than
conventional single-fluid ejectors. Phase I&lt;br/&gt;research will extend these
gains while operating at elevated condenser temperatures. Specific
research&lt;br/&gt;foci are: 1) Highly efficient jet nozzles to supersonically
expand a high molar mass, low specific heat&lt;br/&gt;ratio propellant without
the expansion/compression losses observed when using conventional
nozzle&lt;br/&gt;designs; 2) Mixing of subsonic refrigerant into the supersonic
propellant with minimal kinetic energy loss&lt;br/&gt;by avoiding sonic choking
of the refrigerant; and 3) Maximum pressure recovery diffusers utilizing
weak,&lt;br/&gt;oblique compression waves instead of strong, normal shock waves
to transition the mixed supersonic flow&lt;br/&gt;to subsonic velocity.
Potential applications for the two-fluid ejector compression technology
include&lt;br/&gt;natural gas powered air conditioning, concentrated solar
thermal chiller plants, lower cost combined&lt;br/&gt;heating power and cooling
plants, and thermally-driven water desalination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is reduced economic and
climate burden&lt;br/&gt;associated with the world?s growing demand for space
cooling. Air conditioning is the leading usage for&lt;br/&gt;peak-time
electricity in the U.S. and largest energy expense for commercial buildings.
Globally, the&lt;br/&gt;$65billion air conditioning equipment market is growing
at 5% p.a.; and because it is dominated by the&lt;br/&gt;electrically-driven
mechanical vapor compression cycle the strain on electrical grids - and by
extension&lt;br/&gt;the environment and economy - is rising likewise. A quiet,
clean, reliable and cost effective heat-driven&lt;br/&gt;solution would greatly
reduce these risks. Unfortunately, status quo technologies suffer low
efficiencies,&lt;br/&gt;large form factors, and require expensive water-cooled
condensers. Initial R&amp;D efforts have proven an&lt;br/&gt;ejector vapor
compressor using optimized fluid pairs built with low cost components can
operate at&lt;br/&gt;efficiencies competitive with electric compressors when
operating in moderate ambient conditions. Massmarket&lt;br/&gt;adoption,
however, requires efficient operation at extreme outside temperatures. Phase I
research&lt;br/&gt;will maximize cooling power and discharge pressure (thus
operability at high condenser temperatures) by&lt;br/&gt;minimizing irreversible
losses incurred during supersonic expansion and compression of the
immiscible&lt;br/&gt;fluid pairs. Project findings will benefit adjacent fields
of hypersonic avionics and low atmosphere jet&lt;br/&gt;propulsion