* 1215583
* SBIR Phase I:  A Synthetic Biology Design-Build-Test Platform for Automated Combinatorial DNA Assembly
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Michael Fero, TeselaGen Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2013
* USD 180,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a software technology that comprises a rapid screening and functional
testing system for Synthetic Biology. Wedding recent advances in DNA assembly
methods, and the software algorithms used to design those DNA assemblies, the
goal is to create an easy-to-use platform for assembling complex DNA constructs,
transfecting them into host microbes, and doing a rapid assessment of their
function. The proposed technology is a foundational tool that will facilitate
construction of complex DNA assemblies and combinatorial libraries, allowing
scientists to direct their resources to conducting experiments that address
primary issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project will be to accelerate the pace of microbe development for companies
and organizations that develop valuable proteins, advanced enzymes for industry,
or therapeutic medicines. DNA cloning is an everyday practice in the course of
both industrial- and university-based research. Cloning technology as has
remained largely unchanged for the last 20 years. As a consequence, researchers
waste time and money designing and constructing DNA, which could be applied to
designing and conducting experiments. Over the past few years, standardized
experimental DNA construction methods have been developed that lend themselves
well to automation and rapid assembly of DNA. Process automation is progressing
from luxury to necessity, as target applications demand the fabrication of large
combinatorial DNA libraries in the search for better antibodies, faster enzymes,
and more productive microbial strains. After the construction of the DNA
libraries, screening these libraries for constructs with the desired activities
remains a bottleneck, both in terms of cost and time. The proposed technology
will allow rapid prototyping and characterization of forward engineered
biological libraries of recombinant DNA, proteins or whole cells. The commercial
availability of this technology will provide a low cost alternative to current
methods.