* 1215594
* SBIR Phase I:  A Wafer-Scale Flat-Panel X-ray Source with Raster Control
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Kristin Schmiedehausen, Radius Diagnostics Research
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2012
* USD 148,339.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to
demonstrate key enabling technologies for a novel medical imaging x-­&#8208;ray
source. For over a century, medical imaging has relied on fundamentally the same
approach to generate x-­&#8208;rays: production in vacuum tubes, which are
fragile, heavy, not portable, and expensive. This proposal presents a method
that allows the x-­&#8208;ray source to move from tubes to a robust
flat-­&#8208;panel system produced in much the same way as modern televisions;
matching state-­&#8208;of-­&#8208;the-­&#8208;art flat-­&#8208;panel Digital
Radiology (DR) detector and dramatically changing the economics and application
profile of x-­&#8208;ray devices. The anticipated outcome of Phase I is a
proof-­&#8208;of-­&#8208;concept showing sufficient high-­&#8208;quality
x-­&#8208;ray flux can be generated from the proposed portable
flat-­&#8208;panel source and that the array of emitters can be addressed
(rastered). Simulations will also show that these devices will perform as
expected and conform to the clinical needs and technical standards in radiology.
Microfabrication will be used to produce a prototype system.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is a dramatic shift in
how medical imaging is delivered to the patient. The x-­&#8208;ray source being
developed under this proposal would be highly portable and robust. Such a device
could be carried by first responders, but it would also improve portable
x-­&#8208; ray radiology within the hospital. Current equipment for use in the
Intensive Care Unit (ICU) and Emergency Room (ER), where radiology must travel
to the patient is bulky, cumbersome and uncomfortable in use. The device
proposed would reduce the cost and discomfort associated with such equipment, as
well as fundamentally changing the economics of the fixed radiology in
hospitals. The proposed technology has the potential to reduce patient radiation
exposure while maintaining image quality, and improve advanced imaging including
dual energy x-­&#8208;ray scans, mammography, tomosynthesis and fluoroscopy
through Region of Interest selection: it can help save lives, provide healthcare
to a wider population at lower costs, and in locations not previously
accessible.