* 1215012
* SBIR Phase I:  Chemically Impregnated Nanoparticles for Use in Copper Chemical Mechanical Planarization Slurry
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Robin Ihnfeldt, General Engineering & Research, L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2013
* USD 150,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is focused on the
development of a copper chemical mechanical planarization (CMP) slurry
containing chemically impregnated nanoparticles. The CMP process consists of a
polishing pad and an aqueous slurry containing chemicals and abrasive
nanoparticles. The wafer surface to be planarized is rotated against the
polishing pad which is continuously supplied with slurry. The synergistic
combination of mechanical abrasion and chemical etching creates high material
removal rates (MRR) and rapid planarization. Currently, copper CMP slurry
solutions require a complexing agent, such as glycine, to maintain an adequate
MRR, which at the same time, also causes static etching and dissolution (i.e.
corrosion) of the wafer surface which is difficult to control. If the exposure
of the complexing agent to the copper surface could be controlled so that only
the abraded areas were affected, then static etching and dissolution could be
reduced or eliminated. Therefore, the focus of this proposal is to significantly
improve copper CMP slurry technology by combining the complexing agent into the
abrasive nanoparticle, so that mechanical and chemical actions of the slurry are
localized and simultaneous, thus improving processing efficiency and
tolerances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project includes advancing the state-of-the-art in CMP slurry formulation and
opening the door for functionalized nanoparticles in the CMP slurry market.
Specific impacts of the proposed project on copper CMP slurry technology
include: increasing planarization efficiency (ratio of step height reduction and
removed layer thickness) by decreasing static etching, eliminating a majority of
the chemical additives that are currently required in copper CMP slurries, and
reducing particle agglomeration by improving the dispersion stability. These
advantages will ultimately lead to a reduction in the cost of CMP processing
while also improving processing tolerances. Additionally, an enormous
opportunity exists to exploit functionalized nanoparticles to improve CMP
slurries. Successful implementation of this product will most certainly lead to
derivative technologies for other CMP processes.