* 1215750
* SEES Fellows: Barriers to soil sustainability, food security and biodiversity conservation in the Albertine Rift
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2012,10/31/2014
* Lisa Tiemann, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 10/31/2014
* USD 520,229.00

This project will explore how socio-economic and soil fertility factors interact
to generate unsustainable agricultural practices in Uganda; how the trend of
productivity loss might be reversed; and how the reversal of productivity
declines can be used to protect one of Earth?s most valuable biodiversity
resources ? the Albertine Rift including Kibale National Park. The research will
use an interdisciplinary approach, integrating elements of ecology, soil
science, and social sciences to link patterns of land use intensity with soil
fertility and the socio-economic barriers that inhibit sustainable farming
practices. The project will explore new paradigms in soil organic matter
formation and degradation to form a better understanding of links between land
use and soil fertility. In addition, the project will compile survey data for a
broad-scale quantitative assessment of the effects of traditional land
management practices as compared with perceptions about productivity and soil
fertility in a spatially explicit manner. Soil fertility will be defined by
measurements of soil organic matter, soil carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus, pH,
water holding capacity and microbial biomass. These data will be integrated by
mapping demographic factors, ethnicity, and risks, overlaid with land use and
areas of perceived and actual declines in soil fertility. This type of
integration will be useful in identifying socio-economic factors that may act as
barriers in maintaining soil fertility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
create new ties among North American and Ugandan scientists. Research will be
conducted in close collaboration with local farmers in order to raise awareness
of the importance of soils and soil sustainability. In addition, the project
will partner with non-governmental organizations and local schools to engage
thousands of school children in science education activities related to
sustainable agriculture practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Agricultural
intensification to meet increasing food demands in less developed areas of sub-
Saharan Africa results in only short term increases in crop yields. Methods,
such as cultivating more land, reducing fallow periods, and increasing crop
density are not sustainable because land suitable for cultivation is finite,
soil organic matter is depleted and fertility is lost, and biological processes
are minimized, leading to severely reduced future production potentials. This
project will explore cost effective and culturally acceptable methods for
maintaining soil organic matter and improving soil fertility, with the goals of
increased food security and the conservation of
biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported under the NSF
Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows)
program, with the goal of helping to enable discoveries needed to inform actions
that lead to environmental, energy and societal sustainability while creating
the necessary workforce to address these challenges. With SEES Fellows support,
this project will enable a promising early career researcher to establish
themselves in an independent research career related to sustainability.