* 1215457
* SBIR Phase I:  Synergistic Combinations of New Materials & Systems for Scalable Desulfurization of Distributed Biogas Resources
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Hongyun Yang, IntraMicron Inc
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2013
* USD 169,951.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes a fundamentally
new means for biogas (landfill gas) desulfurization that produces less waste,
allows recycle of recovered sulfur, and provides annualized operating costs a
fraction of current practice. Inexpensive biogas cleanup is required for
subsequent combustion, fuel cell usage, or conversion to liquid fuels. The costs
of gas clean up and spent sorbent disposal currently dictate the cost of biogas
conversion to clean energy. The proposed two-stage process is a synergistic
combination of: a novel Oxidative Sulfur Removal (OSR) catalyst formulation
producing elemental sulfur; a wide temperature range regenerable downstream
polishing sorbent; and a unique in situ sensor permitting optimal adsorbent bed
operation and cycling. Current technology produces 125 tons of spent adsorbent
for a 500kWe biogas combustor. Ironically, this adsorbent must be landfilled.
The proposed process could reduce adsorbent waste 7-20 times and yields
elemental sulfur that can be recycled into the fertilizer industry. The OSR
catalyst is anticipated to be contaminant-tolerant in practice. Major
innovations of the proposed approach include: long-life OSR catalyst, high
selectivity to elemental sulfur, high activity and low-cost catalyst, real-time
in situ adsorbent capacity monitoring to maximize material utilization and
further reduce costs.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes the greatly
enhanced ability to utilize biogas for alternative and renewable energy
production facilities with significantly reduced carbon and waste footprints and
process costs. The proposed process is thermodynamically efficient and readily
scalable to a variety of locations and capacities. The proposed process has the
ability to remove sulfur contaminants to very low levels thereby enabling
catalytic conversion of biogas to higher value liquid fuels and chemicals.
Recovered elemental sulfur can be utilized directly as a fertilizer additive. In
short, the proposed innovation permits biogas desulfurization and subsequent
usage in a more economic and environmentally friendly manner than current
approaches. The proposed process is also capable of cleaning biogas and other
gas sources with high sulfur contents (ca. 1-3%) without a significant increase
in process costs. Besides biogas, other gas streams including natural gas, frac
gas, petroleum gas, and syngas from a variety of sources can be desulfurized.
Therefore, BTL, CTL, GTL, and renewable electric power generation can be
impacted by the success of this innovation.