* 1215825
* SEES Fellows: Social-Ecological Resilience of Coastal Shoreline Ecosystems: Developing a Framework for Informed Decision-Making
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Steven Scyphers, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 06/30/2016
* USD 503,447.00

This interdisciplinary project will investigate the social, ecological and
engineering factors that contribute to coastal resilience and develop a
framework for improved communication and informed decision making. The study
aims to understand how social, ecological and engineering objectives for coastal
shorelines are interlinked with the health of fisheries and fish habitats in
order to develop a framework to improve social and ecological resilience. Study
sites include Narragansett and Mobile Bays, which are both large, densely-
populated estuarine embayments that have experienced dramatic declines in
nearshore marine habitats. The research effort will 1) identify and model the
fisheries consequences of shifts in habitat composition; 2) investigate the
social, cultural and political factors that affect the sustainability of
shoreline ecosystems, 3) assess the shoreline protection capacity and habitat
complexity of wave-attenuating breakwaters; and 4) incorporate the social,
ecological and engineering indices generated by the first three tasks into a
decision-making framework. The project will involve collaboration between
researchers and practitioners in the academic, government and private sectors,
and include a variety of outreach activities to students and the public.

Understanding the complexity of factors related to resilience of human and
natural communities is of high priority for those tasked with managing resources
on a changing planet. In the past, most coastal conservation planning and
prioritization has occurred without adequate knowledge or consideration of
socio-cultural or engineering impacts. The goal of this research is to provide
managers with decision support tools to enable restoration and sustainability
efforts that maximize social capital.

This project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. With SEES Fellows support, this project will enable a
promising early career researcher to establish themselves in an independent
research career related to sustainability.