* 1215864
* MEASURING SOIL WATER FLUXES DUE TO EVAPORATION AND FREEZING
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Robert Horton, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 07/31/2016
* USD 364,010.00

Robert Horton, Iowa State University Joshua Heitman, North Carolina State
University

Heat transfer and associated temperature variations are fundamental drivers of
water phase changes within the hydrologic cycle. Yet, our understanding of soil
water phase changes in the presence of temperature gradients remains limited.
Newly-developed instrumentation provides detailed, fine-scale measurements of
soil thermal properties, temperature and water content. Combined with
conservation of energy and mass, these measurements allow calculation of in situ
latent heat sinks and soil water fluxes, thus revealing both time and depth
dynamics of soil water phase change. Research will test a central hypothesis
about the evaporation process, that the depth of the evaporation front is
controlled by the magnitude of the liquid water flux to the front, within a
context considering both heat and water transfer. This hypothesis will be
evaluated through a series of non-isothermal laboratory experiments using
thermo-TDR equipped soil columns for a series of surface boundary conditions and
two soil types. Measurements of liquid water and water vapor flux profiles, soil
surface temperature conditions, and mass balance will offer unprecedented
information about both heat and water transfer occurring with soil water
evaporation. Concurrently, research will address a second hypothesis about
quantifying soil freezing, that a combined measurement-based energy and water
balance can accurately characterize the rate of soil freezing, ice contents,
liquid water contents and liquid water fluxes at the freezing front in partially
frozen soil. This hypothesis will first be addressed through numerical
experiments aimed at testing system-imposed limitations, and microcosm
experiments and inverse numerical analysis aimed at adaptation of thermal
property measurements for temperatures near the freezing point. Incorporating
findings from these studies, the hypothesis will be tested in a series of
freezing soil column systems, instrumented with thermo-TDR sensors to measure
soil water and ice contents, and associated heat and water fluxes.

Soil water phase changes -- evaporation/condensation and freezing/thawing --
drive the hydrological cycle and determine water availability for biological,
chemical, and physical processes occurring throughout the terrestrial
environment. These phase changes also tightly couple water and energy budgets.
They involve both sensible and latent heat transfer, and both liquid water and
water vapor fluxes. To date, understanding of the interplay of water and energy
fluxes with soil water phase changes remains extremely limited. This research
will carefully examine water and energy budgets together using newly developed,
fine-scale instrumentation in order to improve understanding of the hydrologic
cycle, soil water evaporation, and soil freezing. Implications for this research
include improved capabilities for land-surface modeling and remote sensing of
surface processes, as well as direct application to understanding carbon and
trace gas transmissions and myriad other biogeochemical processes.