* 1216740
* Adaptive Discontinuous Galerkin Methods and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Ohannes Karakashian, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 07/31/2016
* USD 173,512.00

In its broad outlines, the research program outlined in this proposal aims at
the development, analysis and computer implementation of numerical methods
designed to approximate the solutions of some partial differential equations
with important applications in the fields of Engineering, Physics, the
Biomedical Sciences and Mathematics. While the discontinuous Galerkin method
will constitute the core methodology of this effort, a wide range of themes will
be covered: A priori and a posteriori error estimates, adaptive methods,
efficient solution of linear and nonlinear systems using multigrid and domain
decomposition methods, flexible data structures and implementation on multicore
and parallel processors and finally, applications to practical and analytical
problems. A particularly appealing component is the development of generic a
posteriori error estimators. These could find wide acceptability among
scientists who do not have the mathematical background that is necessary to the
construction of the traditional a posteriori estimators. A judicious balance
will be struck between algorithm and code development, on one hand, and the
rigorous analysis of their properties, on the other. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since
the dawn of the modern era, scientists have been successful in describing
natural phenomena by using partial differential equations (PDE's) as models. The
Einstein equations that describe phenomena at the largest (cosmic) scales, the
Schrodinger equation that describes phenomena at the smallest (atomic) scales
and the Navier-Stokes equations that are used to model a plethora of fluid flows
are but a few of such PDE's without which the modern world would not be what it
is today. Yet such PDE's are almost impossible to solve exactly and since the
beginning, scientists have resorted to numerical calculations to approximate the
unknown solutions. Naturally, advances in numerical techinques must keep pace
with advances in PDE's and quite recently adaptive numerical techniques have
emerged as a very promising tool in tackling even the most difficult
approximation tasks. In carrying out the research projects outlined in this
proposal, the P.I. will develop novel and promising adaptive numerical
algorithms, analyze their properties and implement them on state of the art
computers. These methods and computer codes will become part of the arsenal of
tools enabling engineers, physicists and mathematicians to understand the
phenomena described by the particular PDE's they are using. For example, one
research activity proposed herein is to numerically investigate the ways in
which a malignant tumor changes shape. Finally, in maintaining the essential
tradition of training the next generation of teachers and researchers, a
graduate student will participate in these projects in partial fulfillment of
his Ph.D. degree.