* 1216111
* Collaborative Research: RAPID--To Conduct Ionospheric Irregularity and Scintillation Experiments Using the Radio Aurora Explorer II
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2013
* Richard Doe, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Irfan S. Azeem
* 04/30/2013
* USD 40,450.00

This is a short term effort to conduct initial orchestrated coherent scatter and
scintillations experiments utilizing the RAX II spacecraft together with ground
based incoherent scatter radar and heating facilities. The Radio Aurora Explorer
(RAX) satellite was the first NSF Cubesat mission to be selected and flown. It
was launched in November 2010 and successfully executed two radar experiments in
coordination with NSF's Poker Flat Incoherent Scatter Radar (PFISR). Shortly
after, the solar power system degraded, and the mission prematurely terminated.
The recent NASA launch of the backup flight spacecraft (RAX II) in October 2011
offers the opportunity to continue the RAX mission. The additional experiments
that this opportunity enables are the subject of this RAPID project

The RAX mission is a ground-to-space bi-static radar remote sensing experiment
designed to measure meter-scale ionospheric turbulence that occurs during strong
auroral disturbances. Five globally distributed UHF Incoherent Scatter Radar
facilities will be used to illuminate natural/artificial ionospheric field-
aligned irregularities (FAI). The RAX UHF radar receiver measures coherent
backscatter at multiple points along the satellite track, from which on can
quantify the plasma wave energy distribution parallel to the geomagnetic field
lines. RAX II experiments will be conducted for both naturally occurring and
artificially generated ionospheric irregularities in mid to high latitudes. RAX
I was planned to address natural ionospheric irregularities; with RAX II, the
experimental scope is expanded to address new HF heater generated effects. The
goals are to capture (1) coherent scatter from natural and artificial
ionospheric irregularities, and (2) the amplitude and phase distortions of UHF
signals passing through naturally and artificially generated irregularities.
Ionospheric irregularity backscatter experiments will be coordinated with
megawatt-class narrow-beam UHF incoherent scatter radars to provide high spatial
and temporal resolution mapping of ionospheric irregularities (between the
altitudes of 80-400 km) for a wide range of conditions for the ionospheric
electric field, currents, and plasma density gradients. In addition to studying
the properties of naturally occurring plasma turbulence, we will run experiments
to measure artificial ionospheric irregularities generated by high-power HF
heating of the ionospheric E and F regions. Currently, two heater facilities are
available for this purpose: HAARP and SPEAR. The Modular UHF Incoherent Scatter
Radar (MUIR) and the EISCAT Svalbard Radar (ESR), respectively, will be the ISRs
operating in conjunction with RAX II for diagnostics of the artificially
generated plasma turbulence. Ionospheric scintillation of UHF signals will be
measured using the raw data acquisition mode of the RAX UHF payload receiver.

Better understanding of ionospheric irregularities and their role in ionospheric
dynamics is an important space weather research objective because plasma
structures in the ionosphere can have an adverse effect on communications via
satellite, HF and VHF radio and as well as an adverse effect on navigation,
tracking, and positioning. The project will promote education and learning in
that graduate undergraduate students from University of Michigan will perform
the majority of the satellite operations and data handling.