* 1216668
* Collaborative Research: The Science Gateway Institute (SGW-I) for the Democratization and Acceleration of Science
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Linda Hayden, Elizabeth City State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 08/31/2015
* USD 50,000.00

As science today grows increasingly digital, it poses exciting challenges and
opportunities for researchers. Whether it is streaming data from sensors,
simulating the formation of tornadoes, annotating and sharing tagged audio and
video data, or using geographic information systems to anticipate the spread of
disease, the frontiers of transformative science are enormous and continue to
grow. Many scientists are turning to web portals or science gateways to allow
them to analyze, share, and understand large volumes of data more effectively.
The existence of science gateways - and the sophisticated cyberinfrastructure
(CI) tools and resources behind these accessible web interfaces - can
significantly improve the productivity of researchers facing the most difficult
challenges. Most important, science gateways can democratize access to the
cyberinfrastructure that enables cutting edge science. Now the best minds can
tackle todayÂ¹s most challenging science problems, regardless of their
affiliation.

Science gateway developers face several challenges. They often work in isolation
even though development can be quite similar across domain areas, they bridge
local, campus, national and sometimes international cyberinfrastructure, they
need foundational building blocks so they can focus on higher-level grand-
challenge functionality. Sustainable funding for science gateways can also be
difficult to secure as they span the worlds of research and infrastructure.

This one-year planning award will gather community feedback, forming the
foundation of a Science Gateway Institute. The institute will be an incubator of
sorts for science gateways, vastly increasing their chances for long term
success. It will provide a forum for developers to share ideas, approaches and
software. It will provide expertise - in science gateway building, in
technologies enabling grand challenge research, in open community software
development, in virtual organizations, in project management and in science
gateway sustainability. It will provide workforce development, training the next
generation for careers in this dynamic, cross-disciplinary and important area.