* 1216129
* CAREER: Investigation of biological signaling with complexes that release zinc upon illumination with light
* MPS,CHE
* 08/14/2011,09/30/2017
* Shawn Burdette, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 09/30/2017
* USD 513,757.00

This research award in the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) program supports
work by Professor Shawn Burdette at the University of Connecticut to develop
complexes that release zinc upon exposure to light. Current research suggests
that labile zinc may function as a neurotransmitter and signaling agent within
cells. While zinc can be released from intracellular vesicles by electrical
stimulation or applied exogenously, the new caged metal complexes will allow
greater control over the amount of zinc introduced into biological specimens
with enhanced spatial and temporal resolution. Caged complexes are metal ion
chelators that release analytes when exposed to light of a specific wavelength.
The structural properties of cages will be varied rationally and systematically
to tune the properties of the caged complexes for the desired biological
applications. In addition, a summer research program to provide Connecticut high
school students to chemistry research (School of Exploratory Chemistry Research
Experience and Training, SECRET) will continue to be offered on a yearly basis.
Recruiting more students for SECRET from underrepresented groups will be an area
of emphasis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Disruption of zinc signaling pathways and
zinc homeostasis are implicated in numerous human diseases and disorders.
Understanding the underlying signaling functions of zinc is important for
developing strategies to treat these conditions. Developing caged complexes will
provide the chemical tools that are necessary for studying these zinc signaling
pathways.