* 1216568
* Computational Methods and Data Assimilation in Nonlinear Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Timothy Sauer, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 90,000.00

Computer simulation is a critical ingredient of modern science. Simulations that
depend on the solution of differential equations are subject to small modeling,
truncation, and &#64258;oating point arithmetic errors. A relatively new set of
algorithms, called set-oriented methods, have been developed for the analysis of
structures in computational dynamics. We propose to build a foundation for
analyzing the possible effect of the errors on these techniques and others used
in computational dynamics. The second major focus of this project is the
interpretation of data collected from experimental systems and nature when only
a partial mathematical model is available. We will investigate a range of
techniques which, depending on the completeness of the available model, can be
used to attempt to reconstruct the model and dynamical behavior of the process,
with potential to predict or control the process. Complex deterministic time
series from physical, and biological/medical settings that are produced by
network dynamics will be particular applications.

The project focuses on two major areas: the development of new approaches to
study computer simulation validity, and the interpretation of experimental data
from nonlinear processes. Computer simulation is a critical ingredient of modern
science. Simulations are subject to errors both in modeling and computation. The
proposal builds a foundation for analyzing the possible effect of the errors on
set-oriented simulation results, for physically relevant models. The second
major focus of this project is the interpretation of data collected from
experimental systems and nature when only a partial mathematical model is
available. We will investigate a range of techniques which can be used to
attempt to reconstruct the model and dynamical behavior, with potential to
predict or control the process.