* 1216457
* SHF:Small: Fine-grain Dynamically Reconfigurable FPGA Architecture Aimed at Reducing the ASIC-FPGA Gaps
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Niraj Jha, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 08/31/2016
* USD 350,000.00

Field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) and application-specific integrated
circuits (ASICs) are two very important processing elements for computation.
FPGAs are very attractive because of their lower design cost and shorter time-
to-market compared to ASICs. Still, the marketshare of FPGAs remains less than a
fifth of that of ASICs because ASICs enjoy an advantage over FPGAs in terms of
circuit area, power consumption, and delay. The objective of the proposed work
is to significantly reduce these area/power/delay gaps through a new dynamically
reconfigurable FPGA design and thus enable FPGAs to become much more competitive
with ASICs. Continued scaling of bulk CMOS technology faces significant hurdles.
To alleviate these problems, Intel and TSMC have already announced a switch to
multi-gate field-effect transistors, e.g., Trigate and FinFETs, at the upcoming
semiconductor technology nodes. Another important trend is towards 3D integrated
circuits (ICs), in which multiple die layers are stacked on top of each other.
3D ICs promise a revolution in so called ``More than Moore" computing. The
proposed work aims to take advantage of the multi-gate and 3D IC technologies to
further reduce the gaps mentioned above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed FPGA
architecture significantly deviates from the conventional island-style FPGA
architecture by enabling the logic element to either perform computation or
local communication or both. It is aided by the key concept of temporal logic
folding that allows a circuit to be drastically folded, aided by on-chip
reconfiguration memory, before being mapped to the FPGA. It attacks the main
reason for the area/power/delay gaps -- the vast amount of chip resources
allocated to reconfigurable interconnects in FPGAs. Logic folding makes the
communication local, thus making it possible to reduce the amount of resources
devoted to interconnects very significantly. The work entails design space
exploration of the different components of the architecture, investigation of
novel multi-gate computation/communication structures, and algorithms and design
automation tools to map arbitrary circuits to the FPGA architecture. It is
expected to yield a well-characterized and highly versatile family of 3D multi-
gate transistor based FPGAs that are competitive with ASICs. Work on various
design methodologies and tools developed in this research will be disseminated
through conference and journal articles. Technology transfer will be done
through companies interested in using such FPGAs as accelerators. The material
will be included in a senior-level course on Design with Nanotechnologies and a
graduate-level course on Low Power IC and System Design introduced by the PI.
Female and minority students will be attracted to this research through
Princeton's Presidential Fellowship Program.