* 1216614
* SHF: Small: Pipelined and wireless ultra-low power straintronics: An acoustically clocked combinational and sequential nanomagnetic  architecture
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Supriyo Bandyopadhyay, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2016
* USD 440,000.00

Elliptical single-domain nanomagnets with two stable magnetization orientations
are far more energy-efficient as logic switches than traditional transistors.
However, the method employed to switch them must be energy-efficient as well in
order to build ultra-low-power nanomagnetic logic and memory paradigms. It has
been theoretically shown that using multiferroic (magnetostrictive-
piezoelectric) nanomagnets, whose magnetization can be flipped with strain
generated by a tiny electrostatic potential applied across the piezoelectric
layer, results in a remarkably energy-efficient switching scheme. It reduces the
dissipation in the switching/clocking circuit by four orders of magnitude at a
clock rate of ~ 1 GHz compared to other nanomagnet switching schemes. While this
is attractive, an unattractive trait of nanomagnetic logic chains is that in
order to build a pipelined architecture and hence retain an acceptable bit
transfer rate, each magnet must be clocked individually. This necessitates
contacting each magnetic with a contact line, which imposes a Herculean
lithographic burden. The PIs propose to overcome this problem completely by
designing and fabricating a novel acoustic scheme for clocking that allows
pipelining and at the same time does not require contacts to every magnet,
thereby completely lifting the lithography burden. A surface acoustic wave (SAW)
launched in the substrate, and slowed down with periodically placed masses,
generates strain in an array of magnets in the correct sequence for bit
transfer, as long as the spacing between the magnets is one quarter of the SAW?s
wavelength. With this scheme, the energy dissipation in a gate operation at room
temperature can be very low. This project will: (i) design combinational and
sequential logic based on acoustically clocked magnetostrictive nanomagnets
acting as logic switches, as well as perform extensive simulations using the
stochastic Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equation to understand and optimize
reliability and fault tolerance in the presence of thermal noise; (ii)
experimentally demonstrate pipelined unidirectional logic flow, and (iii)
develop comprehensive coupled models for the switching dynamics of nanomagnets
stressed by surface acoustic wave (SAW). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will result in a novel computational paradigm whose astonishing energy
efficiency combined with very little lithographic burden could enable the
production of cheap, high yield and extremely low power processors. Such
processors would consume so little energy that they can be run off the energy
harvested from the environment. This could open up hitherto unimaginable
applications such as medically implanted processors powered only by the motion
of the patient's body, or processors that monitor the structural health of
bridges and buildings while being powered by vibrations caused by wind or
traffic. Integration of this research with education and mentoring will result
in traditional training activities such as guiding two doctoral students who
will gain multidisciplinary skills in advanced nanofabrication,
nanocharacterization and modeling, as well as undergraduate projects on SAW
devices and nanofabrication of magnetostrictive nanomagnets that will be
mentored by the PI and co-PI?s doctoral students. Other innovative outreach
programs will include holding workshops on nanomagnets and computing for high
school students through the Math Science Innovation Center (MSIC) and
incorporating diversity into outreach programs by hosting under-represented K-12
students in summer with the help of VCUs Richmond Area Program for Minorities in
Engineering (RAPME) program. These students will perform nanolithography under
supervision and study the magnetic structures they create with MFM.