* 1216476
* CIF: SMALL: The Linear Information Coupling Problem
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Lizhong Zheng, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2015
* USD 350,000.00

In this research, we study a new problem setting in transmitting information
over networks, which we call the linear information coupling problem. Instead of
asking how many information bits can be conveyed through a given channel, we ask
how can one efficiently send a thin layer of information. Aside from its
operational implications, and the new applications it addresses, we point out
that this new formulation is a generic and fundamental simplification to the
network capacity problem, which has remained open for decades. We observe that
the main difficulties in many network information theory problems are
essentially the same: the high dimensional optimization problems over
probability distributions do not have sufficient structure. The key step of the
linear coupling problems is a local quadratic approximation of the Kullback-
Leibler divergence, from where a geometric structure for the space of
probability distributions is defined. This helps us to visualize the information
transitions as simpler geometric operations such as projections and expansion
with respect to orthonormal bases, and thus identify efficient ways to convey
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Equipped with this new analysis tool, this
project studies two classes of problems. First, as demonstrated with our
preliminary results, the local approximation is particularly powerful in solving
some open network communication problems. We generalize these results to
construct a new network model, where each connection is linearized and
characterized by the corresponding singular value decomposition (SVD) structure.
With this model, the optimal network operations and the corresponding
performance can often be solved explicitly. Secondly, we extend this approach to
study more general information exchanges including real-time, dynamic, and
error-prone systems. This allows us extend the principle of information theory
to a much broader context than conventional coded digital applications.