* 1216749
* The Origins of Domestication in the Mayan Lowlands
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Katherine Emery, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2014
* USD 185,855.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Drs. Erin Kennedy Thornton
and Kitty Emery, together with collaborators at academic institutions in the
United States, Canada and Mexico, will re-examine the timing and process of
turkey husbandry in the Maya lowlands.

Determining when the practice of turkey husbandry was adopted and/or developed
by the ancient Maya has important consequences for understanding Maya
subsistence systems and long-distance trade connections. Since the turkey is one
of only a few animals domesticated in the Americas, this research also has broad
ramifications for understanding the process of New World animal domestication
and animal management. Archaeologists wish to understand the processes which led
to the development of complex social systems. In most instances in which this
occurred - both in the Old and New Worlds - the domestication of animals played
a significant role in the process. Lowland Middle America is unusual in this
regard since it is unclear whether any non-plant species were domesticated there
(as opposed to introduced from elsewhere). Drs. Thornton's and Emery's research
will directly address this issue.

The project is inter-disciplinary: integrating zooarchaeological, osteometric,
isotopic, and DNA analysis. These methods will be used to address several
questions regarding turkey husbandry in the Mesoamerica. The research will
assess when the Mexican turkey (Meleagris gallopavo) was first introduced to the
ancient Maya and when it was widely adopted. Until recently, the non-local
Mexican turkey was thought to have been introduced to the Maya cultural region
during the Postclassic period (AD 1000-1500). The recent discovery of Mexican
turkeys in Late Preclassic (300 BC-AD 100) deposits at the site of El Mirador
(Petén, Guatemala) challenges this assumption, and suggests that the species may
have been introduced approximately 1000 years earlier than previously thought.
The research will also address whether the ancient Maya maintained captive
populations of the wild ocellated turkey (Meleagris ocellata), which is native
to the Maya region.

The research will further provide cross-cultural comparison with turkey
husbandry in the American Southwest, which has been identified as an independent
center of turkey domestication. Such comparisons provide insight into the
economic and social motivations for managing natural resources, and will advance
our knowledge of ancient North America's only domestic animal.

The project will facilitate and develop international collaboration between
educational and governmental institutions in the United States, Canada, Mexico
and Belize. These research partnerships are important to several senior project
personnel who are early career researchers working to establish professional
networks. The research will also provide academic training for both graduate and
undergraduate students from the University of Florida, Universidad Autonóma de
Yucatan, Trent University, Simon Fraser University, University of New Mexico,
and SUNY-Albany. Through open-access data storage and publication, the data
generated from this project will contribute to future research. For example, DNA
obtained from modern specimens will add to the available genetic sequences for
both Meleagris gallopavo and Meleagris ocellata. The zooarchaeological, isotopic
and genetic from this project will also be made publicly available through on-
line databases, as well as standard publications.