* 1216461
* EAGER: Red Blood Cell Membrane Camouflaged Nanoparticles for Drug Delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Liangfang Zhang, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 02/28/2014
* USD 300,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1216461 PI: Zhang, Liangfang ORG: UC San
Diego&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: EAGER: Red Blood Cell Membrane Camouflaged
Nanoparticles for Drug Delivery&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The
research objective of this award is to study an innovative biomimetic
nanoparticle platform that uses natural red blood cell (RBC) membranes, rather
than conventional synthetic stealth biomaterials, to cloak synthetic
nanoparticles for drug delivery. The approach taken will be to utilize a novel
and revolutionary top-down strategy to functionalize nanoparticles by
transferring the entire cellular 'utility coat' of an RBC onto the surface of
drug nanocarriers. A nanoparticle thus modified is expected to exhibit similar
physiologic behavior as its source cells. To achieve the primary goal, two
specific research tasks will be pursued in the proposed project: (i) study the
physicochemical and biological properties the RBC membrane cloaked polymeric
nanoparticles, and (ii) explore effective approaches to incorporate targeting
ligands on the surface of the RBC membrane cloaked nanoparticles for targeted
drug delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: If successful, this project
will develop an entirely new class of biomimetic nanoparticles that combines RBC
membranes with synthetic biomaterials. Such a combination of natural cellular
components with synthetic biomaterials presents an innovative approach to
develop novel and powerful drug delivery nanocarriers and will have profound
impacts on the fields of biomaterials research and nanotechnology drug delivery.
Moreover, this work highly integrates research and education. Two education
thrusts will be carried out during the period of this project: (i) The PI will
create new courses to shape and impact the development of the first
undergraduate curriculum in 'nanoengineering' in the Untitled States. This
curriculum will be provided as a model for the development of similar programs
at other institutions. (ii) The PI will collaborate with the UCSD ET-CURE
Program to provide minority undergraduate students with stimulating research
experiences. The PI will recruit 1-2 minority undergraduate students to work on
this project.