* 1216611
* SHF:Small:Disciplined Approximate Programming for Energy-Efficient Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Daniel Grossman, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2015
* USD 300,000.00

This research aims to make computing systems more energy-efficient, leading to
longer battery life for mobile devices and lower energy bills for end users and
data centers. The key approach is to identify and exploit portions of
computations where approximate results or occasional errors are allowable and
use this flexibility to save energy. While sacrificing precision may initially
seem unthinkable for computers, it is appropriate for the energy-intensive
portions of many applications, such as programs related to multimedia, sensing,
or random simulation. While allowing some approximation, one must still insist
that only data and code specifically annotated as "approximate" by the
programmer is allowed to be imprecise. Moreover, this research will develop
techniques for monitoring and enforcing "quality of service", which in this
context means the impact that approximation has on the observable
output.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research necessarily crosses several layers of
the conventional computing execution stack. The best way to save energy is via
novel hardware that, thanks to approximation, can save energy via various means
such as voltage scaling or lower cache refresh rates. But only higher levels of
abstraction know where approximation is appropriate, so we need language design
and language implementation to communicate this information to the hardware. In
addition, programmers need software-development tools for debugging and
profiling applications that leverage approximation. The results of this research
will include advances in computer architecture, programming language design and
implementation, and software tools.