* 1216314
* AF: Small: Fully Implicit Methods for Partial Differential Equations and Software for Hybrid Architecture
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Xiao-Chuan Cai, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jack S. Snoeyink
* 08/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

The first goal of the project is to develop new domain decomposition algorithms
and software for the numerical solution of some highly nonlinear, coupled
systems of partial differential equations arising from multi-physics
applications. For simple problems, implicit methods are relatively easy to
develop from a given explicit or semi-implicit method, but for some multi-
physics problems it is quite difficult to develop a fully implicit method that
allows a high performance implementation. Most of the existing techniques are
non-smooth and therefore difficult to solve with Newton type solver. In the
project, some discretization techniques will be developed that involve high
order non-smooth discretization for capturing the domain information, and low
order locally smooth discretization for building the Jacobian system of the
Newton iterations. The low order discretization serves as a nonlinear
preconditioner that speeds up the convergence, but doesn't change the accuracy
of the solution. The second goal of the project is to develop an efficient
implementation of the proposed linear and nonlinear preconditioning approaches
on high performance computers with a large number of processors.

Relatively mature technologies including algorithms and software are available
for solving many types of single physics problems, but for coupled multi-physics
problems, robust and scalable techniques are badly needed, especially for large
scale parallel computers with accelerators. The proposed algorithms and software
will have a great impact on several important application areas, such as the
simulation of global atmospheric flows and the bio-fluids, and will also have
substantial influence on other areas of computational sciences where large
linear and nonlinear equations need to be solved. To broaden the impact of the
research, the software will be made fully compatible with the widely used PETSc
package. The research is a rich area in opportunities for both graduate and
undergraduate students interested in high performance computing and general
Computational Science and Engineering.