* 1216567
* Collaborative Research: Methods for Stochastic and Nonlinear Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Jorge Nocedal, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 07/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

The projects described in this proposal are designed to advance the capabilities
of optimization methods for a class of stochastic and deterministic optimization
problems. The first project focuses on problems where the objective function is
given by an expectation or a loss function. We propose dynamic sample algorithms
that attempt to bridge the gap between stochastic and batch methods. Their
essential characteristic is that they adapt the sample size during the
progression of the optimization in a manner that leads to low computational
effort and high accuracy in the solution, when so desired. The second project
deals with the design of new active-set methods for solving constrained
optimization and convex regularized L1 problems. Our work builds on two
algorithms recently proposed in the literature: the block active-set method
(also called the primal-dual active-set method), and the orthant-wise method for
solving L1 regularized problems. Our new algorithms are provably convergent and
applicable to a wider class of applications. The third project addresses the
need to improve the robustness of nonlinear optimization methods in the presence
of infeasibility. Our first goal is to design an interior point method endowed
with infeasibility detection capabilities, and to show how its main mechanism
can be extended to other interior point methods. The second goal is to develop a
convergence theory that is applicable to both active set and interior point
methods consisting of three components: an optimization phase, a feasibility
phase, and a mechanism for transitioning between the two
phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods developed in this project are useful in
big data analysis, which is playing a vital role in genomics, materials science,
meteorology, climate modeling and information science. In all these disciplines,
vast amounts of data have become available in the last decade, with the rate of
generation accelerating exponentially. The challenge is to process this large
amount of information to make inferences and predictions, thereby accelerating
our basic understanding of physical and social systems. For example, the complex
physics simulations employed in the design of advanced materials, meteorology
and climate modeling, require the use of detailed information obtained over a
large set of scenarios. The optimization and machine learning methods developed
in this project can be integrated in support of such simulations, thereby
obviating the need for extremely complex models that are difficult to study and
generalize. Our work has direct impact in genomics and other areas of biology.
For example, we plan to investigate its use in metagenomics, specifically de
novo assembly of next generation DNA sequencing data. Sequences can be tagged
with markers, or found in reference data sets like transcriptomes. A goal is to
use this new information to enable faster and more accurate de novo assembly. In
computer science and information technology, our new algorithms will be useful
in the development of a new generation of speech recognition and computer vision
systems. Speech recognition, which will play an increasingly important role in
many technological applications, can only advance by incorporating more data
more intelligently, and the algorithms described in this proposal are designed
precisely for that purpose.