* 1216282
* III: Small: Multi-field Hierarchical Discovery and Tracking (mf-HDT) of Emerging Topics
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Yiming Yang, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 09/30/2016
* USD 515,182.00

The goal of this project addresses the open challenge of Multi-field
Hierarchical Discovery and Tracking (mf-HDT) of emerging topics at different
granularity levels based on combined evidence in heterogeneous data. The
technical approaches consist of a new Bayesian framework with powerful inference
algorithms, namely the multi-field Hierarchical Correlated Topic Modeling, for
discovering multi-field hierarchies of latent topics, capturing inter-topic and
cross-hierarchy correlations, and enabling query-driven threading of topics over
a Markov chain of hierarchies. These technical innovations and capabilities go
beyond existing Topic Detection and Tracking (TDT) methods and graphical models
used to represent relationships between topics, citations, etc. Significant
improvements are expected in both effectiveness and scalability over the
existing methods, especially in terms of detecting newly emerging topics and
tacking time-sensitive impact. The proposed approach will be evaluated on a four
large datasets of scientific literature data in a broad range (Physics,
Mathematics, Computer Science, Quantitative Biology, Quantitative Finance and
Statistics) as well as news stories, with human-produced queries and relevance
judgments and human-assigned topic labels to support task-oriented evaluations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Productivity of researchers, educational practitioners and
students, government agencies supporting research and industries highly depends
on the availability of up-to-date big pictures about scientific emergence and
co-emergence within and across many fields, along with evidence of the impact of
new technologies, and research or development funding. The proposed techniques,
if successful, will provide principled and effective solutions with a broad
future impact in the applications above and beyond. Web site
(http://nyc.lti.cs.cmu.edu/mfhdt/) will provide access to open-source software,
of datasets, results and publication in order to enable comparative evaluations
and further studies by related research communities. The students involved in
the project benefit from direct experience with using and evaluating cutting-
edge IT technologies in real-world applications. This is complementary to
classroom teaching where the students can observe first-hand the direct
implication of choosing various strategies for categorization, active learning
and distributed computing.