* 1216092
* Uncertainty in Precipitation Inputs in Ecosystem Studies
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2012
* Shannon LaDeau, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 12/31/2012
* USD 30,000.00

The purpose of this EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
proposal is to develop an initial analysis of uncertainty in precipitation
fluxes of water and nutrients at the scale of a small-watershed ecosystem. This
effort complements preliminary studies of uncertainty in forest biomass and in
stream loads. Uncertainty analysis is critical to the construction of ecosystem
mass balances, one of the pillars of ecosystem science, but is rarely conducted
or reported. Failure to address uncertainties can lead to important and
erroneous conclusions, for example in identifying missing sources and sinks in
ecosystem carbon or nutrient budgets. The activities proposed build upon a large
amount of extant data and experience in constructing mass balances and will
specifically utilize the unique weekly precipitation volume and chemistry data
collected over many years from five watersheds at Hubbard Brook, New Hampshire.
This is a great opportunity to help move ecosystem science into a more modern
era of dealing with uncertainties in such datasets, which are generally quite
common. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project are potentially
transformative. The PI and colleagues hope to facilitate a cultural change that
makes uncertainty analysis an accepted and expected practice in the construction
of ecosystem budgets.