* 1216441
* Collaborative Research: Determining the Physical Mechanisms of Atomic Stick -Slip Friction by Closing the Gap between Experiments and Atomistic Simulations
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Ashlie Martini, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 04/30/2015
* USD 226,203.00

The objective of this collaborative research project is to understand the
atomic-level mechanisms of friction that control the sliding of nanoscale
contacts, with a particular focus on the prevalent phenomenon known as "atomic
stick-slip friction". Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations and atomic force
microscopy (AFM) experiments that match tribological conditions as closely as
possible will allow results from both to be directly compared. The ability to
compare AFM experiments with dynamic atomistic simulations, including molecular
dynamics (MD), is limited at present. One is unable see the positions and
velocities of the atoms in AFM experiments, which motivates MD studies. However,
MD results cannot be directly compared with those from AFM because conventional
simulations must be run at speeds several orders of magnitude faster rates than
AFM experiments. As well, many MD and AFM studies differ in other important
conditions such as materials, load, and tip size. In this work, speeds will be
matched through the concurrent use of new methods being developed
collaboratively by the principal investigators specifically for atomic-scale
friction studies. The use of noble metals will ensure that the interface is
well-defined and reliably modeled. Other critical parameters, including
stiffness, tip size and shape, environment, and crystal surface and sliding
direction orientation, are also matched. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
this will enable the atomic structure, mechanics, and dynamics of the contact to
be directly linked with the corresponding friction forces and energy
dissipation. Specifically, by closing the gaps between simulation and
experiment, the detailed results and mechanisms resolvable only in atomistic
simulations can be validated by experiments, phenomena observed experimentally
can be explained by reference to the simulations, and both can form the basis
for reliable predictive models describing nanoscale frictional sliding. This
will provide a deep and reliable understanding of single asperity friction,
which is an important step toward fully understanding the behavior of
collections of asperities that one encounters in larger-scale contacts ? a
longstanding goal for nanotribology research. From the technological
perspective, the work can contribute to the knowledge base needed for the
rational design of nanomechanical devices that involve contacting, sliding
surfaces. From an educational perspective, there will be significant impact
through collaborative efforts between the two principal investigators. This
includes development of a multi-purpose demonstration module based on AFM,
involvement of undergraduates and high school students, organizing and
delivering a short course on nanotribology to graduate students, and active
participation in international collaborative cyber-network communities.