* 1216082
* ICES: Small: Discovering Fundamental Structural and Behavioral Laws of Social Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Rakesh Nagi, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 08/31/2014
* USD 100,000.00

For centuries, the discovery of scientific laws has been driven by empirical
investigation of natural phenomena. However, human capabilities of relationship
discovery get strained in multi-dimensional spaces, which in particular may
explain why we have not seen any fundamental laws postulated for the structure
or behavior of such complex constructs as social networks.

This project will exploit the methodological toolbox based on symbolic
regression with the objective to assist the human mind in simultaneously
searching through multiple social network datasets and detecting stable
relationship patterns across them, thus allowing for the discovery of natural
social network behavior laws. This project will identify objectively measurable,
macroscopic metrics pertaining to social network phenomena and explore under
what conditions the computer-enabled empirical approach to knowledge discovery
can be successful. The scientific inquiry approach based on the computer-enabled
empirical learning paradigm will rely on recent advances in stochastic
processes, systems theory, symbolic regression, evolutionary algorithms, and
data fusion. Using standard social network metrics, computational experiments
will be conducted and their results manually traversed in search for robust
expressions (explicit formulae and invariants) corresponding to hidden symbolic
laws. This project will benefit organizations and institutions that rely on
fundamental understanding of social structures. It will further advances in
communications, economics, engineering, psychology, sociology, epidemiology, and
other domains engaged in studies of social interaction and behavior. On a
broader level, this project will enrich the methodological toolbox of inquiry
for other unexplored areas of modern science. Through student involvement
activities and outreach, this research effort will enhance the educational
environment supported by NSF and fostered at the University at Buffalo.