* 1216817
* Conceptualization of a Water Science Software Institute
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2012,10/31/2014
* Stanley Ahalt, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 10/31/2014
* USD 760,768.00

The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill is awarded a grant to develop
the concept of a Water Science Software Institute (WSSI) and to create a
strategic plan to implement the WSSI. The WSSI mission will be to concurrently
transform the research culture and the software culture of the water science
community. Water sustainability is an urgent, complex, and trans-disciplinary
problem. Complex biophysical and social processes influence water use, quality,
and availability. Few research areas have a greater need for modern
cyberinfrastructure tools than water science, yet progress on meeting the grand
challenge of water sustainability is hindered by insufficient coordination and
collaboration among the exceptionally diverse research communities involved and
because community-developed software and cyberinfrastructure have not been
professionally designed to be interoperable, sustainable, or reusable. This
conceptualization phase will use an open community engagement process with
assistance from the National Socio-environmental Synthesis Center (SESYNC), to
involve the water science community in activities that simultaneously synthesize
input for the strategic plan and serve as prototypes of the processes the
Institute will use to achieve its mission. Specifically, the conceptualization
grant will fund two synthesis workshops that will define the functional elements
of the Institute, a community forum that will present the Institute concept to
stakeholder communities for their input, and a software prototyping activity
that will demonstrate and evaluate methods for developing a culture of
production-quality software engineering within the water science community.
Between community engagement activities, the project will produce white papers
on the elements of the Institute that will be incorporated into the WSSI
strategic plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vision for the WSSI is to facilitate
the development of sustainable, production- quality cyberinfrastructure that
will be used to advance transformative water science. By developing activities
that put water scientists, computer scientists, software engineers, and social
scientists in the same room with a common purpose, such an institute would drive
collaborations that produce innovative ideas and new research. The
conceptualization approach will continuously define, test, evaluate, and refine
the conceptual model of the Institute in order to produce a strategic plan that
serves the needs of the stakeholder communities. This process and its products -
the prototype elements of the Institute, the white papers that describe them,
and the strategic plan - will advance an understanding of how to form and
sustain effective trans-disciplinary collaborations. Software developed as a
result of the prototyping activity will be used to advance water science
research. Thorough planning will mitigate the risks inherent in standing up the
first software institute and will address the challenge of building broad
community support to sustain the Institute after NSF funding ends.