* 1216390
* CAREER: Exhumation of a High-Grade Metamorphic Terrane, and Late-Stage Orogenic Collapse in the Southeastern New England Appalachians
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,05/31/2017
* Yvette Kuiper, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 05/31/2017
* USD 463,601.00

The Appalachians are a composite mountain belt consisting of various
microcontinents, oceanic and continental volcanic arcs and (meta)sedimentary
domains that collided during the Appalachian mountain building events.
Geological investigations in the Appalachian commonly emphasize the amalgamation
history of the various terranes. This proposal focuses on the syn- to post-
collisional exhumation history of the deeper domains, as well as late-stage
collapse of the mountain belt, to gain fundamental insights into late- to post-
mountain formation processes in the northern Appalachians and beyond. Research
is carried out in the southeastern New England section of the Appalachians
through a strongly integrated research and educational plan.

The southeastern New England Appalachians generally consist of three terranes.
From west to east they are the Merrimack, Nashoba and Avalon terranes. The
Nashoba terrane is bounded by moderately NW-dipping faults. Preliminary field
data suggest that deeper domains within the Nashoba terrane may have extruded
towards the east, based on fold geometries, metamorphic characteristics and the
apparent relationship between approximately 395 million year melts in the
Nashoba terrane and approximately 395 million year intrusions in the
structurally overlying Merrimack terrane. Furthermore, preliminary field
observations indicate that most inter- and intra-terrane shear zones show
evidence for late low-grade normal movement, presumably related to late-stage
mountain collapse. The purpose of this research is to investigate both the high-
temperature and low-temperature exhumation and collapse mechanisms through a
combination of field mapping, detailed structural analysis and cutting-edge
radiometric dating techniques.

Integration of research and field work into the undergraduate student experience
is central to this project. Students from various geoscience departments in the
Boston area are encouraged to participate and collaborate through a Geological
Field Research course, giving them an excellent opportunity to discuss research
with their peers and creating a stronger community. Subsequent thesis research
by undergraduate and MS students involves analytical work at Boston College, MIT
and UMass Amherst, strengthening the relationship between the three labs and
between students and faculty. Students, especially women and minority students,
are encouraged to participate through existing courses, departmental advising
activities and other geoscience departments. Students from underrepresented
groups are reached through the Boston College AHANA (African-American, Hispanic,
Asian and Native American) student office and the McNair program for
undergraduates who are low-income and first-generation college participants,
and/or part of underrepresented groups.

Funding for this project is provided by the NSF EAR Tectonics Program, with
support from the NSF EAR EarthScope and Education and Human Resources Program.