* 1216696
* Collaborative Research: Software Infrastructure for Accelerating Grand Challenge Science with Future Computing Platforms
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Manish Parashar, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Rudolf Eigenmann
* 09/30/2014
* USD 50,000.00

Solving scientific grand challenges requires effective use of cyber
infrastructure. Future computing platforms, including Field Programmable Gate
Arrays (FPGAs), General Purpose Graphics Processing Units (GPGPUs), multi-core
and multi-threaded processors, and Cloud computing platforms, can dramatically
accelerate innovation to solve complex problems of societal importance when
supported by a critical mass of sustainable software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will organize scientific communities to help leverage the disruptive
potential of future computing platforms through sustainable software. Grand
challenge problems in biological science, social science, and security domains
will be targeted based on their under-served needs and demonstrated
possibilities. Users will be engaged through interdisciplinary workshops that
bring together domain experts with software technologists with the goals of
identifying core opportunity areas, determining critical software
infrastructure, and discovering software sustainability challenges. The outcome
will be an in-depth conceptual design for a Center for Sustainable Software on
Future Computing Platforms, as part of the Software Infrastructure for Sustained
Innovation (SI2) program. The design, scoped toward grand challenge problems,
will identify common and specialized software infrastructure, research,
development and outreach priorities, and coordination with the SSE and SSI
components of the SI2 program. The interactions will offer a comprehensive
understanding of grand challenges that best map to future computing platforms
and the software infrastructure to best support scientists' needs. The workshops
will enhance understanding of future platforms' potential for transformative
research and lead to key insights into cross-cutting problems in leveraging
their potential. Published results will help guide future research and reduce
barriers to entry for under-represented groups.