* 1216750
* Dating of Folds by Combining Fold Kinematics, Illite Characterization, and Ar-Ar Illite Dating
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Ben van der Pluijm, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 08/31/2014
* USD 135,453.00

EAR-1216750&lt;br/&gt;The (trans)formation of illite in fault zones at high
strain has been addressed in a number of studies around the world in the last
decade. The reactions allowing this application to fault gouge also happen
during folding. Central to the proposed project is to analyze illite in clay
rich layers that were folded by flexural slip/flow. Flexural slip is a folding
mechanism commonly observed in multilayers where competent (e.g. limestone or
quartzite) and incompetent layers (e.g. shale and bentonite) alternate. In
flexural folding the fold limbs of competent layers rotate in opposite
directions about the fold hinge line, involving considerable amounts of shear
parallel to bedding in the incompetent layers; in symmetric folds this shear is
concentrated in the limbs and is close to zero in the hinge. Careful analysis of
deformation in flexural folds, of illite transformation on the limbs and hinges,
and determination of illite ages along the folded layer provide valuable spatio-
temporal information on fold evolution, both locally and
regionally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the researchers propose to
develop and apply a method for obtaining absolute ages of folds that formed
under low grade metamorphic conditions using Ar dating of clay-size fractions.
In this application of illite dating, the researchers utilize the assumptions
that illitization is a process induced by deformation at low temperature and
that the potassium hosted by illite in its structure will allow the
identification of accurate ages of illite with encapsulated Ar dating (as a
decay product of potassium). The method will be applied in a well-documented
section of the Mexican Fold-Thrust Belt (MFTB) in Central Mexico, which involves
Cretaceous basinal carbonate units that are characterized by alternations of
thinly bedded limestone, shale, bentonite and chert. A pilot study on a
representative fold demonstrated the likelihood for success. Similar flexural
folds have been observed along a cross section of the entire fold-thrust belt,
exhibiting a variety of styles, and having formed under a range of temperature
conditions (100-250Â°C). By analyzing folds from different locations along the
section the researchers will be dating deformation within a suitable temperature
window and with different fold geometries, as well as potentially obtaining rate
dates for individual structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach is likely to
provide a powerful new tool for geologists to apply to shallow fold-thrust belts
around the world. Fold-dating can also be applied to other tectonic settings,
such as in restraining bends in lateral fault systems, and deformation
associated with normal faults in extensional systems. In addition, the project
will support a young researcher by developing new research skills that may have
broad application in structural geology, and will offer hands-on research
experiences for senior undergraduates.