* 1216894
* Conceptualizing an Institute for Sustainable Earth and Environmental Software (ISEES)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Matthew Jones, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 09/30/2014
* USD 582,660.00

The University of California Santa Barbara is awarded a grant for a one-year
community-driven process to develop a strategic plan for the creation and
operation of an Institute for Sustainable Earth and Environmental Software
(ISEES) that would provide development and sustainable support of innovative and
interoperable scientific software tools that can transform science at the
intersection of earth, environmental, and life sciences. Software is critical to
advances in environmental science, but is in crisis due to issues that are
prevalent in scientific software, such as code complexity and opacity, lack of
scalability, lack of openness and interoperability, and lack of formal
versioning and management of software evolution for sustainability. The vision
for ISEES is to advance the state of science software by engaging earth and
environmental research communities to address the software barriers that most
impede grand challenge earth science. This project will work with community
efforts such as EarthCube to develop a strategic plan that improves capabilities
for scientific discovery within overlapping disciplines within the geological
and biological sciences, such as ecology, oceanography, and atmospheric science.
ISEES would engage a large swath of the science community in projects that will
create and mature software that facilitates bold new science advances. For each
science topic identified as a community priority, participants in this planning
effort will collaboratively address the entire software lifecycle, from product
conceptualization, to requirements analysis, design, development, testing,
deployment, long-term support, and decommissioning. A robust workforce
development program will be specified to sustain software advances made through
ISEES. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning process will be diverse, including
earth, life, and environmental scientists and experts from software engineering,
computer science, informatics, and library sciences. A series of design
workshops that use proven, formal planning and assessment methods will meet in
three topical clusters to conceptualize and articulate a grand vision and
strategy for how ISEES will transform the software lifecycle and galvanize the
research community. A Science Cluster collates and articulates grand challenges
within earth observational sciences that focus and drive ISEES' software
activities and define exemplary collaborative science activities that support
detailed requirements analysis. A Software Cluster analyzes requirements for
scientific software and proposes approaches for ISEES to address these via
improvements across the full science software lifecycle. And, a Sustainability
and Adoption Cluster examines sustainability and governance challenges, and
proposes models for engaging the research community, governing ISEES, and
developing an effective workforce that can sustain the portfolio of science
software curated through ISEES. Community experts lead each working group and
collectively comprise a Steering Committee that synthesizes recommendations,
presents these results and gathers feedback at a Town Hall co-located at a major
science conference, and combines this with recommendations from an open call for
comments on the Internet to create the final Strategic Plan describing the
mission, design, and impact of ISEES.