* 1216825
* CIF Small Wireless Relay Networks: Coding Above Capacity and Exploiting Structure
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Natasha Devroye, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 12/31/2016
* USD 349,884.00

How to best process and forward received signals, or relay, in wireless networks
has been an open question for many years. We will revisit determining the
capacity of relay networks by taking a fresh look at the problem focussed on
understanding the potential of exploiting two types of codebook structure in
relay networks: 1) messages received at relays, even those received at rates
above capacity, originated from codebooks. This codebook structure should be
harnessed in relaying and we seek to determine how to best compress signals
coded at rates above capacity; 2) matching codebook structure (e.g. linearity of
lattice codes is well suited to linear additive Gaussian noise channels) to
channel structure has recently been shown to be efficient in decoding functions
of messages. In this thrust, we seek to make precise how and when structured
codes may be exploited in multi-source relay networks. Our two approaches both
involve novel departures from and additions to our understanding of random
coding based schemes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A full solution would constitute a
significant step towards the understanding of network information theory, and
will provide new insight into the elusive relay channel. However, the
significance of solving this problem goes well beyond information theory:
understanding how to most efficiently relay in wireless networks is of direct
relevance to satiating the demands on WiFi, cellular, ad hoc military and first
responder wireless networks of the present and future. The fundamental limit --
or capacity -- of such networks not only acts as a benchmark for engineers
building systems, but also provides guidance as to what schemes perform well.
The PI will integrate portions of this research into UIC's curriculum and will
integrate this theoretical approach with practice through the PI-founded UIC
Software Defined Radio lab.