* 1216993
* AF: Small: Collaborative Research: Algorithmic Approaches to Energy-Efficient Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Fei Li, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 07/31/2016
* USD 128,325.00

Energy consumption is now emerging as a dominant performance measure in computer
systems. In recent years, significant progress in improving energy efficiency
has been accomplished by a combination of better hardware design and software
tools. Yet the design of future energy-efficient computer systems will
ultimately require the development of fundamental models and algorithmic tools
that can be used to guide practical solutions.

This project is to study algorithmic methods for improving energy efficiency of
data processing and storage in computer systems. The basic approach is to model
the operation of various system components in the language of combinatorial
optimization, with the objective function representing energy consumption, and
to solve these problems using exact or approximate efficient algorithms. Many of
those problems can be formulated in terms of task scheduling, where the
objective is to optimize the CPU energy consumption required to complete a
collection of tasks, while meeting some performance requirements. Other examples
include minimizing energy consumption of memory systems, both the internal and
external memories, by optimizing power levels and sophisticated paging or
caching strategies. In addition to addressing some specific energy optimization
problems, this work is expected to produce new algorithmic techniques, as well
as deeper understanding of the adequacy of standard performance enhancement
tools, like caching and load balancing, for improving energy efficiency. The
study on energy complexity will also shed some light on the relation between
computation and energy.

Some algorithms developed in the course of this research will be implemented,
tested empirically on the FreeBSD-based platform, and made available to
practitioners. The educational component includes research projects for graduate
and undergraduate students, and developing a course on sustainable computing.