* 1216341
* 2012 Marine Microbes GRC/GRS
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2012,11/30/2012
* Jill Sohm, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 11/30/2012
* USD 28,925.00

Intellectual Merit: The 2012 Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) and Gordon Research
Conference (GRC) in Marine Microbes will be held in conjunction with each other
from June 23-24 and June 24-29, respectively, in Barga (Lucca), Italy. The GRC
is an international forum for cutting edge research in the ecology, evolution
and function of the microbial community in the ocean, while the GRS is a young
researcher-centric meeting bringing together students and postdocs to discuss
cutting edge research, create informal networks among peers, and gain
experience/confidence for participation in the following GRC. Funds are
requested to help support participation in the GRC and GRS by students and
postdocs and to partially cover the registration for invited speakers. Marine
microbes occupy an important role in the biosphere by making up the bottom of
the marine food web, performing energy and nutrient transformations, and
performing a wide range of still unknown metabolic and physiological processes
with implications for our own survival on the planet. They comprise 98 per cent
of the biomass of the world's oceans, supply more than half the world's oxygen,
are the major processors of the world's greenhouse gases and have the potential
to mitigate the effects of climate change. They are also the cause of diseases
that are suspected to be spreading due to global warming, yet produce compounds
which are potential cures and solutions for combating human diseases. This
meeting represents one of the only opportunities for researchers to come
together and discuss marine microbes specifically and in depth, and will be
important in defining the future of the field. The special format of the
Conference, with a maximum of 180 participants allowed, morning sessions,
followed by free afternoons and afterwards evening sessions, is specially
designed to foster interaction and promote the free exchange of
ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The GRC program will cover several aspects of
marine microbial research, from "omics" and other emerging technologies to
physiology, chemical ecology and ecosystem scale science. The best science in
the field will be presented by both younger and more established top scientists
during invited and contributed oral and poster presentations. Specific sessions
will be dedicated to current controversies in the field, where different points
of view will be presented and discussed, hopefully provoking critical thinking
and a consensus. The location of this meeting in Italy will provide a pleasant
and informal setting with many opportunities for casual interactions and ensure
that the meeting is truly international, with the hope of sparking new
international collaborations. The addition of the GRS for the first time this
year will increase participation by young researchers, giving them a chance to
meet the leaders in our field while also forming linkages within their own peer
group that may lead to future collaborations. The GRS has only a limited
educational component from senior researchers, because it is committed to
bringing young scientists together to discuss their current research and build
informal networks with the support of leading scientists from the associated
GRC. The GRS program will consist of talks and poster sessions from the
participants, along with time for formal and informal discussions of the
research presented. The mentoring component will be provided by a plenary talk
from Prof. E.V. Armbrust from the University of Washington, Seattle, and a
mentoring panel entitled "How do I fund my research"? led by Prof. Lisa Campbell
from Texas A&amp;M University, College Station and Johanna Wesnigk from the
German Northwest Marine Research Association. The GRS is expected to have ~50
participants, and all attendees are encouraged to attend the associated
GRC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The GRC and GRS will have an impact
on the community of marine microbial researchers for years to come. By promoting
debates and free thinking, these meetings will foster national and international
collaboration between participants, both among established researchers, and
those just getting started. With the inclusion of the GRS, these meetings will
also promote the careers of young researchers by giving them exposure and time
to interact with established researchers in the field. In addition, the
mentoring at the GRS will help prepare young researchers for careers in
academia, and the discussions at the GRC will help them form personal
perspectives on key issues of relevance to the study of marine microbes