* 1216297
* RUI: Adaptively Weighted Finite Element Methods for PDEs and Optimal Least-Squares Metrics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Chad Westphal, Wabash College
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 08/31/2015
* USD 112,897.00

The overall effectiveness of numerical methods for partial differential
equations may be severely limited by solutions that lack smoothness on a
relatively small subset of the domain. Problems may have singularities induced
by the geometry of the domain; convection dominated regimes may result in
interior or boundary layers; discontinuous material coefficients can cause sharp
gradients; or solutions may blow up at interior points when operator
coefficients are singular or degenerate. This project proposes a systematic
study of weighted finite element methods where standard norms and inner products
are replaced with weighted norms and inner products. In the least-squares finite
element setting, these weight functions serve to redefine the metric under which
the error is minimized and, as such, the relative accuracy of the numerical
solution can be balanced throughout the domain in an optimal way. For some
problems, the right choice of weights can recover convergence where the
analogous nonweighted case does not converge and, in other problems, convergence
rates are enhanced by an appropriate set of weights. This project will develop
robust adaptive methods for a wide class of linear and nonlinear problems, where
the weights are chosen from coarse scale problems within a mesh refinement
strategy.

The efficient numerical solution of partial differential equations is of great
importance throughout the applied sciences. Finite element methods constitute a
popular and flexible approach to solving a wide range of problems, and the
development of robust, accurate, and efficient finite element algorithms is in
high demand for applications including mechanics of deformable solids, fluid
flow, transport, and electromagnetics. This project aims to develop a new class
of adaptive finite element methods that are motivated by the success of
weighted-norm least squares methods and adaptive mesh refinement algorithms.
Robust adaptive algorithms allow for better numerical simulations by focusing
computational resources on the most challenging aspects of the problem,
increasing overall accuracy and decreasing computational time. In models of
glacier flow, for example, regions of the ice near the surface and the ground
require more resolution than the majority of the interior ice, and accurate
models must be able to allocate the computational work in an optimal way.
Successful results from this project will enhance the current understanding of
how adaptive algorithms can be designed to evolve optimally from coarse scale
approximations.