* 1216109
* SEES Fellows: Hoahu, to set aside for the future - understanding sustainability of community based natural resource management through a century of rapid land use change
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Mehana Vaughan, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 05/31/2017
* USD 317,266.00

This project seeks to expand understanding of how social-ecological systems
adapt to change. The research fellow will investigate community-based natural
resource management in a model island system, the Hawaiian ahupuaa (a
traditional Hawaiian unit of land division which organized human communities
along watershed boundaries) over a time of transition from communal land
ownership, to plantation agriculture, to development of luxury homes on
agricultural lands. The study will consider changing mechanisms of access,
boundaries of both resources and the community, rights and responsibilities of
users, resource health, and ecological knowledge. The researcher hopes to
illuminate often unseen patterns of natural resource use - how resources are
accessed for cultural purposes, how they are shared, and what cultural ecosystem
services they provide, not just to individuals, but to entire communities. The
study will use geographic analysis to map the cultural landscape of traditional
knowledge and resource use alongside policy and land use change, using visual
and narrative tools to display diverse sources of information together.

This research will enhance future community-based resource management efforts
by: 1) documenting fast disappearing traditional ecological knowledge, 2)
creating visual tools to display past environmental changes, while providing
baseline data against which to measure future changes, 3) educating future
leaders on how to care for natural resources at the local level, and 4) building
on the area's poetic and storytelling traditions to translate multiple diverse
ways of seeing the same landscape, and often conflicting views of
sustainability, to non-academic audiences. In utilizing a mixed-methods approach
that incorporates interviews, focus groups and mapping the project bridges the
fields of natural resource management, cultural and physical geography, cultural
anthropology, planning, environmental education and environmental studies. The
research offers the potential to transform the conceptual framework within which
natural resources are managed and to effect policy within this realm.

This project is supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for
Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to
enable discoveries needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy
and societal sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address
these challenges. With SEES Fellows support, this project will enable a
promising early career researcher to establish themselves in an independent
research career related to sustainability.