* 1216040
* US-UK Collab:   Ecological and socio-economic factors impacting maintenance and dissemination of antibiotic resistance in the Greater Serengeti Ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Robert Quinlan, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2018
* USD 2,499,996.00

Antibiotic resistance in bacteria is a significant challenge to both human and
veterinary medicine. The problem is both multifaceted and global. Resistance
continues to evolve and amplify at local scales while travel and trade bring
antibiotic resistance to the global arena. This project will produce crucial but
currently missing knowledge about the mechanisms by which ecological and
socioeconomic factors impact the fate of antibiotic resistance traits. The
research will be carried out in three ecologically distinct zones of the greater
Serengeti ecosystem of Tanzania by a multi-disciplinary and international team
with expertise in molecular biology, disease ecology, quantitative modeling,
socio-economic and ethnographic disciplines. It includes researchers from the
Paul G. Allen School for Global Animal Health and the Department of Anthropology
at Washington State University in the United States; the University of Glasgow
and the Royal Veterinary College of the University of London in the United
Kingdom; and the Tanzania Wildlife Research Institute and the Zonal Veterinary
Investigation Centre in Tanzania.

The goal is to understand how antibiotic resistance is impacted by patterns of
connectivity within and between communities, arising from shared resources such
as water; population density and its effect on interactions between human and
livestock; and animal movements via trade between communities. The central
hypothesis is that the prevalence and diversity of antibiotic resistance in
human and livestock populations is primarily explained by the dissemination and
persistence of resistance within and between various host populations, rather
than by direct use of antibiotics, leading to similar antibiotic resistance
patterns and gene pools in human and livestock populations. Antibiotic
resistance characterization of 64,000 isolates of E. coli from humans, livestock
and wildlife and molecular characterization of a subset of these isolates will
be carried out on samples from 30 study communities. Socio-economic and
ethnographic data will be collected at both the household and community levels.
Besides providing information about antibiotic use behaviors, these data will be
incorporated into an ecological modeling process that will investigate the
diversity of resistance traits and their spatio-temporal distribution and
probable dissemination pathways between reservoirs.

The project is based on the "One Health" premise that simultaneously considers
both human and animal health and welfare. This is particularly important in
rural communities where economic and food security is highly dependent on the
health and welfare of livestock. The findings from this project will have direct
implications for policy design and execution to control the global emergence and
spread of antibiotic resistance, a challenge that transcends national and
international borders. The project also supports international research
collaboration and the training of postdoctoral researchers and graduate students
in the United States, the United Kingdom, and Tanzania.