* 1216716
* Collaborative Research: Scientific Software Innovation Institute for Advanced Analysis of X-Ray and Neutron Scattering Data (SIXNS)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* John Rehr, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 100,000.00

SUMMARY

The Office of Cyberinfrastructure, Division of Materials Research, and Chemistry
Division contribute funds to this award.

This award supports a conceptualization effort to design a Sustainable Software
Innovation Institute to elevate the level of scientific computing in X-ray and
neutron scattering science. This conceptualization project will define the
priorities of users and facilities to serve a significant fraction of the
community of 14,000 annual users of X-ray and neutron scattering facilities in
the U.S. The Institute aims to adapt modern methods of computational materials
science to predict scattering from materials. It would incorporate these
software tools into workflows for scattering scientists, giving them new
pathways to scientific discovery.

Since 1980, the performance per dollar of computer hardware has increased by a
factor of 100 every decade. Over the same time period, this million-fold
improvement has been closely matched by the increased brilliance of X-ray
sources, and in the past decade the performance of neutron sources has increased
by a factor of ten. These improvements should be multiplied by comparable
factors to account for improvements in software and methods of computational
science, and for major improvements in optics and detectors for X-rays and
neutrons. These enormous advances in computing and in scattering have occurred
independently. Today there are exciting opportunities for combining them to do
new science, and there is a growing body of work in computational scattering
science that does so. Today this is only a small fraction of the work done by
users of the synchrotron and neutron sources in the U.S., but it accounts for a
disproportionately large fraction of high impact publications.

The conceptualization process will shape and assess envisioned activities of the
Institute in the areas of workflow, uncertainty quantification, new avenues for
discovery, and education.

An important activity of the Institute will involve developing new computational
workflows that open channels for discovery in scattering science. This can be as
direct as offering a common environment for comparing results from experiment to
results from computational materials science. Computing also facilitates the
combined analysis of information from different types of experiments, linked by
an underlying model of the structure and dynamics of a material. Such a combined
approach requires the assessment of uncertainties in the model using
mathematical methods that are not yet standard practice in scattering science.
This conceptualization project will develop a path to obtaining appropriate
uncertainty analysis tools for a computationally enabled scattering science.

Workflows that include calculations of the structure and dynamics of materials
can allow experimental results to be interpreted on a more fundamental level,
letting scientists explore properties that are not measured directly by
experiment opening new avenues to discovery.

This project supports aspects of the Materials Genome Initiative.

The Institute will bring materials simulation to train the next generation of
scattering scientist. The Institute aims to broaden participation, particularly
of women in computational science.