* 1216132
* NeTS:  Small: Exploiting Adaptive Protocols in Packet-Based Broadband Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Victor Frost, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 07/31/2016
* USD 377,974.00

The desire to hide the transmission of information has existed since antiquity.
This has included the need to conceal the very existence of transmissions;
exposing the presence of transmissions may reveal the location of the sender or
an increase in the frequency of transmissions may indicate the impending
occurrence of an event. Research is underway to determine if communications can
be hidden in the midst of the RF emissions of current and future broadband
packet-based wireless networks. These systems use Orthogonal Frequency Division
Multiplexing (OFDM) along with protocols that adapt to the environment, e.g.,
adaptive modulation and coding (AMC), Hybrid ARQ (HARQ), and opportunistic
scheduling. This research is based on the key insight that the adaptive nature
of the protocols used in wireless systems makes the networks vulnerable to
exploitation. This research is discovering those weaknesses and exposing how
those vulnerabilities can be used to enable communications by covert ad hoc
networks. Theoretical systems analysis combined with laboratory prototyping is
quantitatively demonstrating the information transfer and low probability of
detection capabilities that covert systems can achieve as well as their impact
on the performance of the target wireless system. The effort could lead to new
covert communications techniques. Conversely, exposing the vulnerabilities of
wireless networks has to potential to help to guide the creation of new
protocols or motivate the modification of existing techniques to make them less
susceptible to exploitation.