* 1216096
* ICES: Small: Collaborative Research: Dynamic Parking Assignment  Games
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Jane Lin, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2015
* USD 200,000.00

Finding parking has been a major hassle for drivers in many urban environments
for decades. For example, studies conducted in 11 major cities revealed that the
average time to search for curbside parking was 8.1 minutes and cruising for
these parking spaces accounted for 30% of the traffic congestion in those
cities, on average. Each parking slot generated 4,927 vehicle miles traveled
(VMT) per year, and the overall increase in traffic is obtained by multiplying
this number by the number of parking slots in the city (e.g., 35,000 in
Chicago). Motivated by these factors and enabled by the current revolution in
wireless communication, sensor networks, and mobile computing, an
interdisciplinary team will investigate a number of core algorithmic, game-
theoretic, and computational complexity issues to address parking slot selection
problems. Thus, this project seeks to contribute to development of more
efficient urban transportation systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The technical
merits of the proposal include the investigation and analysis of real-time
distributed competition for spatial resources. The competitive nature of the
problem leads to a dynamic multi-player game-theoretic framework to analyze the
quality of a solution. The investigators will formulate computational problems,
study their mathematical properties, design efficient algorithms for them, and
implement resulting algorithms to assess accuracy and efficiency. In particular,
partly inspired by Newton's laws of gravitation, the investigators will research
a broad class of parking navigation strategies loosely termed as the
Gravitational Parking Paradigms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The final goal of this
project is to develop the theoretical underpinnings of applications that, given
the locations of parking slots, will guide a driver to a most appropriate
parking slot. Other components of the project include the integration of
research and education via several means such as course and curriculum
development, effective dissemination of research, mentoring undergraduate and
graduate students, and promoting diversity in related research and educational
activities.