* 1216695
* SHF: Small: Shared Memory Architectures and Microarchitectures for Heterogeneous General-Purpose Chips
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Daniel Sorin, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 07/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

The computing industry is currently producing and developing chips that include
processor cores of different types. The move towards heterogeneous chips is due
to two trends: the ability to squeeze more transistors on each chip and the
improved power-efficiency of using specific cores for specific purposes. This
research project extends the inter-core communication systems and precise
specifications of homogeneous chips to heterogeneous chips. The benefits of
extending homogeneous communication paradigms include improved performance and
improved power-efficiency, and preliminary results show orders of magnitude
improvements in both metrics. Society relies upon computers for ever more
purposes, and qualitatively improving their performance and power-efficiency are
critical to future computing platforms. Furthermore, by extending homogeneous
specification methodologies, this research project facilitates chip testing and
validation for heterogeneous chips, which is a significant fraction of industry
effort in chip development, and eases the programming of these chips, which is
among the biggest challenges in computing today. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
research project consists of two technical thrusts. The first thrust is the
development of memory systems for heterogeneous chips. Rather than treat a
heterogeneous chip as two distinct systems that happen to share a chip, the goal
is to closely integrate the heterogeneous cores in a systematic fashion that
enables most communication between cores to be performed via on-chip caches
rather than via off-chip memory. The second research thrust is to extend the
notion of a computer architecture--an implementation-independent specification
of a processor's behavior--from homogeneous systems to chip-wide heterogeneous
systems. This research project involves the design and experimental evaluation
of heterogeneous processor chips, and the bulk of the experimental work uses
full-system simulation and experiments on purchased hardware. The contributions
of this project will be heterogeneous processor chips that have significantly
greater performance and power-efficiency, as well as implementation-independent
architectures for heterogeneous chips. Society will be using heterogeneous
processor chips in personal computers, in smartphones, and via cloud-provided
services. Qualitatively improving these chips will enhance user computing
experiences and enable new and exciting computing applications.