* 1216007
* CAREER: A Collaborative Adaptive Data Sharing Platform
* CSE,IIS
* 10/31/2011,03/31/2017
* Evangelos Christidis, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2017
* USD 589,242.00

CAREER: A Collaborative Adaptive Data Sharing Platform&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
increased popularity of domain social networking and blogs is creating a huge
amount of shared data. Properly annotating this data would allow its effective
searching and analysis. Consider as a specific motivating application a disaster
mitigation collaboration network for businesses. Using keyword search to find
open child care locations after a hurricane would require sifting through
hundreds of shared documents. Current data sharing platforms provide little help
to the users to effectively and effortlessly annotate their data in a way that
will benefit the information demand of other users. The long term goal of this
project is to leverage the collective knowledge of communities to increase the
utility of shared information. The objective of this project is to create the
knowledge and techniques to allow the users of an application domain to
effectively and effortlessly annotate, share and query data, by exploiting the
past user interactions -- i.e., data annotations, query workload and user query
relevance feedback. A key novelty of the proposed Collaborative Adaptive Data
Sharing Platform (CADS) is that the past user interactions are leveraged to
effectively annotate the data at insertion-time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project is the facilitation of effective annotation,
matching and querying of shared data by leveraging the user interactions at
insertion and query time. The algorithms for the transformative concept of
adaptive insertion form, which will suggest the best attributes, values and
matchings to annotate the to-be-inserted data, will estimate the information
value and confidence of a candidate annotation and dependencies analysis on the
query workload. The adaptive query form algorithms which will guide the user in
formulating effective queries, will exploit past user interactions to estimate
the user?s affinity to a condition. All algorithms will be evaluated with real
users and datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is expected to have the
following broader impacts: (a) Promote participation of FIU (one of the largest
Hispanic institutes in the country) minority students in the research process.
This is expected to attract more minority students to pursue MS or Ph.D. in
computer science, which is hindered by the lack of exposure to academic
opportunities. (b) Facilitate effective collaboration and information sharing
among the members of communities -- e.g. disaster management, scientific, news.