* 1216056
* R/V Thomas G. Thompson Ship Operation 2012
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2012,07/31/2019
* William Wilcock, University of Washington
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rose Dufour
* 07/31/2019
* USD 28,160,432.00

The proposal was submitted to the ship operations program requesting funds to
carry out 163 operational days in 2012 aboard the R/V Thomas G. Thompson in
support of NSF peer-reviewed sea-going programs. The projected 2012 total number
of funded days from all agencies is 277 days, of which 267 days will be days at
sea. R/V Thompson will be operating in the Western Pacific off the
Mariana&lt;br/&gt;Trench and Forearc for two consecutive MG &amp; G programs,
one utilizing the deep-towed sonar system (IMI-120) and a second operating in
conjunction with R/V Marcus Langseth for an OBS active and passive source
seismic project. Since submission of this proposal, R/V Thompson was able to
divert their transit between Apra, Guam and San Diego into Honolulu in order to
accommodate two stranded NSF&lt;br/&gt;projects. These cruises had previously
been scheduled on R/V Kilo Moana but following a significant hull compromise a
rapid response was required in order to support the cruises within the original
project scope. The first cruise for Julian Sachs will&lt;br/&gt;conduct a marine
diatom experiment. The second cruise for Zackary Johnson, represents a two day
add-on to the transit where he plans to collect biological sampling ahead of his
2013 cruises. R/V Thompson will work south of San Diego in the
Oxygen&lt;br/&gt;Deficient Waters off the Eastern Tropical North Pacific for
Allan Devol. This cruise has a UW student component, where the University has
contributed 12 days of institutional funds to augment the cruise. The second
half of 2012, R/V Thompson will be operating&lt;br/&gt;in the Pacific Northwest,
in and out of home port supporting NSF work for Cascadia, ODP hydrogeology of
Juan De Fuca using borehole network and Jason, CORKS and development of a high
speed optical communication system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;Oceanographic vessels, operated by the UNOLS academic institutions
and funded by NSF, and &lt;br/&gt;other agencies, have been the traditional
multi-use facilities required to expand human &lt;br/&gt;knowledge of the ocean
environment. These ships working from the ocean's surface
&lt;br/&gt;complemented by human-occupied, robotic and more recently --
autonomous undersea vehicles &lt;br/&gt;and sensors, along with aircraft and
satellites, continue to provide vital tools in our understanding &lt;br/&gt;of
the role of the oceans in determining our climate and in studying and accessing
the living and &lt;br/&gt;non-living resources of the world?s seas and sea-beds.
&lt;br/&gt;Proper stewardship over ocean resources and their wise use, and
decision making for future &lt;br/&gt;ocean- and coastal- related issues are
inconceivable without an interested and engaged citizenry: &lt;br/&gt;In
addition to technology, our national ocean endeavor requires technical support
in the form of &lt;br/&gt;expert human resources, with sound science,
mathematics and technical education: a critical &lt;br/&gt;mass of individuals
who will collect and analyze tomorrow's data, and design the tools, models
&lt;br/&gt;and applications we will require. Provision of these sea-going
research and educational facilities &lt;br/&gt;enables marine scientists and
students from the University of Washington and other institutions
&lt;br/&gt;nationwide to study natural phenomena and to instruct the future
scientists and stewards of our &lt;br/&gt;marine ecosystems on board state-of-
the-art oceanographic research vessels complete with &lt;br/&gt;laboratories,
sensors, analytical equipment, communications to shore-side investigators and
&lt;br/&gt;educators, and full life support for extended missions. Essential to
our mission is the provision &lt;br/&gt;of educational opportunities both to
students of the marine sciences, and, through educational &lt;br/&gt;outreach
programs such as REVEL, Teacher at Sea, to K through 12th grade students,
&lt;br/&gt;nationwide. Periodically, The University held open houses and
outreach events to provide a &lt;br/&gt;learning experience for local students
including tours through the ship facilities and hands-on
&lt;br/&gt;demonstrations of marine science research guided by faculty, students
and ships? crewmembers. &lt;br/&gt;In 2011, the School of Oceanography hosted
the International Research Ship Operators &lt;br/&gt;conference at UW. During
the conference, participants enjoyed the opportunity to tour and ride
&lt;br/&gt;onboard for a lunch cruise from the Seattle waterfront, through the
Ballard Locks, to the &lt;br/&gt;Oceanography Dock. The University of
Washington, with the support of the National Science &lt;br/&gt;Foundation and
with coordination by the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System,
&lt;br/&gt;remains dedicated to, and focused upon, furthering mankind's
understanding of the world ocean, &lt;br/&gt;the living and non-living resources
therein, and their interactions with the approximately fifty &lt;br/&gt;percent
of our citizens who live within fifty miles of the shoreline.