* 1216038
* ICES: Large: Collaborative: The Role of Space, Time and Information in Controlling Epidemics
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Rajmohan Rajaraman, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2016
* USD 275,000.00

The control of epidemics, broadly defined to range from human diseases such as
influenza and smallpox to malware in communication networks, relies crucially on
interventions such as vaccinations and anti-virals (in human diseases) or
software patches (for malware). These interventions are almost always voluntary
directives from public agencies; however, people do not always adhere to such
recommendations, and make individual decisions based on their specific "self
interest". Additionally, people alter their contacts dynamically, and these
behavioral changes have a huge impact on the dynamics and the effectiveness of
these interventions, so that "good" intervention strategies might, in fact, be
ineffective, depending upon the individual response. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to study the foundations of policy design for
controlling epidemics, using a broad class of epidemic games on complex networks
involving uncertainty in network information, temporal evolution and learning.
Models will be proposed to capture the complexity of static and temporal
interactions and patterns of information exchange, including the possibility of
failed interventions and the potential for moral hazard. The project will also
study specific policies posed by public agencies and network security providers
for controlling the spread of epidemics and malware, and will develop resource
constrained mechanisms to implement them in this
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate approaches from
Computer Science, Economics, Mathematics, and Epidemiology to give intellectual
unity to the study and design of public health policies and has the potential
for strong dissertation work in all these areas. Education and outreach is an
important aspect of the project, and includes curriculum development at both the
graduate and under-graduate levels. A multi-disciplinary workshop is also
planned as part of the project.