* 1216193
* Modeling disease transmission using spatial mapping of vector-parasite genetics and vector feeding patterns
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2012,09/30/2021
* Lori Stevens, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2021
* USD 2,486,879.00

This award supports the development of an innovative model of the transmission
dynamics of Chagas disease. Chagas disease is a parasitic disease endemic to
Latin America that afflicts an estimated 10 million people. The causative agent
is a protozoa, Trypanosoma cruzi. The protozoa is most commonly transmitted to
people by bloodsucking insects whose populations increase in newly deforested
and partially re-forested tropical regions. In this project, a team of
scientists from the University of Vermont, the Loyola University New Orleans,
and the University of San Carlos in Guatemala, will take a new, multi-
disciplinary approach to understanding how Chagas is transmitted at both the
local and regional scales. While previous research has found connections between
single factors and Chagas disease, this will be the first time that multiple
contributing factors have been brought together in a single model so that the
underlying processes can be identified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
be conducted in three localities along the Guatemala-El Salvador border that
differ significantly in landscape, socioeconomic, and disease transmission
characteristic. In three villages in each region, the scientists will collect
and geographically map information on parasite and vector genetic diversity;
land use ecology; forest disturbance; blood meal sources; and socio-economic
characteristics such as housing type, presence of domestic animals, and use of
electric lights. From these data they will develop, test, and validate new
models of how Chagas disease transmission. Once validated, these models can then
be extended to predict transmission of the many other vector-borne diseases that
affect human beings wherever they are found and that cumulatively produce about
1.4 million deaths annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this research
will be shared with the Guatemalan Ministry of Health and the Pan American
Health Organization to inform their ongoing efforts to stem the tide of Chagas
disease in Latin America. The researchers will publish papers in scientific
journals and will make their genomic databases and geo-referenced complex
systems tools available to other researchers. This research will also benefit
graduate and undergraduate students in Louisiana, Vermont, Guatemala and El
Salvador through training in genomics, population and molecular genetics,
geospatial analysis, and complex systems modeling.