* 1216285
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research:Non-Shannon Information Inequalities
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Christopher Freiling, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 09/30/2017
* USD 110,000.00

This project develops techniques for finding non-Shannon information
inequalities and strives to geometrically characterize the space of vectors
whose components are the entropies of subsets of jointly distributed discrete
random variables. Specific sub-topics include the geometric description of inner
and outer entropic region bounds, such as: the Shannon space, the Ingleton
space, the common information space, the linearly representable space, and the
copy region space. In addition, a unified approach to many important
mathematical questions with engineering applications is studied using
information theoretic inequality implications. Special cases include: random
variable conditional independence implications, entropic region membership,
information inequality identification, and network coding capacity bounding.

The problems in this field are of interest as fundamental theoretical questions
and are also strongly motivated by communications applications in the area of
network coding. Most of the study is analytic in nature, but the project also
exploits computer assisted discovery and verification of new non-Shannon
information inequalities for four and more random variables using techniques
based upon auxiliary variables.

The discovery of new non-Shannon information inequalities provides improved
bounds on the set of all entropic points. Such improved bounds lead to better
bounds on the transmission capacity of networks. Calculating the capacity of a
network is traditionally an extremely difficult, and usually intractible,
problem. New inequalities also shed light on the basic understanding of both
probability and information theory fundamentals. As information theory has
proven to be an important and practical field over the last half century, a firm
theoretical basis for it is necessary.

There are some broader impacts resulting from the proposed activity: The project
involves active participation of graduate students, undergraduates, and also
high school students, commensurate with their backgrounds and abilities.
Graduate student participation provides training for careers in academia and
industry. Undergraduate participation encourages research as a career and steers
students towards academia and research in general.