* 1216347
* HCC: Small: Copyright and Online Communities: An Empirical Study of Social Norms and User Conceptions
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Amy Bruckman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2016
* USD 388,946.00

This research will develop a detailed understanding of interactions between
copyright law, social norms, and user behavior in online communities where
people create and share content. Recent work has found that the following five
things are typically different: (1) what the law says; (2) what people think the
law says; (3) what people think is ethical; (4) community norms; and (5) what
people actually do. How can we better understand users, how they engage with
copyrighted content online, and how they interact with one another in
environments of creative sharing? To fully answer these questions, it is
necessary to address all five dimensions, and their complex interactions. This
research takes up the task of understanding how these dimensions function within
different online communities, how community norms evolve, and what lessons can
be derived for online community management and design.

The Internet is a rich medium for a vast spectrum of creative activity. People
make original art, write stories, make videos, and share them with others
online. The raw material for this wealth of creativity is a combination of
original ideas and existing content, including the remix of copyrighted material
created by corporations or other Internet users. As a result, while the nuances
of copyright law were once something that largely mattered only to commercial
producers of content, technology has changed all of this. With both copying and
wide dissemination made orders of magnitude easier thanks to digital content and
the Internet, copyright is now something that touches the average computer user
on almost a daily basis. This is particularly true for the large number of
online amateur content creators. However, just because the law is more relevant
to more people does not mean it is more easily understandable.

The same confusions that have always existed in applications of the law have
been exacerbated by technological advances. Social norms that form within these
communities of creators do not necessarily track exactly to the law, but
represent shared understandings and constructions, as well as ethical
intuitions. These norms interact in intricate ways with other sources of order
in online communities - legal rules, site policies, and technology-imposed
control - and only together provide a complete picture of user behavior.

This study will gather data from three sources: (1) current online community
policies; (2) public conversations about intellectual property occurring on
current online sites and archives from older communities; and (3) interviews
with creators of online creative content. The analysis will focus on teasing out
the norms that exist within different communities, how they have evolved, and
how they interact with the law as written and as enacted by community policies.

The results of this research will better inform online community design, and
more broadly contribute to our fundamental understanding of how social norms
operate in complex sociotechnical systems. It will provide evidence-based
guidance for online community designers, and for policy makers tasked with
helping the law adapt effectively to new technologies. Broader educational
impacts of this research include the training of two graduate students in this
interdisciplinary field of study. Additionally, this research will enrich the
curriculum for the required undergraduate class CS 4001 "Computers, Society, and
Professionalism."