* 1216165
* EAGER: Blood Parasite Infections in Fishes and Their Transmission by Gnathiid Isopods on Caribbean Coral Reefs.
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Paul Sikkel, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 05/31/2016
* USD 327,568.00

The ocean covers most of the planet and harbors most of the Earth?s biomass and
diversity, including that found within the so-called 'rainforests of the sea',
coral reefs, that supports more species per area than any other ecological
system. Current research on diseases in coral reef systems focuses primarily on
corals and sponges, the major invertebrate architects of reefs, and how these
diseases contribute to morbidity and mortality of such organisms, causes that in
turn result in major shifts in community structure. Yet an estimated 80% of the
organisms on coral reefs are parasites, which, like terrestrial systems, include
many arthropods. The study of animal parasites and diseases has historically
been the realm of pathologists, veterinary scientists, and animal husbandry
professionals, while at the same time attracting the attention of some
evolutionary biologists. Given that parasitism is the most common animal
lifestyle and that many diseases are either caused or transmitted by parasites,
it is therefore surprising that, historically, few ecologists and environmental
biologists have addressed the links among such. However, there has been
considerable interest in recent years in the interface between ecology and
disease biology: understanding the link between biotic and abiotic environmental
factors and the dynamics of diseases and their vectors. Thus, research in marine
systems is particularly needed to achieve a comprehensive and balanced
understanding of the ecology of diseases. Arguably the most ecologically
important among these are gnathiid isopods. Common members of the benthic
zooplankton community, they are the major ectoparasite of reef fishes and main
food item for cleaner organisms. As with their terrestrial blood-feeding
counterparts (e.g., ticks and mosquitoes), they have been shown to transmit
protozoan parasites to fish hosts. The ultimate goal of this project is to
understand the effects of changes in benthic community structure of coral reefs
and host density on the abundance of ectoparasitic gnathiid isopods, the per
capita risk of infestation of gnathiids on fish hosts, and the prevalence of
protozoan and other diseases of fish hosts in the Caribbean. The principal
investigators propose to determine the range of Caribbean hosts for
haemogregarine protozoans and test the important assumption that Caribbean
gnathiid isopods also transmit them.

Broader Impacts: This research will support undergraduate and undergraduate
students and their interactions within multiple institutions, including Arkansas
State University-Jonesboro, University of the Virgin Islands, and University of
Puerto Rico. It will further build on existing relationships with local US
Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico resource managers and K-12 schools and will
contribute to their local economies. Finally, it will foster collaboration with
scientists in South Africa and the United Kingdom.