* 1216726
* Collaborative Research: Conceptualizing an Institute for Empowering Long Tail Research
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Carl Kesselman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 09/30/2013
* USD 100,000.00

The majority of NSF-funded research occurs in small and medium-sized
laboratories (SMLs) that often comprise a single PI and a few students and
postdocs. For these small teams, the growing importance of cyberinfrastructure
and its applications in discovery and innovation is as much problem as
opportunity. With limited resources and expertise, even simple data discovery,
collection, analysis, management, and sharing tasks are difficult. An
unfortunate consequence is that in this "long tail" of science, modern
computational methods often are not exploited, much valuable data goes unshared,
and too much time is consumed by routine tasks. To date, research investments in
science cyberinfrastructure have disproportionately emphasized big science
projects, providing tools for use by IT staff and technology savvy researchers
rather than complete applications consumable by end users. This project's goal
is to lay a foundation for a more balanced research agenda by focusing
exclusively on the needs of SMLs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Software Institute
Conceptualization project aims to determine whether these obstacles to discovery
and innovation can be overcome via the use of software as a service (SaaS)
methods. Such methods have proven immensely effective for small and medium
businesses due to their ability to deliver advanced capabilities while
streamlining the user experience and achieving economies of scale. To determine
whether similar benefits can apply for SMLs, the project team will engage with
multiple science communities to identify science practices, match science
practices against candidate SaaS offerings, and evaluate business models that
could permit sustainable development of those offerings. The outcome of this
process is intended to be a compelling and competitive strategic plan for an NSF
Software Innovation and Sustainability Institute that both meets immediate needs
of the initial science communities and provides a basis for a new, more cost-
effective method of addressing cyberinfrastructure needs across all NSF
directorates.