* 1216893
* Conceptualization and Analysis of a 3D Virtual Cell
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Philip Bourne, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Stefan Robila
* 02/28/2014
* USD 625,830.00

The University of California San Diego is awarded a grant for planning activies
leading to a conceptual design for an an S2I2 Institute for Translational
Systems Biology (ITSB) that emphasizes biological 3-dimensional (3D) structures
from molecule to cell and addresses the sustainability challenge. This virtual
3D cell provides the scientific framework to collect and disseminate software
associated with all aspects of molecular and cellular biology in a way that can
be understood by practicing scientists. We will draw from the App store model,
which, while a software distribution paradigm in common use in daily life, has
not been considered as a way to distribute, maintain and evolve scientific
software. The app store model defines a source of software, a place to comment,
rate and contribute to software; a place with an expectation of how that
software will operate; and a place where software has standardized interfaces.
The ITSB is a community driven project and the community will be bought together
by a symposium and a series of focused workshops that: (I) explore where the
science will be in 5 years from the world leading practitioners; (ii) smaller
workshops that take that vision and define what software, data and tool
development is needed to fulfill that vision in areas such as the biology of
supramolecular assemblies, protein-protein interactions, pathway analysis and
simulation; and (iii) a workshop that focuses on K12, undergraduate and
professional education and dissemination through visual cues and organization of
content that will train the next generation of translational biologists using
the full power of the Internet. The 3D virtual cell web site will become a hub
through which diverse practitioners can contribute, gain knowledge and
interact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biology occurs at multiple scales, from molecules
to cells to organisms to environments; scales which have traditionally been
studied separately. Translational biology is now seeking to bring these
disparate scales together to achieve a new level of understanding. This
understanding requires new algorithm development and analysis tools that can
operate on an increasingly large, diverse, complex and widely distributed body
of digital biological data. Hence, translational biology is faced with
cyberinfrastructure challenges related to data accessibility, software
development, software reuse, and sustainability on a scale not seen before. The
prior modus operandi of individual software development efforts needs to be
complemented by a concerted community effort. Open source software repositories
are useful in this regard but they do not focus on cyberinfrastructure to solve
a biological grand challenge, but rather address a number of smaller challenges
in a piecemeal fashion. As a result it could be argued that the current software
development and maintenance cycle costs too much, takes too long, operates in
too many silos, is unlikely to be unsustainable and cannot meet the ever
increasing challenges of 21st century biological sciences. The broader impact of
the ITSB is a virtual biological environment physically manifest as a center for
advanced software and data infrastructure. In content it provides a source of
data, software, tools and knowledge of the emergent 3D virtual cell. In concept
it is a new model for aggregating developments in the field. As such anyone with
an Internet connection can gain access to a collated and well-described set of
data, tools and knowledge, materials that hitherto might only have been present
in select laboratories and not easily accessible to a broad community of
scholars from diverse backgrounds and institutions.