* 1216186
* STTR Phase I:  Technical, Economic, and Regulatory Evaluation and Demonstration of Policy-based Dynamic Spectrum Access-Enabled Broadband Wireless Communications Networks
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Martin Weiss, Shared Spectrum Company
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2013
* USD 177,804.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will demonstrate
the technical and commercial feasibility of the near-term innovative Dynamic
Spectrum Access (DSA) technology to efficiently share spectrum resources with
legacy Federal systems. Increasing spectrum demand along with years of growing
regulatory support for innovative wireless technologies like DSA presents a
unique opportunity to show how spectrum sharing approaches and technologies can
wring abundance from scarcity by finding ways to use spectrum more efficiently.
The objectives of this research are to quantify the cost/benefit tradeoffs and
validate the regulatory and system requirements for sensing-based, geo-location
and hybrid broadband systems that can coexist with Federal users. The project
will consist of technical and economic modeling and simulations of several
policy-based, DSA-enabled system configurations under a wide range of scenarios
in selected Federal bands currently under regulatory review for potential
reallocation. It will create detailed spectrum sharing system design documents
that include comprehensive entrant and incumbent user requirements,
architectures and costs (including initial testing, validation and transaction
costs, incremental capital costs, implementation costs and recurring operational
costs). It will culminate with a demonstration plan to field test the most cost-
effective sharing approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This broader impact of this
project will be in the multiple benefits resulting from improving spectrum
efficiency, lowering costs and fostering American innovation. Enabling spectrum
sharing accelerates by 5 to 10 years the transition process through proven
approaches that allow co-existence of new and incumbent systems. DSA-enabled
spectrum sharing on both a geographic and temporal basis greatly increases the
overall capacity of broadband wireless systems. This technology also facilitates
band clearing in Federal bands, where appropriate, and maximizes spectrum access
where relocation of Federal incumbents would be too costly or infeasible. This
avoids having to redirect funds from auction proceeds to cover Federal
government efforts in planning, redesigning and moving every existing system. It
also relieves the pressure to auction more exclusive use spectrum licenses by
enabling innovative unlicensed, light licensing and other models. When Federal
systems must be relocated, DSA allows them to gain equivalent or improved
spectrum access in other bands. This project will greatly improve the
understanding of DSA-enabled spectrum sharing by identifying stakeholder
requirements and cost effective solutions. It will prove that these capabilities
are feasible and benefits real by producing cost data for different DSA
approaches, allowing operators, regulators and incumbents to understand whether
costs align with bandwidth gains.