* 1216816
* Collaborative Research: A Scientific Software Innovation Institute for Computational Chemistry and Materials Modeling (S2I2C2M2)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Robert Harrison, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 10/31/2013
* USD 130,000.00

Computational chemistry is one of the pillars of computational science, and thus
its impact reaches well beyond chemistry into biomolecular and polymer physics,
materials science, and condensed-matter physics. Over its long history, which
stretches back more than half a century to the dawn of computation,
computational chemistry has achieved a much-deserved status as a full partner
with experiment in scientific discovery, yielding simulations of such high
accuracy that its predictions of a variety of molecular properties may be
considered "computational experiments," often with greater reliability than
laboratory measurements for many chemical properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
history of computational chemistry endows the field not only with great
experience, but also with a legacy of diverse and complex code stacks. Many
molecular dynamics and quantum chemistry programs involve hundreds of thousands
to even a million lines of hand-written code in a variety of languages,
including Fortran-77, Fortran-90, C, and C++. While this complexity has arisen
naturally from the intricacy of the problems these programs were designed to
solve, it also presents a crucial obstacle to the long-term sustainability and
extension of the software on ever-changing high-performance computing
hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the S2I2C2M2 will be to overcome
these obstacles of both algorithms and culture and change the fundamental nature
of computational chemistry software development. In the year-long
Conceptualization Phase, S2I2C2M2 will bring together an interdisciplinary team
of computational chemists, computer scientists, applied mathematicians, and
computer engineers to attack the fundamental problems of software complexity and
education. Three working groups will focus on the key areas of portable parallel
infrastructure, general-purpose tensor algebra algorithms, and protocols for
information exchange and code interoperability. In addition, experts from the
S2I2C2M2 team will participate in an inaugural summer school on software
development for computational chemistry.