* 1216288
* GOALI: E. coli Metabolic Engineering to Produce the Marine Anticancer Agent Lomaiviticin A
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Blaine Pfeifer, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 08/31/2015
* USD 250,781.00

0932612 Pfeifer

Intellectual merit

This project originates from a complementary partnership between Tufts
University and Wyeth Research. The Wyeth Natural Products Discovery Group is
recognized as a leader in industrial natural products-based drug discovery and
development and has recently sequenced the gene cluster responsible for a potent
anticancer compound called lomaiviticin A. The gene sequence was isolated from
the marine bacterium Salinispora pacifica naturally responsible for lomaiviticin
A production. Unfortunately, lomaiviticin A production from S. pacifica is time-
consuming (7-14 days), inconsistent, and low-yielding (0.5 mg/L). In this
project, E. coli will be used as a heterologous host for lomaiviticin A
biosynthesis with the logic that E. coli will overcome the current S. pacifica
production limitations. Here, the Principal Investigator's (PI's) group at Tufts
University will lead efforts to transfer the lomaiviticin A gene cluster to
E.coli for subsequent heterologous production. The Tufts team specializes in
genetic transfer strategies to facilitate complex natural product production
through convenient heterologous hosts. Together, the industrial-academic
collaboration is well-suited for the production of this important marine
anticancer agent through perhaps the ideal biological host.

Broader impacts

The synergistic and complementary academic-industrial partnership between Tufts
and Wyeth will promote unique broader impact opportunities. Through Tufts, the
project will use research as an educational and outreach mechanism. The research
itself crosses numerous disciplines that include: molecular biology,
microbiology, chemistry, genetics, and chemical and biological engineering.
Students at two educational levels (graduate and undergraduate) will have the
opportunity to participate in and learn from this multi-disciplinary approach.
In addition, individual research responsibilities have been designed to re-
enforce the academic level of the student. The graduate student will oversee and
manage the experimental efforts in Aims 1 and 2 while simultaneously guiding
undergraduate assistants. Hence, the graduate student will develop as an
independent scientist and will also gain mentoring experience as he/she trains
younger students. The undergraduate student will learn process culturing and
analysis skills that coincide with their chemical and biological engineering
curriculum. As part of the outreach initiatives, the undergraduate will be
selected from the Tufts NSF-sponsored Computer Science, Engineering, and
Mathematics Scholars program that encourages underrepresented groups to pursue
science and engineering and for whom the PI serves as an academic advisor.
Finally, the students will be able to compare academic and industrial research
opportunities and gain first-hand access to both climates through summer
internships hosted by Wyeth.