* 1216555
* Value, Impact and Best Practices: Maximizing REU SBE Potential
* SBE,SMA
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2014
* Andrea Chapdelaine, Council on Undergraduate Research
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 04/30/2014
* USD 46,725.00

The Council on Undergraduate Research (CUR) is hosting a 1.5 day conference in
Washington, DC, devoted to Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) in the
fields of Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences. The conference brings
together veteran REU awardees and their students, new awardees, and faculty who
aspire to win REU grants for their institutions or send their students to REU
programs. Participants hear from plenary speakers on the research showing the
value and impact of undergraduate research and best practices in undergraduate
research programs. Breakout sessions address relevant topics, e.g. how to
institutionalize, sustain, and evaluate undergraduate research programs, and
scaffolding undergraduate research experiences from first through fourth year.
At least one breakout session is designed specifically for student participants,
e.g. leveraging undergraduate research experiences for future career success.
Following the conference, CUR will publish conference proceedings with plenary
addresses, PowerPoint presentations, and summaries of breakout sessions. These
will be made available to the CUR network of university faculty and
administrators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. Long-standing REU
programs have developed procedures for recruiting and supervising students,
providing logistical support, supervising research, teaching research ethics,
and disseminating research results. There is currently no mechanism for these
experienced programs to share their best practices with existing programs or
with new awardees; this conference provides that mechanism. The conference
includes student participants in SBE REU programs to (a) share their experiences
with principal investigators and NSF program officers and (b) experience an
academic conference with other faculty and students in their broad disciplinary
area within the SBE sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. REU programs
are typically developed and managed by researchers who understand research in
their own disciplines, but may not know of the scholarship of undergraduate
research. This conference helps experienced REU principal investigators put
their undergraduate research programs into a broader framework by sharing
research on the impact of participating in research. It also helps new principal
investigators consider and potentially adopt the appropriate best practices
developed in veteran program to their own projects. It helps faculty whose
institutions do not currently host an REU program to learn how their students
can access REU programs at other institutions, and how they might win REU grants
themselves. The conference also addresses issues of interest to all, e.g.
institutionalizing REU programs, specific challenges faced by SBE REU sites,
securing additional resources, and incorporating appropriate research
opportunities into undergraduate curricula.