* 1216908
* STTR Phase I:  Universal Wireless Channel Selection Filter for Enhanced Access to RF Spectrum
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Vrinda Haridasan, Physical Devices LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2013
* USD 179,989.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will investigate
an ultra-wideband tunable radio frequency filter for use as a universal channel
selection filter to maximize spectrum utilization. The research during Phase I
will focus on high fidelity modeling of a tunable phase shifter design to
provide high linearity, low insertion loss and efficient power utilization. It
will also focus on circuit design for continuously tunable cancellation of
distortion to fabrication of the circuit in CMOS in a design that will provide
linear operation at input high power, independent of signal modulation, coding
or channel frequency. The goal is design of a circuit that can be miniaturized
for integration in hand held devices of all types to provide continuously
tunable reception initially from 700 MHz to 3 GHz, and with a channel bandwidth
tunable to 20 MHz and more to support current and pending, as well as legacy,
wireless communications standards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project is it will maximize the carrying
capacity of the wireless spectrum, enabling its efficient utilization at
frequencies from White Space to WiFi. In addition to benefitting consumer
communications, it will also benefit research and technical education, as well
as biomedical care by providing continuously tunable RF filters for such
instruments. Continuously tunable center frequency will allow smart phones and
other software defined radios to use any frequency, by contrast with the limited
channel selection provided by the switched filter banks in use today. The
distortion cancellation capability will enable linear operation at high input
power, such as in receiving OFDM signals from a nearby tower, preventing dropped
calls and increasing quality of service. The net result will be to maximize
simultaneous users and increase their quality of service while reducing the
size, weight and complexity of handheld devices and increasing their
reliability, helping the industry meet consumer expectations and aiding
continuing growth of wireless industry, which shipped over 500 million smart
phones in 2011.