* 1216977
* EXP: Building a Learning Analytics System to Improve Student Learning and Promote Adaptive Teaching Across Multiple Domains
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Marsha Lovett, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2016
* USD 496,315.00

This PI team aims to use artificial intelligence to exploit data collected from
intelligent tutoring systems to provide feedback both to students and to
teachers effectively and at the right times. The team is using a new analytic
approach, which introduces hierarchical modeling to learning analytics, to
investigate how to better understand students' learning states. Algorithms make
valid interpretable and actionable inferences from student-learning data,
drawing on cognitive theories and statistics to make it work. As in tutoring
systems, analysis is at the level of component skills rather than looking at end
performance on a task as a whole. Research is around construction of the
algorithms for deducing student learning and student learning states and around
learning ways of signaling both to learners and to their teachers what concepts
and skills learners understand and are capable of and which they are having
trouble with. A learning dashboard will allow teachers to visualize the learning
needs of a whole class and adapt activities to student needs. Feedback aimed at
learners themselves will help learners recognize activities they need to engage
in next to better their skills or understanding. Evaluation will include the
degree to which learners development of metacognitive skills when such tools are
available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will contribute
towards the next generation of intelligent tutoring systems as well as
contribute to the data analytics needed to make use of large-scale educational
data repositories. Because the Learning Dashboard will be independent of any
particular domain, and because metacognition and self-assessment are
foregrounded, the Learning Dashboard and what is learned about designing an
effective learning dashboard should be applicable across disciplines and
classes. The proposal brings together what is known about learning,
metacognition, and intelligent tutoring systems to address timely learning
analytics issues.