* 1216309
* REVSYS: Multilevel Revision within the Praying Mantises (Insecta, Dictyoptera, Mantodea)
* BIO,DEB
* 01/23/2012,01/31/2017
* Gavin Svenson, Cleveland Museum of Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* ashley dowling
* 01/31/2017
* USD 357,450.00

The charismatic predatory insect group of praying mantises (order Mantodea)
includes over 2,400 described species that exhibit an incredibly rich diversity
of morphology and life history strategies. Despite the long tradition of
ecological, behavioral, and physiological research focused on the group,
mantises have received limited taxonomic attention and the current
classification scheme does not reflect genetically based, evolutionary
relationships. This project will unify traditional and modern morphological and
genetically based systematic methods to reconstruct the evolutionary
relationships for all praying mantises, which will guide the construction of a
natural classification that reflects true evolutionary groups. This research
will also produce two species-level taxonomic monographs (representing about 21%
of the praying mantis diversity) while building new museum collections,
describing numerous new species, producing online, interactive identification
keys for mantis genera, and producing a publicly accessible database of
taxonomic information and scientific literature references.

This project will represent a significant first step in modernizing the
systematics of these insects that are often used to control such pests as
aphids. The project will also provide a model for future revisions of other
insect groups. This research will impact the broader community by: 1) producing
high-quality images of mantises and their morphology, organized in an
evolutionary framework that will facilitate community identifications through
online, interactive taxonomic keys; 2) opening annually scheduled workshops to
include university students, high school teachers, and the public, which will
provide information and training in praying mantis taxonomy, morphology, and
biology; 3) providing new scientific training at the post-doctoral, graduate,
and undergraduate student levels; and 4) immediately complementing current
comparative research in mantis sexual ecology, prey recognition physiology, and
auditory evolution by providing a stable and predictive classification.