* 1216928
* Developing reduced basis methods for Galerkin and Collocation framework
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Yanlai Chen, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 07/31/2016
* USD 161,113.00

Reduced basis method (RBM) is a model reduction framework for rapid and reliable
simulations of input-parametrized partial differential equations. Many
applications require simulations to be repeated tens of thousands of times to
study the effect of the parameters on the solution. This repetition can be
prohibitive in terms of computational cost. The RBM can provide a surrogate
solution in negligible computational time. A similar approach, known as the
reduced basis element method (RBEM) can be employed for computing the surrogate
solution on a complicated domain. This method is a combination of domain
decomposition and RBM. In this grant proposal, the PI proposes to continue his
work in these two areas to design a completely new RBM for the collocation
framework and to develop (Galerkin) variants of RBM and RBEM suitable for
applications to simulations of scattering problems with large number, wide range
of parameters, and rough geometries. The proposed research includes two phases.
The first phase aims to build a solid theoretical foundation that includes study
of the new collocation-based RBM, a novel error estimation procedure for RBEM, a
RBM algorithm design based on efficient error estimation for a wider range of
weak formulations. The second phase of this project is the application of the
newly-developed methodologies to acoustic/electromagnetic scattering with rather
high-dimensional parameter and uncertainties in the geometry of the scatterer.
The intellectual merit of the proposed research lies in their comprehensive
coverage of novel algorithm design, solid analysis, and efficient
implementation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's work has far-reaching goals
beyond the current proposal because of the methods' broad applicability to
problems of significant impact in science and engineering. The real-world
application areas include (but are not limited to) national security (fine-
tuning of the shape and material for stealth technology), renewable energy
(design of solar cells), and non-destructive sensing. The broader impact of this
proposal will result from its scientific impact and educational component. The
results will be widely disseminated and the codes made publicly available. The
proposed research will incorporate rigorous undergraduate and graduate student
training and mentoring. Special attention will be paid to under-represented
groups including minorities.