* 1216462
* Novel methods for the analysis of animal movement: spatial and temporal structure across scale SCIB conference; Charleston SC; Jan 3-7, 2012
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Michael Dickinson, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 12/31/2012
* USD 12,309.00

The quantification of animal movement is an important tool in diverse research
disciplines within biology. For example, geneticists developing new mutants use
locomotion to describe changes in phenotype for thousands of lines,
neuroscientists use movement to understand how the brain works, and changes in
animal migration patterns are providing understanding of the effects of global
climate change. Endeavors ranging from the scale of the movements of cells
within developing embryos to continental and ocean migration patterns are
benefitting from new advances in computing, automated tracking, and imaging.
However, many of the newest tools are being developed within academic
laboratories and, even if offered freely, may require specialized skills in
engineering to utilize. A second challenge for all such projects is the need to
develop mathematical approaches to the analysis of the large data sets produced
via automated tracking and movement assessment systems. Thus, advances in
computing and sensor hardware have created unprecedented opportunities that are
nonetheless unavailable to many biologists. As a first step to address this
problem, we have organized a symposium where potential users can become aware of
the new tools available. The program is designed to encourage interactions among
the audience members and with invited speakers to create opportunities for
collaboration and shared development that would not otherwise be possible. The
symposium will include presentations by eleven speakers including one graduate
student, four postdocs and junior fellows or faculty. The collection of speakers
illustrates a major effort to recruit among the most important contributors to
this integrative topic while simultaneously broadening the participation of
under-represented groups at the interface of engineering and biology.