* 1216253
* HCC: EAGER:  Authoring Game AIs by Demonstration for Real-Time Strategy Games
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2012
* Ashwin Ram, Palo Alto Research Center Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 12/31/2012
* USD 142,921.00

This research will explore novel "authoring by demonstration" techniques for
real-time strategy (RTS) games. Creating rich artificial intelligence (AI)
behavior sets for complex computer games requires significant engineering
effort. Developers need to anticipate all imaginable circumstances that the AI
may encounter within the game world. The resulting AI is often static and
results in predictable behaviors, detracting from the player experience. In
addition, it is difficult for average players to create AI behaviors, without
significant expertise in both AI and scripting. Modeling human-like goals and
behaviors required for multiplayer games with semi-autonomous avatars adds
additional complexity. This potentially transformative project will develop
novel learning techniques that allow users to create intelligent behaviors
simply by demonstrating them. The research will be done within the domain of RTS
games, as these domains pose significant challenges that must be tackled in
order to scale up the learning techniques to real-world tasks.

Case-based planners, hierarchical task network planners, or industry-standard
behavior-tree execution engines require a library of base behaviors or methods
in order to generate complete plans, which traditionally are coded by hand. The
project will investigate ways to automate the process of generating such
behavior libraries based on novel methods for learning strategic plans from user
demonstrations. The techniques will be evaluated in the context of a case-based
planning system for RTS games. RTS games are complex and involve strategic
decision-making, multi-agent coordination, real-time interaction, and partially-
observable environments. These properties pose significant challenges to
existing AI methods for planning and learning. This research will make
fundamental scientific contributions to learning, case-based reasoning, and AI
for real-time strategic domains, addressing key problems in goal recognition,
plan learning, and authoring support.

This research will enable game designers and other non-programmers to create the
behavior sets for RTS games without requiring programming knowledge. This
capability has two main consequences: first, it allows game developers to create
games with less effort, and second it will enable a new genre of games where
players would be able to create their own AIs as part of the game play.
Additionally, as RTS games are essentially domain-specific simulations, the
research will support authoring of behavior sets for domains such as simulation
environments for training, real-time robotic control, organizational modeling
for business decision-making, or sophisticated market simulations for economics
strategy or public policy. The educational impact of the project is twofold.
First, the project will constitute an important advance towards easy authoring
of training simulators for educational applications that require environment
with complex AI behaviors. This will enable development of new educational
technologies with simulators or virtual worlds. Second, the project will involve
undergraduate and graduate students in all phases of the work.