* 1216756
* CSR: Small: Scheduling and Virtualization Technologies for Heterogeneous Clusters with Many-core Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Michela Becchi, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2016
* USD 512,920.00

Many-core graphics processing units have been used to accelerate a wide variety
of applications and are increasingly a part of high performance computing
clusters. Despite the rich body of literature on job scheduling and on
virtualization of CPU clusters, resource management frameworks and cloud
computing services for heterogeneous clusters that include many-core devices are
still in their infancy. The project targets this problem and proposes the design
of a set of virtualization and scheduling technologies to allow for the
efficient use of heterogeneous clusters that include general purpose processors
and many-core coprocessor devices. In particular, the proposed research focuses
on the following aspects and on their interactions. First, many-core sharing is
explored as a means to improve system utilization while keeping infrastructure
costs low. Second, scheduling mechanisms targeting both single- and multi-node
applications accelerated using coprocessor devices are proposed. Third, memory
unification technologies are proposed in order to hide from the users the
complexity of the heterogeneous memory system. Finally, diverse software stacks
are integrated into a coherent runtime system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results
of this research will be disseminated through publications and conference
presentation. In addition, open-source software modules will be released and
made available on the PI?s Lab website. The knowledge generated by this research
will allow creating instructional material to teach cluster and cloud computing
at both the undergraduate and graduate levels. Undergraduate student involvement
will be promoted leveraging the University of Missouri Undergraduate Research
Program and a partnership with Truman State University and Lincoln University.