* 1216389
* EXP: Transforming High School Science via Remote Online Labs
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* David Uttal, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Hoadley
* 09/30/2015
* USD 649,999.00

The PIs seek to understand better how online remote labs can be made to function
effectively in high-school science classes, especially focusing on the roles of
teachers as they facilitate investigations around those labs and how to support
teachers in their roles. The big research issue addressed is coming to
understand both when and why remote labs promote effective learning and
teaching. The project team is addressing this question in the context of using a
high-school radiation lab for several different purposes. They are refining
student and teacher materials over the course of the project so they can serve
as models for other virtual lab experiences. The lab journal that is being
refined is designed to include scaffolding for carrying out investigations in
online remote labs that will be generally applicable across laboratory contexts.
Research shows that access to remote labs helps students better grasp the
reality of their investigative experience than do simulations when students do
not have access to first-hand experience with physical phenomena; students
experience phenomena as more real when carrying out experiments using remote
labs than when using simulations to carry out the same experiments. This
suggests that for schools without lab equipment and for situations where
investigations are too dangerous or sophisticated to be carried out in a
classroom, online remote labs can play a powerful role in promoting both content
learning and science literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If we truly want our full
population to be scientifically literate, then giving every teen the opportunity
to participate in meaningful laboratory experiences that allow them to
experience what scientists do and how scientists reason is essential. But there
are many high schools without the equipment to allow this to happen. This
project lays the groundwork for creating such meaningful experiences around
remote labs. Some such labs have sophisticated equipment that would be
inappropriate in a school; some have simpler equipment that many schools simply
cannot afford. Remote labs are accessed by individuals or student teams using a
user interface that is developmentally appropriate for the learners and that
allows them to run and refine and rerun experiments and watch from afar as real
equipment carries out their instructions. Making remote labs work well in
classrooms requires having the kinds of tools for teachers that will allow
teachers to facilitate investigation activities and monitor the progress of
individuals and groups in the class as they do their investigations online and
remotely. This project's focus is on one particular remote online lab (a Geiger
counter), creating meaningful experiences for high schoolers around that lab,
and identifying the kinds of tools teachers need to facilitate such experiences
effectively. What will be learned will be applicable to creating other
meaningful remote lab experiences and using other remote lab facilities in
similar ways.