* 1216656
* Next-generation integral equation methods for wave scattering and propagation in periodic structures
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Alexander Barnett, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2015
* USD 180,000.00

The investigator and supported graduate student will develop new integral
equation algorithms to solve the Helmholtz equation in the context of time-
harmonic wave scattering from complex periodic structures. These algorithms will
be efficient, high-order accurate, mathematically rigorous, and, unlike many
existing integral equation solvers, robust for all problem parameters. Building
upon success in two dimensions, the project considers technologically important
multilayer media and three dimensional doubly-periodic scatterers. The work
includes developing new surface quadrature schemes, and the use of recent fast
direct solvers to handle multiple incident angles.

Basic science, engineering progress, and technology is increasingly reliant upon
the guidance and control of waves by periodic structures on the scale of the
wavelength. Examples include diffraction gratings, filters, photonic crystals
and other nano-scale materials, cost-effective solar cells, microwave antennae,
radar, sound absorbers, lithography and remote sensing. The computer algorithms
proposed by the investigator will make the modeling and design of such devices
more efficient, accurate, and reliable. Efficiency and robustness are paramount
because predicting real-world device performance often requires thousands of
solutions at different parameters. The societal benefits of more rapid modeling
and design of such complex devices are many, including faster communication, and
cheaper renewable energy. The investigator will release publicly-available
software, and also will engage local rural high-school mathematics students with
hands-on explorations in music, acoustics, waves, and computer signal analysis.