* 1216339
* Volatility, Possibility and Utility
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Larry Epstein, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 190,636.00

Financial decisions about complicated securities or investments must be made
subject to considerable uncertainty about the returns they will ultimately
produce. Moreover, as in the case of the recent crisis, there is often a limit
to what can be deduced from history about what to expect in the future.
Significant nonstationarities weaken the connection between past and future and
thus can render useless standard methods of statistical inference. It has been
argued that the (perceived) failures of the theory of finance in the context of
the recent crisis are due to inadequate attention paid to nonstationarities and
related complexities of financial markets. Indeed, the dominant theory of
portfolio choice and asset pricing models investors as completely confident in
their understanding of the environment and in their ability to predict the
future. This project is concerned with modeling the behavior and interaction of
individuals who are aware of the complexity of their environment and who are
therefore suitably cautious when making decisions: they recognize that the past
is an imperfect guide to the future and they seek decisions that are robust to
possible errors in their theory or model of the environment.

More specifically, the project's goal is to generalize formal continuous-time
asset pricing theory to incorporate the preceding features (limited confidence,
robust decision-making, nonstationarities and less ambitious learning).
Continuous time modeling is prominent in financial economics because of its
analytical advantages and because we live in continuous time. A technical
challenge that ensues is that the familiar tools of stochastic analysis employ
and build on probability theory. However, as indicated further below, the above
features cannot be accommodated within a probability space framework. Thus the
project will have a sizable technical component that will adapt and extend very
recent developments in stochastic analysis that eliminate the need for a
probability space framework in continuous time modeling. The resulting expansion
of the tool box of financial economics is a contribution in its own right.

A major focus of the project is on the modeling of volatility. Stochastic time
varying volatility is important for understanding features of asset returns,
particularly empirical regularities in derivative markets, and also the dynamics
of real macroeconomic variables; and evidence suggests that volatilities follow
complicated dynamics. The common modeling response, in the so-called stochastic
volatility literature, is to postulate correspondingly complicated parametric
laws of motion, including specification of the dynamics of the volatility of
volatility. However, one might question whether investors can learn these laws
of motion precisely, and more generally, whether it is plausible to assume that
investors become completely confident in any particular law of motion. It has
been argued that such confidence is particularly problematic because the
quantity being modeled is not directly observable, and because noise in the data
makes it difficult to draw sharp inferences about volatility from observables,
such as the market prices of derivative securities. Furthermore, it is often the
case that alternative models of volatility have differing implications for the
application at hand but cannot be distinguished empirically from past data. This
motivates modeling decision-making that is robust to possible misspecifications
of the dynamics of volatility, providing thereby a way to robustify stochastic
volatility modeling. It is known that robustness to uncertainty about the true
model of volatility cannot be accommodated within a probability space framework,
thus motivating the technical component described above.

Broader impacts include the possible impact of this work on the methods used by
regulators and others to understand financial markets.