* 1216858
* CIF: Small: A Cross-Tier Approach to Interference Management in Wireless   Heterogeneous Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Zhi-Quan Luo, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2015
* USD 314,125.00

In a heterogeneous wireless network, interference has become the dominant
performance limiting factor due to frequency sharing between the second tier low
powered micro/pico/femto base stations and the high powered macro base stations.
This project deals with several theoretical and practical aspects of
interference management for the heterogeneous wireless
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will first identify the
classes of interference management problems that are computationally
intractable, and then show how well they can be approximately solved with a
complexity that is polynomial in the problem size and the solution accuracy.
Special emphasis is given to the distributed implementation of the proposed
algorithms. A unified co-tier and cross-tier approach will be developed for
joint user admission, user-base station association, power control, user
grouping as well as transceiver design. Central to this study is to jointly
optimize user-base station association, transmit/receive beamformers, user
scheduling as well as partial joint transmission among a subset of base
stations. The proposed approach will transform the interference management
problem into an equivalent higher dimensional optimization problem and explore
efficient update of iterates that can be decomposed across base stations, users
and frequency slots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout this research, advanced
optimization techniques will be the key to the development of various
interference management algorithms. The methodologies developed in this research
will provide effective means to mitigate interference in heterogeneous networks
and significantly improve the network throughput as well as the users quality of
service.