* 1216011
* ICES: Small: Collaborative Research: Data-driven mechanisms in healthcare
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Mohsen Bayati, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2015
* USD 199,997.00

The main objective of the project is to develop and study new incentive and
reimbursement mechanisms within the context of the delivery of medical care. The
project takes a game-theoretic perspective, with the main players being the
government, health plans, healthcare providers, and patients. Some of the design
goals of the mechanisms are to motivate the parties involved to improve
healthcare quality while controlling costs. Among others, the study will try to
extend the algorithmic game theory framework to address the unique challenges
that occur in the context of healthcare. A key goal of the study is
understanding the extent to which utilizing electronically available medical
records may enable new mechanisms in the context of healthcare. In particular,
the project studies potential advantages of high quality risk-adjustment schemes
that are empowered by the application of machine learning to medical
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, much of the focus in the US public
policy debate has been given to problems surrounding providing and sustaining
healthcare services. One of the key problems the US healthcare system faces is
that of aligning incentives among the various stakeholders - the government,
health plans, care providers, and patients - to ensure favorable outcomes and
efficient resource utilization. The study will use tools from algorithms and
game theory to develop new alignment strategies. In particular, the study will
look at ways in which the collection and data-mining of electronic health
records may be used to provide better incentives for the stakeholders, and lead
to better overall care at lower cost.