* 1216827
* Physicochemical foundations of lipid phosphomonoester group mediated cell signaling events
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Arne Gericke, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2014
* USD 387,479.00

The extraordinary chemical diversity of lipids provides the foundation for the
many roles they fulfill in cellular systems, which ranges from controlling the
structural and morpho¬logical properties of cell membranes to mediating crucial
cell signaling events. Lipids with phosphate groups are ideally suited to affect
protein functions and they have been shown to control an ever-increasing array
of cell signaling events. The selective binding of proteins to lipid molecules
with phosphate groups like phosphoinositides, ceramide-1-phosphate,
sphingosine-1-phosphate or phosphatidic acid provides the specificity of the
signaling event. Kinases and phosphatases, which upon activation alter the
number of phosphate groups attached to the lipid headgroup, provide the temporal
control, while the spatial control is rooted in the rich chemical functionality
of the respective headgroup that gives rise to local enrichment through
interactions with other membrane resident molecules. Despite the importance for
lipid signaling, lipids with phosphate groups in their headgroup have not been
identified as a unit with a common theme and their properties have not been
investigated in a comparative manner. The experiments outlined by the PIs are
designed to identify the physico¬chemical commonalities these lipid signaling
molecules exhibit, while at the same time they are designed to highlight the
disparities among these lipids that give rise to their selective protein
binding, differences in lateral distribution and their varying subcellular
localization. The PIs will investigate the extent and consequences of hydrogen
bond formation between like and unlike lipid species with phosphate groups, the
effect of cholesterol on the lateral distribution of these lipids species, the
interaction of these lipids with arginine, lysine and histidine amino acid
residues and the impact of lipid morphology on the activity of lipid modifying
enzymes. &lt;br/&gt;The PIs will continue their partnership with the Max Planck
Institute (MPI) for Colloids and Interfaces (Germany). One undergraduate student
each summer will visit the MPI for a 10 week inter¬national research experience
that exposes the student to a different cultural environ¬ment and at the same
time allows the student to work at a premier research institution. During the
academic year undergraduate students will work in the PIs research labs, which
will prepare them for their summer research experience. As in the past, the PIs
will strive to identify students from groups underrepresented in the sciences
for these experiences.