* 1216019
* ICES:  Large: Collaborative Research:  Markets, Algorithms, Applications and the Digital Economy
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Vijay Vazirani, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 07/31/2017
* USD 600,000.00

Extensive work over the last decade, done within theoretical computer science,
has provided deep insights into the computability of market equilibria for
various market models and utility functions, using the powerful tools of the
modern theories of algorithmic design and algorithmic complexity. This follows
up on a century-long work, within mathematical economics, on obtaining a
mechanism that converges to equilibrium -- a goal that had to be eventually
abandoned due to certain negative results on efficient computability of the
equilibrium. The work in TCS was motivated in part by applications to markets on
the Internet. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The current project will extend this work
along several exciting directions. Recent work of the lead Principle
Investigator (PI) on using complementary pivot algorithms, for obtaining usable
algorithms for certain market models that are unlikely to have efficient
algorithms in the usual sense of polynomial worst-case running time, opens up
the possibility of extending this approach to broader classes of markets, in
particular, markets with production. A major new challenge is to address
dynamically evolving markets. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In terms of applications of
markets, the team brings to this project a wealth of experience on electricity
markets, gained from work done with researchers in computer science and control
dynamics. The PIs plan on bringing their expertise in mechanism design to bear
on the problems of integrating renewable energy sources into the smart grid and
providing better approaches to the pricing and allocation of ancillary services
to guarantee reliability and stability. Another new challenge is to extend
general equilibrium theory, the undisputed crown jewel of mathematical
economics, to the digital economy. The traditional notion of equilibrium is not
applicable to digital goods -- once produced, an unbounded number of copies of
such goods are available. The digital realm is very rich and is increasingly
occupying a larger share of our economy. It is imperative, therefore, to achieve
the same depth of understanding of pricing for digital goods as was obtained for
conventional goods. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will provide algorithms
and insights into the computational aspects of markets, including electricity
markets and transactions on the Internet, thereby helping make their operation
more efficient. Hence, it is expected to contribute to advances in science and
engineering, as well as to promote economic prosperity.