* 1216512
* Research Starter Grant: Consequences of saltwater intrusion on water quality in coastal plain wetlands
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Marcelo Ardon-Sayao, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2013
* USD 50,000.00

Human accelerated climate change will alter the functioning of coastal plain
wetlands through changes in hydrology and sea level rise. Decreased
precipitation and sea level rise will increase the probability of saltwater
intrusion into formerly freshwater wetlands. While much work has been conducted
on the effects of saltwater intrusion on wetland vegetation, much less is known
about the effects on biogeochemical cycling of carbon (C), nitrogen (N), and
phosphorus (P). Saltwater intrusion can alter biogeochemical cycling of C, N,
and P through both microbial metabolic and physicochemical pathways. Microbial
metabolic pathways are due to changes in the availability of electron donors and
acceptors. Physicochemical pathways are due to changes in chemical equilibrium,
flocculation, and cation exchange with sediments. The main objective is to
examine the effects of saltwater intrusion on C, N, and P cycling in coastal
plain wetlands. The overarching hypothesis is that saltwater intrusion will
increase N and P availability, while decreasing C availability, primarily
through physicochemical pathways. The work will be conducted in the Timberlake
Observatory for Wetland Restoration (TOWeR) site, a large (440 ha) extensively
instrumented wetland restoration project in the coastal plain of North Carolina.
The temporal and spatial dynamics of saltwater intrusion into the site provide
unique opportunities to test the consequences of saltwater on biogeochemical
cycling.

The functioning of coastal plain wetlands will change due to alterations in
hydrology and sea level rise. Decreased rainfall and sea level rise will
increase the probability of saltwater intrusion into formerly freshwater
wetlands. While much work has been conducted on the effects of saltwater
intrusion on wetland vegetation, much less is known about the effects on
biogeochemical cycling of. Saltwater intrusion can alter the cycling of carbon
(C), nitrogen (N), and phosphorus (P) in the wetlands. The research proposed
will illuminate vital aspects of the coupling of C, N, and P cycles in coastal
plain wetlands under saltwater intrusion. The ability to predict how these
ecosystems respond to altered precipitation regimes and sea level rise will
depend on understanding both the microbial metabolic as well as the
physicochemical effects of saltwater on ecosystem function. This work provides a
unique opportunity for basic ecosystem ecology research to have a direct impact
on the regulations and practice of wetland restoration.