* 1216074
* Characterizing Microorganisms during Ecosystem Development: Do Soil Microbial Communities Show Patterns of Succession?
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2011,01/31/2013
* Mark Williams, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 01/31/2013
* USD 93,273.00

The trillions of microorganisms that inhabit soils are key components of
ecosystems and they are integral to the many services that ecosystems provide. A
new DNA sequencing method will be used to catalog, in a level of detail that has
not been achieved before, microbial diversity in natural soils along a
successional dune chronosequence. The treasure trove of novel bacterial species
that is likely to be discovered will enhance our understanding of patterns,
causes, and consequences of changing microbial diversity and composition. It
will contribute to our understanding of the consequences of introducing microbes
into ecosystems for specific purposes such as bioremediation, and to our
understanding of factors that may limit the distribution and abundance of
potentially disease-causing bacteria. &lt;br/&gt;This research will result in
the cross-disciplinary training of one doctoral and three to six undergraduate
and high school students in soil biochemistry, microbiology, and molecular
ecology. Cooperation with the Mississippi School for Mathematics and Science
(MSMS) will result in the recruitment of future undergraduate students for
summer research projects. These projects will also help to expand state of the
art science projects into a learning experience that will impact High School
classrooms. Student research will be highlighted in state competitions such as
the State Engineering Fair and the young scientist division at the Mississippi
Academy of Sciences.