* 1216073
* ICES: Small: Evaluating Price Mechanisms for Clouds
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Scott Shenker, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 07/31/2016
* USD 375,000.00

Cloud computing centers are used by most major corporations to store business
data and provide flexibility in computing services allowing more agile business
responses in this rapidly evolving economy. Individuals also benefit from cloud
computing services ranging from data storage (e.g. dropbox.com) to mobile
computation (e.g. the iPhone's Siri computes in the cloud). These cloud
computing centers must adapt rapidly and efficiently to complex and intensive
requests from many simultaneous users. One emerging mechanism for such complex
real time allocations is to use pricing -- provide prices for various resources
and allow an internal market to find good allocations. The goal of this project
is to carefully analyze several important properties of price mechanisms. First
and foremost is the accuracy and stability of prices and the allocations that
they induce -- the so called market equilibria. Second, is their manipulability
by users, a problem that has been observed in several such systems. Third is
their relationship to external pricing and their relationship to various methods
used to increase the income of cloud computing providers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to analyze price mechanisms for cloud
computing, studied within the more general framework of resource allocation. In
the first special case (the Leontief economy) it is assumed that the commodities
are perfect complements. The second special case is the "machine based model" in
which some machines are of use to only a subset of all users. The project will
study the fairness properties of such schemes and particular their relation to
Nash bargaining theory, the convergence rate to the clearing prices, and the
potential for users to manipulate the market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will have direct impact on the design and development of modern cloud computing
centers, allowing them to provide lower cost service and avoid many pitfalls
that have been problematic in the past. In addition, the study of prices and
markets in such a controlled environment will allow us to develop mathematical
and computational tools that will be useful in understanding the national and
international economies. In particular, the study of price manipulations and the
development of systems that limit such manipulations are of great importance.
Also, the development of better mechanisms for managing cloud computing centers
will improve the environment by reducing the number of computers required by
these centers, saving resources and energy. The PIs will participate in
education outreach at local high schools and with women and under-represented
groups at the Berkeley Foundation for Opportunities in Information Technology
(BFOIT) summer workshop.