* 1216023
* ICES:Small: An architectural, economic, and legal approach to encouraging end-to-end Quality of Service in the Internet
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Scott Jordan, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Networking research on Internet Quality of Service techniques has resulted in
standards that have been widely incorporated into routers. And yet, use of
Quality of Service practices is very limited. Internet Service Providers have
implemented Quality of Service practices to support their own voice and video
services, but do not offer Quality of Service techniques to their subscribers
for use by any other Internet applications. Internet Service Providers have not
incorporated Quality of Service practices into their agreements with other
Internet Service Providers, and hence Quality of Service techniques are not
available across the Internet. The limited deployment of Quality of Service
practices has ignited vigorous debate over Net Neutrality, one of the most
contentious telecommunications public policy issues in
decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the lack of
availability of Quality of Service techniques widely across the Internet. It
will adopt an interdisciplinary approach that integrates network architecture,
economics, and law. The project will have three goals. First, it will create and
analyze network architecture and economic models that can give insight into when
an Internet Service Provider will choose to offer Quality of Service techniques
to application providers other than itself. Second, it will consider how
communications law may affect the development of Quality of Service practices.
Third, it will illustrate potential technical and economic arrangements between
users, Internet Service Providers, and application-providers that could enable
widespread deployment of Quality of Service practices in a manner consistent
with new laws regulating traffic management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It
is hoped that the results will encourage the widespread deployment of Quality of
Service practices and thus enable further development of novel Internet
applications. The research will also encourage interdisciplinary teaching of
networking technology, economics, and law through further development of a novel
undergraduate course on The Internet and Public Policy. The research, if
successful, will inform ISPs and regulators, and potentially improve both the
functional character of the Internet and the revenue opportunities of the ISPs.