* 1216102
* The 4th International Ra-Rn Workshop June 3-8, 2012
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Edward Durbin, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Brian Midson
* 01/31/2013
* USD 25,000.00

Funds from this award to the University of Rhode Island will provide partial
funding for the Fourth International Radium and Radon Workshop, the latest in an
ongoing international workshop series devoted to developments and new directions
in the application and measurement of radium (Ra) isotopes and radon (Rn) as
tracers in the environment. The accurate measurement and modeling of radium and
radon isotopes is important because they have become increasingly important
tools for determining fluxes of submarine groundwater discharge (SGD) into the
ocean, rates of mixing of coastal waters, residence times of water in estuaries,
and interactions between surface water and groundwater.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will provide an important forum for a growing
community of scientists to discuss the benefits and challenges associated with
the measurement of radium-223 , radium-224, radium-226, radium-228, radon-220,
and radon-222 , as well as models used to apply the results to environmental
problems. Prior Ra-Rn workshops held in Monaco, Venice, and Jerusalem (listed
below) have identified a number of issues related to the application and
accurate measurement of Ra and Rn in aquatic systems. These and other issues
would greatly benefit from discussions with the broader scientific community, as
proposed for this workshop. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The workshop
would provide a timely and valuable opportunity to continue to develop
discussions on the application of Ra and Rn tracers, provide scientific and
programmatic updates, and foster international collaboration. At the time of the
proposal submission, 54 participants from 15 countries had registered for the
workshop. Proposed mechanisms to disseminate the meeting results include a short
synopsis article in EOS, AGU/ASLO special session(s), and a special issue of
peer-review publications to be published in a collegially agreed-upon top
scientific journal. Dissemination of the meeting results in these ways would
inform the broader scientific community, including students and early career
scientists, of the latest developments.