* 1216576
* Collaborative Research: Efficient Unstructured Discontinuous Galerkin Methods for Global Nonhydrostatic Atmospheric Modeling
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Dale Durran, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 357,568.00

This is a proposal to develop efficient unstructured discontinuous Galerkin (DG)
methods for global non-hydrostatic atmospheric modeling. As the horizontal
resolution of numerical weather prediction models increases, it becomes
advantageous to model non-hydrostatic motions. The dynamics of deep convective
clouds are non-hydrostatic and these clouds produce important feedbacks on the
larger-scale flow that are difficult to parameterize. To represent such clouds
and similar small-scale processes, the equations solved by global atmospheric
models must transition from hydrostatic to non-hydrostatic formulations. A host
of challenging, non-trivial numerical problems arise when one enters the non-
hydrostatic regime, including: I) developing efficient time-integrators and/or
"soundproof" equation sets to confront the fast acoustic waves supported by the
governing equations; II) effectively resolving multi-scale flow features, that
may require adaptive mesh refinement (AMR); and III) constructing spatial
discretization methods that conserve all important quantities and can be
exploited to satisfy the above two conditions. Item (I) will be addressed by
designing a suite of implicit-explicit (IMEX) time-integrators for our governing
equations and discrete spatial operators to allow larger explicit time-steps
with better conditioned implicit parts. In addition, the fully compressible
(Euler) equations will be compared to sound-proof systems (anelastic, pseudo-
incompressible) in meteorologically relevant test cases. Item (II) will be
addressed by testing two forms of AMR: conforming and nonconforming methods.
Conforming methods are traditionally used with continuous discretization methods
and require no modifications to the partial differential equation (PDE) solver
since the AMR is essentially a separate method. Nonconforming methods are
traditionally used with discontinuous methods but can also be used with
continuous methods. Nonconforming methods couple the PDE solver with the AMR
approach in a seamless fashion thereby requiring modification of the PDE solver.
Item (III) will be addressed by virtue of the DG method that is capable of
delivering both local and global conservation of all prognostic variables and is
also well suited for handling strong gradients (e.g., discontinuities) that may
be introduced by the moist variables.

Long-range weather forecasting and studies of the Earth's climate use computers
to simulate the weather over the entire globe. Individual thunderstorms and
clusters of similar deep clouds produce rain and transport moisture, heat, and
momentum vertically throughout the atmosphere. Limitations in computer power
have prevented global simulations from using the fundamental equations
describing fluid motion to calculate the behavior of these localized clouds.
Instead, the net effects of such clouds on the global atmosphere are
"parameterized" using necessarily crude approximations. The latest advancements
in computer architecture have finally made it possible to simulate large clouds
in global models, but there are major challenges that must be overcome. The
mathematical equations on which global models are based must become better
approximations to the fundamental equations of fluid motion, and an efficient
flexible structure must be determined to hold the data describing the state of
the global atmosphere. This research addresses both of these challenges.