* 1216788
* Collaborative Research:  Conceptualizing an Institute for Using Inter-Domain Abstractions to Support Inter-Disciplinary Applications
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* John Hart, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 09/30/2016
* USD 135,000.00

This grant is a planning grant to fund the conceptualization of an institute for
software infrastructure for sustained innovation. It funds the planning of the
technical and organizational aspects. To understand community requirements, it
involves workshops and outreach to gather community requirements.

To fully understand the behavior of a complex physical phenomenon such as a
burning building, it is often necessary to understand both large-scale effects
such as the buildup of heat on each floor, and small-scale effects, such as how
a steal beam in the foundation deforms as it gets hotter. Computational
simulations that study such effects in tandem are called "multi-scale"
simulations, and are exceedingly difficult to write. This is because the
computational models that represent the different scales differ widely, and the
software components used to simulate each scale are often incompatible.
Combining these disparate components requires painstaking and error prone
programmer labor. This project will conceptualize an institute devoted to
providing solutions to scientists investigating multi-scale problems. The
project centers around reaching out to computational scientists and computer
systems researchers to determine both what kinds of programming abstractions may
be useful for different computational models and how to best adapt existing
abstractions to the challenges of multi-scale simulation. The goal is to enable
the establishment of an institute that will study the use of various programming
abstractions to bridge the gap between differing software components, hence
easing the pain of writing multi-scale simulations. The ultimate effect will be
to allow multi-scale systems to be simulated accurately and efficiently,
providing deeper insights into the behavior of complex physical systems.