* 1216361
* Doctoral Mentoring Consortium at the International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2014
* Maria Gini, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 01/31/2014
* USD 30,000.00

This project supports the travel of U.S. doctoral student researchers to the
premier international conference on autonomous agents and multi-agent systems
and their participation in the Doctoral Mentoring Consortium held in conjunction
with it. The Eleventh International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and
Multi-Agent Systems (AAMAS 2012) will be held in Valencia, Spain, June 4-8,
2012. All students awarded stipends will participate in a Doctoral Mentoring
Consortium in which they will present their research to other student
researchers as well as experienced researchers and receive in-depth feedback
from a group of invited senior researchers. Travel stipends will be awarded
through an application process that includes submission of a two-page extended
thesis abstract, a one-page personal research statement, a short CV, and a
recommendation from the thesis advisor. In selecting students to be given
stipends, the committee will consider resources available to them to attend the
conference, their exposure to international research, and their level of
participation in the conference (e.g., paper, poster, workshop presentation); it
will also consider the diversity of the potential participants. The travel
stipends will allow the selected students to present their research results and
participate in valuable discussions that will likely shape the future of this
critically important field. The AAMAS technical program is complemented with an
array of workshops, tutorials, and other events. The wide variety and
significance of the topics typically presented at AAMAS, in the technical and
other programs, provide opportunities for students to share, exchange, and learn
from each other.