* 1216037
* SEES Fellows: Atmospheric Water Transport from Mexico to the U.S. - A Holistic, Binational Approach to Reducing Vulnerability to the North American Monsoon
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Theodore Bohn, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 08/31/2017
* USD 490,147.00

This project will explore the impacts of changes in land cover/land use in
northwestern Mexico on moisture recycling and transport to both the United
States and other areas of Mexico, using a coupled land-atmosphere model. The
feasibility of employing land use decisions to influence the North American
monsoon and thereby reduce regional vulnerability to climate variability and
change will be assessed. The study will be embedded within an integrated
assessment framework, in which scientists and stakeholders from both sides of
the border interact and co-develop both the model experiments and a decision-
support tool. Stakeholders will be involved in guiding the form of the
experiments and the form of the tool, and in evaluating the tool?s performance
as an aid to decisions in the context of sustainable resource management.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A substantial portion of summer precipitation in the
southwestern United States originates from land in northwestern Mexico and is
transported across the border via the phenomenon of moisture recycling during
the monsoon. Research also indicates that land use decisions in northwestern
Mexico may have a large influence over the timing and magnitude of this moisture
recycling, and on the behavior of the monsoon itself. The potential link between
land use and downwind precipitation could represent a major paradigm shift,
affecting our concepts of water rights and international treaties and making bi-
national cooperation in land use crucial to sustainable water resources
management. The scientific results and adaptive strategies investigated in this
project will be applicable to the U.S.-Mexico border region, as well as to other
arid regions and monsoon systems, and to the international coordination of
shared resources around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported under the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability
Fellows (SEES Fellows) program, with the goal of helping to enable discoveries
needed to inform actions that lead to environmental, energy and societal
sustainability while creating the necessary workforce to address these
challenges. With SEES Fellows support, this project will enable a promising
early career researcher to establish themselves in an independent research
career related to sustainability.