* 1216839
* I-Corps:  Combining Machine Vision and Crowdsourcing for Convenient and Accurate Image Annotation
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2012,08/31/2012
* Pietro Perona, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 08/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

Annotating a large body of images quickly, accurately and inexpensively would be
a valuable capability in scientific, medical and other commercial applications.
Machine vision is making progress in these arenas. However, accuracy is not yet
sufficient for many applications. In recent years, a complementary solution has
become available: crowdsourcing, that is, dynamically recruiting thousands of
people to carry out an assigned task from their computer. The team's research
suggests that it is possible to combine the complementary strengths of human
annotators and machines into a hybrid system that is flexible, accurate, fast
and inexpensive. To demonstrate effectiveness and potential commercial
opportunity, the team will develop a prototype and a business model around this
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As imaging becomes more available and storage
inexpensive, the amount of image data will continue to increase. This is true
for the scientific, research, geospatial information systems and consumer
markets. The proposed effort will address the need to scale annotation and
analysis of this data while keeping the process as inexpensive and fast as
possible with today's computational power. By combining computer vision and
machine learning automations with humans (both experts and non-expert
annotators), the system promises to be quickly configurable and trainable across
virtually any image analysis challenge.