* 1216890
* Collaborative Research: SI2-S2I2: High-Performance Computational Science with Structured Meshes and Particles (HPCS-SMP)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Phillip Colella, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 366,050.00

The starting point for this proposal is a view of scientific simulation
articulated in the conclusions of the 2008 National Academy of Sciences Study,
The Potential Impact of High-End Capability Computing on Four Illustrative
Fields of Science and Engineering: "Advanced computational science and
engineering is a complex enterprise that requires models, algorithms, software,
hardware, facilities, education and training, and a community of researchers
attuned to its special needs." (p. 122)

Over the last few years, the design of computer and software systems,
particularly as they relate to simulation in the physical sciences, has been
organized around a collection of algorithmic patterns / motifs. These patterns
have been very productive because they are a natural "common language" in which
application scientists can express their computations, and for which computer
scientists can provide optimized libraries, domain specific languages,
compilers, and other software tools.

This project will design an institute focused on a subset of these patterns ---
structured grid discretizations of partial differential equations and particle
methods, along with the linear and nonlinear solvers that enable their effective
use --- with the specific goals of providing simulation capabilities for a set
of scientific domains that make heavy use of these patterns. Two major
components are envisioned to this proposed institute, called the Institute for
High-Performance Computational Science with Structured Meshes and Particles
(HPCS-SMP). The first component is a software infrastructure development
activity that will be performed by a team whose expertise spans the design and
development of mathematical algorithms and software frameworks, as well as the
design and development of compilers, runtime systems, and tools that enable one
to obtain high performance from emerging multicore and heterogeneous
architectures. The second component is an outreach activity, in which
algorithms, libraries, and software frameworks developed by the institute will
be customized and integrated into simulation codes for stakeholder application
domains. At the heart of this activity will be collaborations and partnerships,
in which the institute will provide one or more software developers to
collaborate with application scientists over a period of months to years to
develop a new simulation capability or enhance an existing one.

The design of this institute will be carried out through a series of workshops,
each focused on one of five stakeholder science domains that have been
identified as using these motifs and that play a central role in various NSF
Grand Challenge problems, with participation of both representatives of the
science domain and the the relevant mathematics and computer science
communities. In addition, there will be a final workshop that will bring
together the relevant mathematics and computer science experts to identify
cross-cutting themes. These information obtained from these workshops will be
used by the project to develop the final conceptual design of the institute, in
the form of a document that includes the input from all of the workshops and our
analysis of how this leads to a design of a software institute.