* 1216571
* Material Transformation and Community Creation at the Etowah Site, Georgia
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,12/31/2015
* Adam King, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2015
* USD 149,891.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Adam King and colleagues
seek to explore changes in the built environment of the Etowah site and how
those changes reflect community organization and the community formation process
itself. While this study is firmly grounded in material culture, architecture,
and the use of space the intent is to use data generated through remote sensing
as a primary source for interpretation. Traditionally, the data generated
through techniques such as gradiometry, ground-penetrating radar, and electrical
resistance have only been used as guides for where to excavate to evaluate ideas
and learn about the past. In part the emphasis on remote sensing is a conscious
effort to reduce the impacts (of excavation) on the archaeological record of
Etowah -- a precious resource to some and sacred to others. Additionally, the
emphasis on remote sensing data is intended to push the interpretive limits of
those data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project to explore the creation of the
social groups living at Etowah through the built environment will contribute to
continuing efforts to understand the formation of complex, often multi-ethnic
communities of the Mississippian period. Because the establishment and creation
of the physical space of a community is a human universal, what is learned from
these efforts will contribute to broader attempts, spanning time and geography,
to explore the creation of society using space and architecture.
Methodologically, this project attempts to push the limits of non-invasive
investigations by asking questions of geophysical data that traditionally have
been asked only of excavated data. The results may make it possible to study the
development of prehistoric communities like Etowah using only geophysical data
and information from very limited and targeted
excavations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today the Etowah site is a state
park and a prehistoric archaeological site famous for having some of the largest
earthen platform mounds built in the Deep South, and producing some of the most
impressive art objects ever found in the Southeast. In the past it was a
thriving Native American community and capital of a larger polity: a role it
played for some 550 years during the Mississippian period of the Native American
past. Etowah's archaeological record not only captures the structure of those
communities, but it also contains traces of the process through which those
Etowah communities were formed. Communities are collections of people who,
through various means, forge themselves into a social unit with a shared sense
of identity, history, and community practice. Community creation is a complex
and ongoing process that is part of the universal human experience, and it is
encoded into the use of space, architecture, and material culture. This project
uses remote sensing data and limited archaeological excavation to explore how
Etowah's built environment and associated material culture were transformed with
each new incarnation of the Etowah community and in turn examine the process of
community creation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project to explore the creation of
the social groups living at Etowah through the built environment will contribute
to continuing efforts to understand the formation of complex, often multi-ethnic
communities of the Mississippian period. Because the establishment and creation
of the physical space of a community is a human universal, what is learned from
these efforts will contribute to broader attempts, spanning time and geography,
to explore the creation of society using space and architecture.
Methodologically, this project attempts to push the limits of non-invasive
investigations by asking questions of geophysical data that traditionally have
been asked only of excavated data. The results may make it possible to study the
development of prehistoric communities like Etowah using only geophysical data
and information from very limited and targeted
excavations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also serve an important
teaching function. The archaeological data will be collected by field school
students as they learn the process of archaeology, and the geophysical and
archaeological data produced will form the basis for a graduate student theses.
It is also designed to involve descendant communities in the exploration and
interpretation of their history. Members of culturally affiliated Creek and
Cherokee communities will be invited to participate in the data collection, the
interpretation of the results and in learning from those interpretations.