* 1216739
* RI: Small: BCSP: The Whole Worm: A Brain-Body-Environment Model of Nematode Chemotaxis
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Randall Beer, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2016
* USD 489,440.00

The overall goal of this work is to construct, analyze and experimentally test a
brain-body-environment model of orientation in an invertebrate. Even relatively
simple animals exhibit a remarkable combination of flexibility and robustness to
their behavior that would be extremely useful to the design of artificial
systems. How do animals achieve this difficult balance?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how animals operate as integrated wholes
requires building brain-body-environment models of complete animals. This in
turn requires an animal system for which detailed behavioral, biomechanical, and
neuronal information is available. In this regard, knowledge of the behavior,
anatomy, genetics, development and neural connectivity of the nematode worm C.
elegans is perhaps the most complete of any animal, with significant progress
now also being made on the electrophysiology of its nervous system. Success also
requires a modeling methodology that can work cooperatively with experimental
methods throughout the project lifecycle and that can provide a theoretical
framework for interpreting the integrated functioning of the system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to demonstrate the feasibility of whole-animal
modeling, this proposal describes a project to construct and analyze an
integrated brain-body-environment model of C. elegans klinotaxis, a form of salt
chemotaxis in which changes in direction are oriented towards the source through
gradual continual adjustments. The approach described here combines connectome
data-mining and a novel bracketing methodology, parameter optimization and
clustering techniques for working with populations of models, and dynamical and
information-theoretic analysis of representative motifs with behavioral
manipulations, neuronal ablation and photo-stimulation, and electrophysiological
studies on the biological system by an experimental colleague.