* 1216028
* ICES: Small: Using Web Crawling and Complex Network Analysis to Understand Institutional Activity and Connectivity
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Ricardo Hausmann, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2016
* USD 124,220.00

How do institutions organize to perform the many functions that they seek to
perform, such as education, health, infrastructure, market regulation, or
policing? How do they interact internally and with other organizations in the
society at large to execute these functions and gain feedback on their
performance, and what are the implications of these patterns of activity and
connectivity? This project proposes that institutions are complex systems that
self-organize so as to provide a range of essential products, services, rules,
and regulations for the economy and society. It will use the growing presence of
institutions on the Internet to gather and analyze the first comprehensive,
objective dataset on the functions institutions perform and the connectivity of
individual institutions with each other and with different parts of society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop novel methods for community
discovery, graph mining, and analytical web crawling to transform the
information in the websites of U.S. institutions, and the linkages of these
websites with each other and with societal organizations, into a pilot dataset
on the activity and connectivity of institutions in the United States. These
data will then be used to investigate the nature and evolution of the activity
and connectivity of U.S. institutions, and their implications for public policy,
relations with business and society, and economic productivity and performance.
The project will open new avenues for analysis of variation in the activity and
connectivity of institutions, including a range of new indicators of
institutional linkages and connectivity, as well as new techniques for web
crawling, data mining, and data analysis of complex networks. The project will
also form the basis for new techniques and collaborations between computer
scientists and economists.