* 1216847
* Settlement pattern dynamics and the evolution of social complexity on the northern Northwest Coast
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Kenneth Ames, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2015
* USD 179,672.00

With NSF support, Drs. Kenneth M. Ames, Andrew Martindale, and Kevan Edinborough
will use recently perfected field and mapping methods to investigate the history
of social complexity on the northern Northwest Coast (NWC) of North America. The
social complexity in this region was comparable to that which scholars
traditionally thought could only be achieved with agriculture; yet the people of
this region were hunter-fisher-gatherers (HFG), a case study that can reveal the
underlying causes of this universal aspect of human
history&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on the Coast Tsimshian and on
the archaeological record of Prince Rupert Harbor (PRH), British Columbia, a
major global case study for HFG complexity. At European Contact, PRH contained a
dense aggregation of villages, archaeologically visible as an extraordinary
concentration of massive shell middens. The harbor's 277 recorded sites includes
96 shell middens of which 61 are documented villages, 18 of which are major
villages (more than 10,000 m2 ) in a area of 30 km2. Key open questions are the
timing of initial occupation of the harbor; the evolution of settlement patterns
including when the historic village aggregation developed; and the timing of the
development of permanent inequality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
build a large data set of radiocarbon dates in PRH using field techniques honed
over the past 20 years for investigating large shell sites in geologically
complex coastal environments. A database of archaeological and
paleoenvironmental radiocarbon dates for the northern NWC will also be compiled.
The results will increase the precision with which organic samples from marine
environments are converted to calendar dates (essential to constructing
histories); test current models of the evolution of social and political
complexity; build a chronology for the massive shell middens within the harbor,
and date the formation of the historic village aggregation in the harbor, hence
testing the adawx accounts. This work will produce the best-supported local
marine radiocarbon correction on the west coast of North America improving
global understanding of this issue with a well dated coastal settlement history
that potentially covers the last 12,000 years; better evidence with which to
date the appearance of permanent inequality on the NWC, a model of population
dynamics for the northern coast based on a large, controlled sample of
radiocarbon dates and a tested methodology for investigating enormous shell
middens, which will be of broad archaeological interest. The active use and
testing of Coast Tsimshian data will provide a tested model for incorporating
oral traditions into archaeological research, addressing a major issue for
Native peoples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on a long tradition of
international research projects in PRH and of deep involvement of Coast
Tsimshian people in such research. The project is funded by NSF and the Social
Science and Research Council of Canada, drawing researchers from the United
States, Canada and Great Britain. Coast Tsimshian involvement includes work in
field and lab research as well as formal consultation, discussions with elders
and active sharing of the results with them.