* 1216070
* RAPID: Service Provision and Security in Mogadishu, Somalia
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Jesse Driscoll, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* erik herron
* 12/31/2012
* USD 45,000.00

The project explores the impact of the state on security and citizen welfare.
Conventional expectations of state-building suggest that regions controlled by
formal authorities will provide enhanced security and citizen welfare. However,
it is difficult to test this belief with appropriate levels of control; regions
controlled by formal authorities are often systematically different than those
which are not. This proposal will conduct a representative survey following the
withdarwal of Al Shabaab in Mogadishu, Somalia. Mogadishu is now divided among
areas controlled by formally recognized state authorities and local power-
brokers. By comparing these two types of areas which are similar on many other
dimensions, the survey will allow reseachers to isolate the effect of formal
authority on security and citizen welfare. The proposal also incorporates
communications technology in a novel manner, potentially advancing methods of
conducting surveys in hard-to-reach areas of the world. The findings should have
implications not only for the scholarly community, but could inform non-
governmental organizations and policymakers about how to more efficiently
provide assistance to conflict-prone areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resolution
of this question willcontribute to our understanding of the origins and effects
of state power. In addition, the project will assess how clan- and kinship- ties
contribute to security and welfare within areas outside of state control. The
project also features important broader impacts. Most notably, the survey
incorporates technological innovations to gather survey responses that are novel
and potentially transformative. Satellite imagery will be used to develop the
sampling frame. Because of recent conflict in the region, demographic data are
incomplete. The use of satellite imagery allows the investigators to work around
this challenge. Enumerators will collect, encrypt, and transmit data using
mobile phones allowing investigators to gain immediate access to data and to
enhance the security of the data collection enterprise. This approach could be
applied to other conflict zones, providing the scholarly community opportunities
to conduct research in previously inaccessible areas. The data produced by the
project will be of immediate use to the NGO and policy-making communities.
Further, the PI's incorporation of the US-based and local Somali communities
provides opportunities for training of an underserved group.