* 1216006
* ICES: SMALL: Mechanism Design with Information-Sensitive Agents
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Ronen Gradwohl, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2017
* USD 315,629.00

Mechanism design studies the problem of designing interactions that yield
socially, politically, and economically desirable outcomes when the agents
participating in the interaction are self-interested. While agents' interests
are typically captured by preferences over material outcomes such as money and
consumption goods, this is often insufficient for real-world interactions. For
example, many of today's social and economic interactions take place online, and
records of the interactions are archived, maintained, and often spread to
others. In such interactions agents are motivated not only by the resulting
material outcomes, but possibly also by concerns about what and how much of
their private information is revealed in the course of the interaction. Agents
may, for example, prefer one outcome to another when their private information
is revealed, but may prefer the latter outcome to the former if no information
is revealed. They may value privacy, and wish to prevent the leakage of their
private information. Alternatively, they may wish to credibly disclose their
private information as a signal to others. This project develops a model of
information-sensitive agents that captures these kinds of preferences, and
examines the problem of designing ineractions for such
agents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some of the questions addressed in this project
are: Do the mechanisms that exist in the current theoretical literature and in
practice still "work" when agents have information-sensitive preferences? Is it
possible to design mechanisms that are robust to various levels of information-
sensitivity of the agents? Are there mechanisms that have additional desirable
properties, such as the preservation of privacy or the credible disclosure of
information?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project are
twofold. First, a prevalent form of information-sensitivity is a predilection
for privacy, one of the most debated issues in electronic commerce. Since this
project examines the strategic implications of privacy, it has the potential to
contribute valuable insights to this heated debate. Second, information-
sensitivity is particularly relevant when agents participate in numerous
mechanisms, in which case the leakage of information from one mechanism to
another becomes a critical consideration. By explicitly including concerns for
information leakage, this project facilitates the design and analysis of
economic mechanisms that are both more robust and more modular.