* 1216310
* Collaborative Proposal: Investigating the Subsistence Transition in Post-Lapita Fiji (2500-1500 years BP)
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2017
* John Dudgeon, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2017
* USD 74,535.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Julie Field, Chris Roos, and John
Dudgeon will use archaeological, geoarchaeological, and paleoecological analyses
to explore the transition from marine foraging to sedentary farming in the
centuries following the colonization of the Fiji Islands.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will determine how and when food production
developed in Fijian prehistory, and examine how this transition relates to
evident changes in diet, settlement, material culture, demography, and island
ecology. This topic is particularly relevant to current research questions in
Oceania, in particular the decline of the signature elements of the founding
society, the Lapita, and the emergence of the core components of the Oceanic
societies of New Caledonia, Fiji, Tonga, and Samoa. By the contact period these
island groups had large populations, vast agricultural systems, and ranked
societies, but the relative importance of food production to this process is not
well understood and has received little direct study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
team will focus on the Sigatoka Valley, located on the island of Viti Levu, and
will examine the range of variables used to forage or produce food. The
researchers will employ a high-resolution retrodictive GIS-based model. This
model will provide the foundation for geoarchaeological investigations within
several watersheds to determine the frequency of natural and human-induced fire,
and build a picture of landscape change from forest canopy to open farmland.
Large areal excavations will be conducted with the goal of retrieving evidence
of foraging and food production by Fiji's earliest inhabitants. Radiocarbon
dating of features and artifacts related to food processing and consumption will
be used to generate a chronology for agricultural development in Fiji. The
project will also conduct isotopic analyses on recovered bone in order to
examine human diet, the relative increasing importance of cultivated foods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in Fiji will build upon a history of
collaboration between US archaeologists and the Fiji Museum that began in 1947.
Fieldwork and subsequent laboratory analyses will provide training and research
opportunities for students in Fiji and the United States, and will be connected
to a series of educational programs for Fijian adults and schoolchildren that
emphasizes cultural resource management and the natural sciences. Reports and
data generated from this project will be shared with local communities via the
Fiji Museum, and also published internationally.