* 1216559
* Novel Numerical Approximation Techniques for Non-Standard Sampling Regimes
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Rosemary Renaut, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 336,853.00

Title: Novel Numerical Approximation Techniques for Non-Standard Sampling
Regimes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anne Gelb and Rosemary
Renaut&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs build on their recently developed techniques
that fuse methods&lt;br/&gt;from numerical approximation and inverse theory,
such as for purposes&lt;br/&gt;of reconstruction fidelity, with those that
exploit specific application&lt;br/&gt;information, such as sparsity. Their
methods address both theoretical&lt;br/&gt;and practical considerations.
Algorithms are proposed for function and/or&lt;br/&gt;image recovery, as well as
to characterize and extract important information&lt;br/&gt;from a data set,
such as edges, or other features, without necessarily&lt;br/&gt;determining the
underlying function. Research objectives include (i)&lt;br/&gt;developing novel
approximation approaches for functional and/or feature&lt;br/&gt;recovery from
data that is deficient with respect to one or multiple&lt;br/&gt;perspectives,
i.e. data is under-sampled or missing, may be noisy, is&lt;br/&gt;measured via a
dual representation, or is otherwise non-standard with&lt;br/&gt;respect to
traditional numerical approximation techniques; (ii)
developing&lt;br/&gt;numerical approximation operators that can be directly
applied to practical&lt;br/&gt;data sets, or may provide a feedback to
practitioners for improving sampling&lt;br/&gt;protocols; and (iii) integrating
techniques from numerical linear algebra&lt;br/&gt;and statistical
regularization that are specifically pertinent for obtaining&lt;br/&gt;robust
but efficient solutions of ill-conditioned problems when
handling&lt;br/&gt;practical data. This research will provide rigorous analysis
of all new&lt;br/&gt;algorithms in terms of accuracy, efficiency, and
robustness, especially&lt;br/&gt;in the presence of of noise, perturbations, or
otherwise incomplete data&lt;br/&gt;information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Practical
data collection techniques are becoming increasingly
more&lt;br/&gt;sophisticated. User friendly software packages allow
disciplinary&lt;br/&gt;scientists to successfully diagnose, predict, model, and
determine&lt;br/&gt;important characteristics from a plethora of measured data.
Yet,&lt;br/&gt;recent investigations into various reconstruction algorithms for
data&lt;br/&gt;collected under modern magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
protocols&lt;br/&gt;have clearly demonstrated shortcomings that arise when
pragmatic&lt;br/&gt;algorithmic modifications are used without considering
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;mathematical issues regarding accuracy and measurement
error. Some&lt;br/&gt;currently employed algorithms in fact yield both incorrect
diagnoses&lt;br/&gt;and additional procedural costs. This project extends the
PIs prior&lt;br/&gt;research and addresses the development of novel mathematical
techniques&lt;br/&gt;for handling issues associated with extracting functional
and feature&lt;br/&gt;information from data acquired by non-standard sampling
protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;