* 1216472
* Support for the 2nd Penn State Bioinorganic Workshop
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Squire Booker, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 04/30/2013
* USD 15,188.00

Intellectual Merit The 2nd Penn State Bioinorganic Workshop will be held on the
University Park campus of The Pennsylvania State University from May 31-June 9,
2012. The proposed workshop aims to provide a complete immersion training
experience to students and postdocs. The field of bioinorganic chemistry is
diverse, and includes a wide variety of scientific disciplines, including
genetics, molecular biology, biochemistry, bioinformatics, analytical chemistry,
and physical chemistry. The workshop will include lecture topics, such as, (1)
principles of molecular biology; (2) principles of coordination chemistry; (3)
principles of quantum chemistry; (4) transient state kinetic methods; (5) EPR
spectroscopy; (6) ENDOR/ESEEM spectroscopy; (7) computation of spectroscopic
parameters; (8) resonance Raman spectroscopy; (9) X-ray absorption spectroscopy;
(10) Mössbauer spectroscopy; (11) magnetic circular dichroism spectroscopy);
(12) mass spectrometry; (13) isotope effects as mechanistic probes; (14) protein
electrochemistry; (15) X-ray crystallography; and (16) biological electron
transfer. In addition, a "hands-on" laboratory training aspect is also included.
The following hands-on sessions will be offered: (1) SF-absorption spectroscopy;
(2) the FQ method; (3) EPR spectroscopy; (4) Mössbauer spectroscopy; (5)
ENDOR/ESEEM spectroscopy; (6) resonance Raman spectroscopy; (7) mass
spectrometry ; (8) purification of air-sensitive enzymes; (9) site-directed
mutagenesis; (10) protein electrochemistry; and (11) cryoreduction experiments
at the Breazeale Nuclear Reactor on the Penn State campus.

Broader Impacts Many areas of this meeting will directly relate to central
challenges facing society today. Fundamental collaborative research in
bioinorganic chemistry may provide important insight for rational design of
chemical/industrial processes. An example includes the improvement of the Haber
Bosch process, a crucial process for modern agriculture, by a better
understanding of the enzyme nitrogenase. This workshop will make important
contributions to training of students and postdocs in bioinorgranics.
Approximately 80 young researchers will immerse themselves in a wide variety of
methods and concepts central to this research area, thus receiving training that
will undoubtedly be broader than they could possibly receive in any one research
group.