* 1216916
* Collaborative Proposal: Coupled C, N and S cycling in coastal plain wetlands: how will climate change and salt water intrusion alter ecosystem dynamics?
* BIO,DEB
* 08/14/2011,09/30/2014
* Amy Burgin, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 09/30/2014
* USD 239,555.00

Coastal plain wetlands occupy a critical landscape position at the intersection
of terrestrial and aquatic and fresh and salt waters. Like all wetlands, coastal
wetlands are disproportionately valuable in terms of services provided compared
to the area they comprise including nutrient transformation, water purification,
and flood control. Humans have drained wetlands throughout much of the
southeastern coastal plain for agriculture and forestry, thus diminishing their
capacity to provide critical ecosystem services such as nutrient and carbon
sequestration. At the same time, fertilizer use and manure from intensive meat
and poultry production have dramatically increased nutrient loading to coastal
ecosystems. Increased loading and decreased retention of nutrients has caused
eutrophication of downstream freshwater and coastal ecosystems, with the
associated degradation in water quality and decline in coastal fisheries.
Climate change may further exacerbate these trends: higher temperatures and
increasingly sporadic precipitation may further diminish the spatial extent of
perennially flooded wetlands and is already leading to seasonal salt water
intrusion during drought. Predicting the likely ecosystem carbon and nutrient
cycling of coastal plain freshwaters into a saltier and increasingly uncertain
hydrologic future requires significant improvements to our current understanding
of freshwater ecosystems. This proposal focuses strategically on two aspects of
this problem: first, incorporating sulfur (~from sea salt) dynamics into our
understanding of how microbes alter carbon and nutrient cycling and second,
utilizing simulation modeling to mesh dynamic hydrology together with microbial
biogeochemistry. Adaptive simulation modeling together with targeted empirical
work will allow us to rapidly test and refine current models of wetland carbon
and nutrient cycling and to formalize the emerging conceptual understanding of
wetland biogeochemistry into a flexible, easily adjusted modeling framework.

The focal field site is a formerly ditched and drained agricultural field in
North Carolina's coastal plain that was restored to riverine wetland hydrology
in 2007, becoming the largest privately owned mitigation bank in the southeast.
The site has very little topographic relief (-1 to +1 m elevation); experiences
significant salt water intrusion via surface water mixing during summer
droughts; and has wind tide driven hydrology that generates large gradients in
sulfur concentrations in both time and space. The field site is representative
of large areas of SE coastal plain agricultural landscapes that are being
actively restored or abandoned. The economic and ecological "success" of this
project will be closely watched by regulators and practitioners throughout the
region. This research program will directly affect the potential for site owners
to sell validated carbon and nutrient credits in emerging ecosystem service
markets. Resulting research findings (together with their economic implications)
will influence future patterns of mitigation and conservation investment
throughout the southeastern coastal plain and will provide critical information
that will facilitate climate adaptation planning throughout the region.