* 1216270
* Particle Physics in the Era of Data
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,10/31/2016
* Lisa Randall, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 10/31/2016
* USD 660,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Lisa Randall at Harvard
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next few years hold the promise of the
discovery of new phenomena and particles: at the Large Hadron Collider, in dark-
matter experiments, and in precision tests of flavor and the electroweak sector.
Professor Randall's research will focus on LHC and dark-matter model building.
Professor Randall will also continue to address theoretical issues related to
predictions from various theories of physics beyond the Standard Model.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The high-energy physics community has also been seeing
that the new physics effects or new exotic phenomena might be at the edge of
what is kinematically accessible. This poses challenges to both theorists and
experimenters, requiring that both communities stretch ingenuity to the limits
in order to uncover as much as possible. Accordingly, Professor Randall will
continue to pursue research whose aim is to find the fullest potential of LHC
experiments and to formulate consistent scenarios that will allow the most
comprehensive tests of theoretical proposals. The broader impact of this
research is its strong interaction with the experimental community, as well as
the training of junior scientists who will be involved in this project.
Professor Randall will also continue her involvement in the public communication
of science.