* 1216415
* Workshop on Emerging Research in the Field of Ceramics, Carbon, Glasses and Composites (March 2012, DC area)
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2015
* Gregory Rohrer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 01/31/2015
* USD 97,787.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: A workshop will be held to identify emerging research
areas in the field of ceramics, inclusive of glasses, composites, and oxide and
non-oxide ceramics. The workshop will take place in March 2012, and it will
involve 40 to 50 researchers representing a broad range institutions from the US
and abroad. The workshop will identify the most exciting recent discoveries in
the field and determine whether or not they represent important areas for future
research investments and, if so, why. The most promising research areas will be
prioritized. In addition to evaluating trends in research, strategies to sustain
and promote leadership in the field of ceramics will be examined. The outcome of
the workshop will be a report that will be peer-reviewed and published in the
Journal of the American Ceramic Society as a feature article.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The workshop will be organized by
materials type, and there will be separate committees on oxide ceramics, non-
oxides, glasses, and composites. Cutting across these topical areas, attention
will be given to methods to accelerate discovery and deployment of materials.
The workshop will convene for two and one-half days. One and one-half days will
be devoted to the identification, evaluation, and prioritization of emerging
research in each of four topical areas: oxides, non-oxides, glasses, and
composites. During the next half day, the workshop will divide into two groups
to separately consider the international context and funding mechanisms. At the
end of the second day, the chairs of the international and funding committees
will present draft reports. In the final half day, the group will break into the
four topical subcommittees and will draft sections of the report. In the final
session, the entire group will reconvene and each of the four subcommittees will
present their drafts. During the afternoon of the third day, the PI begin the
process of merging the subcommittee reports.