* 1216382
* SHF: Small: ADAPT: an Adaptive Delay-insensitive Asynchronous PlaTform for energy efficiency across wide dynamic ranges
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Jia Di, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 07/31/2016
* USD 339,528.00

Advances in semiconductor technology in recent years allow billions of
transistors to be integrated on the same chip, which makes power consumption the
most critical design constraint. While the prevailing clocked synchronous logic
has started to face more and more challenges as the transistor feature size
continues to shrink, this research is to develop an innovative asynchronous
digital processor design methodology and platform for energy efficiency, which
provide a balanced power-speed tradeoff to deliver "just right" performance
under all circumstances across a large variety of applications.

In our novel design methodology, given information for an application scenario
and design constraints, appropriate asynchronous processing elements are
selected and the number of cores in a parallel architecture is determined. This
throughput analysis step is optimized by including a wide range of processing
elements and by employing a fine-grained characterization process. During
processor operation, the input data rate and the system utilization are
monitored and compared with user preference to determine how many cores should
remain active and also to adjust the supply voltage accordingly. A history-based
forecasting mechanism is implemented for accurate yet efficient workload
prediction.

Centralized and distributed voltage architectures for dynamic voltage scaling
will be compared across wide dynamic ranges, along with the evaluation of
various low voltage gate designs in facilitating extreme voltage scaling for
power reduction. A series of prototype circuits will be designed, laid out, and
simulated under various constraints and user settings. The results will be
summarized and analyzed for performance evaluation and further optimization in
the design methodology. Outcomes of this research have the potential to impact
the battery-powered mobile computing and communication device industry, by
enabling products that offer longer battery life, enhanced reliability, and
reduced cost.