* 1216769
* EXP: Improving the Quality of Worked Examples in Open, Online, Homework Help Forums
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Robert Atkinson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Hoadley
* 08/31/2015
* USD 550,000.00

Online homework help forums exist, but there is no good way, right now, for
students to know whether they are getting good advice or not. The innovations
here are to take advantage of the fact that many students participating in
online homework forums want to give each other good advice and almost all want
to do well on their homework. Taking advantage of participants' want to give
good advice, these PIs propose to provide scaffolding that will encourage and
aid good explanations of the how-tos and whys of worked-out-problem examples
students are sharing. Taking advantage of participants' want to get their own
homework right, the PIs propose a simple approach to helping them learn to judge
the quality of help they receive. The innovation is quite simple; it includes
providing users of a homework site a template for sharing answers and a rating
rubric that has them reflect on what made a worked-out answer to a question
useful to them. The PIs are carrying out a set of experimental studies in a
quasi-authentic homework forum to address several issues: How can we help
students judge the quality of solutions that are shared? How can we help sharers
present better quality worked examples? There is learning to be had for both
kinds of participants. The work builds on research on what makes worked-out
examples helpful and on what is known about the value of self-
explanations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One way middle school and high school
students get help with homework is through online homework forums. The most
popular current online homework forums hold repositories of worked-out examples
that those needing homework help can use as analogues as they work on their own
homework problems. But students who go to these sites for help cannot know if
the worked examples they are looking at are done well or not, and simply solving
one's own homework problem the way someone else solved an analogous problem does
not guarantee learning. This project is developing a way to help students who
seek help from these forums to know whether a worked example is done well and to
promote the best learning possible from worked examples. The worked-example
literature reports that structuring worked examples according to the steps in
working them out, the goals being addressed in each step, and the means of
addressing each goal promotes learning better than structuring worked examples
in other ways or note structuring them at all. This project, therefore, is
developing a way to encourage and help those who are entering worked examples to
structure their examples so that those seeking to learn will get get the most
from their answers. The self-explanation literature suggests that such
structuring will also allow those offering worked examples to deepen their
understanding and capabilities as they work towards presenting their worked
examples to others in an organized way. This project is developing a means of
helping those who offer worked examples to structure them for promoting learning
and a means of helping those who are using those worked examples to know if a
worked example is likely to be trustworthy and learn well from the worked
example, and it is investigating the benefits to both those offering examples
and those using them of using a structured approach. Eventually, such help could
be incorporated into the real-life help forums themselves.