* 1216970
* Collaborative Research: Computational Framework for Non-asymptotic Homogenization with Applications to Metamaterials
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Vadim Markel, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2015
* USD 148,426.00

The project is aimed at developing a non-asymptotic
homogenization&lt;br/&gt;theory of Maxwell's equations in artificial periodic
composites&lt;br/&gt;(metamaterials). Currently, there is a consensus that
sufficiently&lt;br/&gt;large lattice cell sizes are necessary for some
nontrivial physical&lt;br/&gt;effects to occur in such structures. (The most
intriguing of these&lt;br/&gt;effects is high-frequency magnetism.) Classical
homogenization&lt;br/&gt;theories work well in the zero-cell-size limit but are
difficult to&lt;br/&gt;apply to large metamaterial cells. In contrast, the
proposed theory is&lt;br/&gt;non-asymptotic and does not involve any series
expansions with respect&lt;br/&gt;to the cell size. The electromagnetic field in
the material is&lt;br/&gt;approximated by a finite set of functions (modes)
usually but not&lt;br/&gt;necessarily Trefftz functions such as Bloch waves. The
coarse-grained&lt;br/&gt;fields and flux densities are defined via curl-
conforming and&lt;br/&gt;div-conforming interpolations, respectively. A linear
map between&lt;br/&gt;these interpolants is established and defines an extended
material&lt;br/&gt;tensor. In a certain canonical basis, this extended tensor
has a&lt;br/&gt;classical block of 36 local parameters and a novel block
quantifying&lt;br/&gt;nonlocal effects. From the differential-geometric
perspective, this&lt;br/&gt;constitutive relationship can be viewed as a
realization of&lt;br/&gt;Bossavit-Hiptmair's discrete Hodge operators (linear
maps between&lt;br/&gt;discretized 1-forms that correspond to vector fields and
2-forms that&lt;br/&gt;correspond to fluxes).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last
decade, metamaterials have attracted unprecedented&lt;br/&gt;attention due to a
variety of potential applications that include&lt;br/&gt;superlensing,
electromagnetic cloaking, electromagnetically-induced&lt;br/&gt;transparency,
efficient antennas, and more. Experimental&lt;br/&gt;demonstrations of these
effects have been limited to proofs of&lt;br/&gt;principle and at optical
frequencies have so far been incomplete.&lt;br/&gt;Subwavelength optical imaging
has been achieved only in the&lt;br/&gt;quasi-static (near-field) regime,
standard for the more conventional&lt;br/&gt;near-field optics; the so-called
"carpet cloak" conceals surface bumps&lt;br/&gt;rather than 3D objects, and so
on. Moreover, applications that do not&lt;br/&gt;depend critically on the
effective medium description of metamaterials&lt;br/&gt;appear to be more easily
achievable than the ones that do. The latter&lt;br/&gt;group includes, notably,
superlensing and cloaking. This suggests&lt;br/&gt;that, to make further
progress, theoretical and mathematical issues at&lt;br/&gt;the heart of
metamaterial science must be unambiguously resolved. The&lt;br/&gt;main problem
can be stated as follows. Given the composition of a&lt;br/&gt;metamaterial cell
and the operating frequency, determine whether this&lt;br/&gt;metamaterial can
be reasonably described as a continuous medium with&lt;br/&gt;some effective
parameters, just like any natural optical material; if&lt;br/&gt;the answer is
positive, develop a rigorous methodology for such a&lt;br/&gt;description. The
proposed research is aimed at solving this problem in&lt;br/&gt;the most
difficult case when the cell size of the composite is an&lt;br/&gt;appreciable
fraction of the wavelength of light. The methodology, once&lt;br/&gt;developed,
will allow the scientific community to delineate the&lt;br/&gt;possible from the
impossible in the field of metamaterials.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
the proposed research is in the development&lt;br/&gt;of a new paradigm of non-
asymptotic homogenization, of new&lt;br/&gt;computational methods related to it,
and in the application of the&lt;br/&gt;proposed methodology to electromagnetic
metamaterials, allowing one to&lt;br/&gt;gain a much deeper understanding of
their properties and limitations.&lt;br/&gt;As a new area of research, non-
asymptotic homogenization will also&lt;br/&gt;have a broader technical impact in
other areas of applied physics and&lt;br/&gt;engineering, such as acoustics,
heat transfer and possibly elasticity.