* 1216338
* Using the Science of Broadening Participation to Enhance the Diversity in Science
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2013
* Sally Hillsman, American Sociological Assoc
* Standard Grant
* Rosanna Guadagno
* 04/30/2013
* USD 29,975.00

The Collaborative for Enhancing Diversity in the Sciences (CEDS) proposes to
host a workshop of university and college representatives, social science
research methodology experts, and STEM disciplinary stakeholders to examine data
collection and associated research methodology and reporting standards to
advance the STEM stakeholders' power to more effectively deal with demographic
discrepancies in STEM. This request is to support a workshop to establish a
common standard for measuring and evaluating success of diversity-enhancing
programs. The one-day workshop will include stakeholders from universities and
colleges, professional societies and associations as well as local, regional and
national federal and private organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is well-
recognized in the scientific community that data-driven, scientifically rigorous
tools are needed to stimulate and enhance efforts to use the talents of all our
citizens, including underrepresented minorities and women. There is an
additional need to look beyond individual efforts to begin to pursue a system-
based analysis. This workshop will address the need to establish a more
comprehensive and cohesive effort to track the many and various efforts of
government (federal, state, and local), private foundations, universities and
colleges, scientific societies, and professional associations. Systematic data
collection would allow possible answers to broad and important questions such
as: To what extent should research training be supported collaboratively? What
are the best practices that could be adapted that would allow for a maximum
increase on the return on investment?