* 1216048
* ICES:Small: The Effects of Shocks on Interacting Social and Physical Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Zeev Maoz, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2016
* USD 275,691.00

This project investigates how exogenous shocks that take place in one network
affect the structure and evolution of other networks. The objective of the
project is to gain a better understanding of the interaction between social and
physical networks at critical junctures, allowing both assessment of the
conditions of failure and rehabilitation of systems that fail because they are
connected to other systems that fail. The main focus is on three types of
interrelations between pairs of networks: 1) Overlapping networks: two or more
networks that share nodes and/or edges. 2) Complementary networks: two or more
networks that perform partially or fully complementary functions (such as
e-commerce and shipping networks). 3) Competitive networks: networks in which
the flow of goods, information, or energy in one is inversely correlated to the
flow of similar items in the other (such as airline and rail transportation).

The intellectual merit of the project rests in explaining the effect of shocks
on the structure of interacting social and physical networks. It will allow new
insights into the cross-network effects of shocks as a function of both the
structure of individual networks and the type of relationships between pairs of
networks.

The broader impacts of the project include the development of methods and
computerized infrastructure for predicting the impact of a future shock in one
network on other networks, potentially providing decision makers with insights
into structuring network ties in a way that will optimize the effects of a shock
in one network. Finally, this project offers graduate student training and
experiencing in theory development, designing mathematical and agent-based
models, and empirical evaluation of theoretical models.