* 1216850
* Educational Design &amp; Development: Planning for a STEM Learning Research Transformation
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2014
* Christian Schunn, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 04/30/2014
* USD 49,548.00

TERC and the International Society for Design and Development in Education
(ISDDE) support a virtual workshop to examine the rigorous scholarship behind
educational design and explore its potential for the transformation of STEM
teaching and learning environments. The virtual workshop engages a core group of
ISDDE principals in the articulation and examination of design processes. Key
questions are: What do we know about the elements of effective design as well as
the process of designing? What features of designs and the process of designing
transform STEM learning? The planning group develops a collection of papers that
present fundamental tenets surrounding design issues in the domains of
instructional materials and professional development for STEM learning and
teaching. A virtual panel of respondents and critical thinkers respond to these
papers and help develop an agenda for further discussion and research
conceptualization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four to five papers are commissioned
that address fundamental tenets about what to design and how to design for
enhanced student learning in the domains of STEM instructional materials and
professional development. The papers are to address various characteristics of
enhanced student learning such as Universal, Backward and Strategic Design,
embedded formative assessments, electronic communities, personalized learning,
cyberlearning, culturally responsive teaching and learning. Up to 10
"correspondents" prepare written comments about the commissioned papers. Their
comments are circulated among project participants and one or more virtual
discussion panels are convened to assemble and analyze the comments. A final
report that informs subsequent research and development in the use of design in
STEM learning is compiled and disseminated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Instructional
materials are presently being developed without a theory of good design
underlying the activity. The virtual workshop develops an active community of
people who have long experience in developing instructional materials and
professional development and people with expertise in design to engage in
substantive dialogue to produce an up-to-date body of knowledge to inform a
research agenda for designs and design processes to transform STEM teaching and
learning.