* 1216972
* Collaborative Research: Advanced Numerical Techniques for the Simulation of Magnetohydrodynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Scott MacLachlan, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 299,026.00

The overall objective of this research is to develop numerical models and
efficient energy-consistent methods for simulation of complex fluid systems and
to obtain physically-accurate solutions for magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) systems,
in particular. This work focuses on minimizing the computational cost of
approximating solutions to these systems in order to develop practical
simulations for this type of problem. The bottom line is to further develop
discretization and solution algorithms that yield the most accuracy per
computational cost. This is achieved by deriving discrete energy laws for MHD
systems and proving that they are consistent with the continuous mathematical
model. The investigators accomplish this by using the Energetic-Variational
Approach (EVA) to further investigate the MHD model itself and determining which
"flavor" of the MHD equations is the simplest model that captures the relevant
physics. One of the main issues with using finite-element methods for solving
complex fluid and electromagnetic problems has been the precise preservation of
divergence-free solutions. Here, the investigators analyze discretization
methods that satisfy these quantities accurately, while remaining amenable to
efficient solution. Finally, the main bottleneck in the discretization methods
used so far is the slow convergence of the linear solvers. By further developing
multigrid methods for systems of partial differential equations, the
investigators create a robust and efficient algorithm for these complex
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of an efficient simulation
framework for MHD systems has a major impact on the study of fusion energy, as
this model is used to describe various phenomena that occur in fusion reactors,
including tearing mode and sawtooth instabilities. With projects such as the
International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) in France and the
National Ignition Facility (NIF) at Lawrence Livermore National Lab attempting
to obtain sustainable fusion energy, scientific computing in fields related to
these projects is critical. In addition, the numerical tools being developed,
such as energy-preserving finite-element discretizations and optimal multigrid
solvers for systems of PDEs, are applicable to a wide variety of other problems
in multi-physics and multi-scale systems. Finally, the project supports a
graduate student, training and exposing them to the latest scientific findings
and tools related to modeling, discretization, and solution of problems in the
computational modeling of plasma physics and complex fluids.