* 1216054
* EID:   Collaborative Research: Invasion and Infection: Translocation and Transmission: An Experimental Study with Mycoplasma in Desert Tortoises
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* C. Richard Tracy, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2018
* USD 2,303,899.00

Solar panel development in the Western Mojave has resulted in a large number of
threatened Desert Tortoises being moved from one location to another. Studies
have shown that this species has become threatened through habitat loss and
pneumonia infections and the translocation of tortoises will exacerbate disease
risk. This project will examine the effects of social network structure on
disease transmission dynamics using desert tortoises as a model system. The
project will use a non-fatal mycoplasm infection and controlled introductions to
follow disease spread in a system where the movements and interactions of all
individuals can be tracked. The investigators will examine when translocation
disrupts contact patterns and increases likelihood of an outbreak. Specifically
they will undertake detailed experiments at both small and large scales and link
these with probabilistic network models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental
part of this project is to identify a relationship between population structure,
contact patterns and disease spread that can be used more generally to predict
the likelihood of disease outbreaks. One outcome will be a management tool that
can be used to assess risk of disease outbreaks in relation to tortoise
translocation. More generally the researchers seek to examine the relationships
between contact patterns and disease risk in other types of populations,
including human and livestock. In this respect this study will be of great
importance in understanding how emerging infections invade na√Øve populations.