* 1216095
* ICES: Small: Collaborative Research:Understanding the Roles of Intermediaries in Matching Markets
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jason Hartline, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2016
* USD 273,452.00

Market design--economic engineering--has been successful in the redesign of
real-world "two-sided matching markets," including the matching of doctors to
residencies and the assignment of students to schools. A recent and growing
literature has shown that the methods and results of two-sided matching theory
extend to substantially more general settings, including "trading networks" in
which agents negotiate over contracts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike two-sided
matching markets, trading networks feature intermediaries, agents who both buy
and sell in the market. These intermediaries may be intermediate producers (as
in most economic models of supply chains) or may simply facilitate trade (e.g.,
through provision of information). Although the presence of intermediaries is
the defining distinction between the matching-in-networks model and the previous
two-sided frameworks, the analysis of intermediaries in these matching models
has been limited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will further our
understanding of the behavior and impact of market intermediaries. Theoretical
work using the matching-in-networks framework will be supplemented with detailed
empirical analyses using plant-level microdata on production networks, in order
to gain insight into the magnitudes of intermediaries' effects on welfare.
Simulated counterfactual models will be developed when theory does not provide
sharp predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will inform and support new
applications of market design approaches to real-world intermediated matching
markets. One focus will be understanding how "local" perturbations (e.g.,
intermediary entrance and exit) affect the "global" structure of networks;
another will be the identification and reduction of rent seeking by
intermediaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to enabling novel work in
applied market design, this research will promote joint work between computer
scientists and economists working in the theory and practice of market design.