* 1216519
* Student Travel Support for 2012 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Nilanjan Sarkar, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Voyles
* 05/31/2013
* USD 41,000.00

This proposal requests travel funds from NSF to assist 50 US students to
participate in ICRA 2012, which will be held in St. Paul, MN, May 14-18, 2012.
The purpose of this Group Travel Grant Proposal is to make it possible for US
students and postdocs to attend the conference, present their work, and forge
connections with colleagues from around the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
year marks the 50th anniversary of robotics. In addition to the regular
conference, ICRA 2012 will feature interactive presentations, robot
demonstrations, thematic plenary sessions on design, bio-robotics, and
intelligent transportation, and special-topic symposia celebrating the
conference theme of "Innovation for Tomorrow's Needs." As part of this award,
students will also have the opportunity to participate in special events and
learn more about the field of robotics. Travel funding will be in the form of
partial airfare reimbursement and full reimbursement for student registration to
approximately 50 U.S. students who plan to present at least one paper at the
Conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Most major international
robotics conferences were outside of North America this past year, so demand
should be very high from American students and professors to attend this major
robotics event. The benefit to student learning and mentorship by encouraging
attendance of students by direct monetary means brings large dividends in
student confidence, knowledge and expertise.