* 1216547
* Non-quadratic Penalization in Generalized Local Regularization for Linear and Nonlinear Inverse Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Patricia Lamm, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Variational methods with non-quadratic penalty terms (such as those associated
with total variation or sparsity constraints) are extremely effective solution
methods for the resolution of sharp features of nonsmooth solutions to applied
inverse problems. Unfortunately, such globally-defined methods are often
associated with large computational costs, a situation made even worse by the
scale of the underlying problem (e.g., large imaging data sets). Using their
expertise in methods of generalized local regularization, the investigator and
her colleagues develop localized non-quadratic regularization methods for ill-
posed inverse problems as a way to reduce computational costs while still
maintaining the sharp resolution of solutions.

Applications of these new methods include problems of image deblurring,
nonlinear autoconvolution, blind deconvolution, fractional
integration/differentiation, and inverse and backward heat conduction. The
methods developed by the investigator and her colleagues lead to faster, less
computationally-intensive techniques for the accurate reconstruction of pictures
in a wide number of applications, from satellite image gathering, biomedical
imaging (CT scans, PET scans, etc.), to geophysical exploration. The improved
methods enable the analysis of more data in a shorter amount of time, and with
less overall expense. In addition to imaging applications, these new methods are
also applicable to the problem of determining hidden cracks and weaknesses in
structures and materials, and the detection of ozone levels in the atmostphere,
as well as to problems arising in the analysis of nano-structures.